Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations. MD&A contains forward-looking statements and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes, and other financial information included in this report. Unless the context suggests otherwise, the terms “First Community,” “Company,” “we,” “our,” and “us” refer to First Community Bankshares, Inc. and its subsidiaries as a consolidated entity.
Executive Overview
First Community Bankshares, Inc. (the “Company”) is a financial holding company, headquartered in Bluefield, Virginia, that provides banking products and services through its wholly owned subsidiary First Community Bank (the “Bank”), a Virginia chartered bank institution. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank operated 50 branches in Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina and Tennessee. Our primary source of earnings is net interest income, the difference between interest earned on assets and interest paid on liabilities, which is supplemented by fees for services, commissions on sales, and various deposit service charges. We fund our lending and investing activities primarily through the retail deposit operations of our branch banking network and, to a lesser extent, retail and wholesale repurchase agreements and Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) borrowings. We invest our funds primarily in loans to retail and commercial customers and various investment securities.
The Bank offers trust management, estate administration, and investment advisory services through its Trust Division and wholly owned subsidiary First Community Wealth Management (“FCWM”). The Trust Division manages inter vivos trusts and trusts under will, develops and administers employee benefit and individual retirement plans, and manages and settles estates. Fiduciary fees for these services are charged on a schedule related to the size, nature, and complexity of the account. Revenues consist primarily of commissions on assets under management and investment advisory fees. As of December 31, 2020, the Trust Division and FCWM managed and administered $1.18 billion in combined assets under various fee-based arrangements as fiduciary or agent.
Our acquisition and divestiture activity during the last three years includes the December 31, 2019, acquisition of Highlands Bankshares, Inc. (“Highlands”), headquartered in Abingdon, Virginia with total assets of $563 million. The completion of the transaction resulted in total consolidated assets increasing to $2.80 billion immediately after the transaction. Activity in prior years include the completion of our Agreement and Plan of Reincorporation and Merger changing our corporate domicile from Nevada to Virginia on October 2, 2018, as well as the sale of our remaining insurance agency assets to Bankers Insurance, LLC on October 1, 2018. For additional information, see Note 2, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Recent Developments: COVID-19 and the CARES Act
The outbreak of COVID-19 has significantly disrupted local, national, and global economies and has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which the Company’s customers operate and could impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations to the Company. The World Health Organization has declared COVID-19 to be a global pandemic and almost all public commerce and related business activities have been curtailed, to varying degrees, with the goal of decreasing the rate of new infections. The spread of the outbreak has caused significant disruptions in the U.S. economy and has disrupted banking and other financial activity in the areas in which the Company operates. While there has been no material impact to the Company’s employees to date, COVID-19 has the potential to create widespread business continuity issues for the Company.
Congress, the Executive Branch, and the Federal Reserve have taken several actions designed to cushion the economic fallout. Most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was signed into law at the end of March 2020 as a $2 trillion legislative package. The goal of the CARES Act is to curb the economic downturn through various measures, including direct financial aid to American families and economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors through programs like the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The package also included extensive emergency funding for hospitals and providers. In addition to the general impact of COVID-19, certain provisions of the CARES Act as well as other recent legislative and regulatory relief efforts have had a material impact on the Company’s operations and could continue to impact operations going forward.
The Company’s business is dependent upon the willingness and ability of its employees and customers to conduct banking and other financial transactions. While progress has been made on the vaccine front, if the global response to contain COVID-19 is prolonged or is unsuccessful, the Company could experience further adverse effects on its business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. While it is not possible to know the full universe or extent that the impact of COVID-19, and resulting measures to curtail its spread, will have on the Company’s operations, the Company is disclosing potentially material items of which it is aware.
Financial position and results of operations
Pertaining to our December 31, 2020, financial condition and results of operations, COVID-19 had a material impact on our allowance for loan losses (“ALL”). While we have not yet experienced any significant charge-offs related to COVID-19, our ALL calculation and resulting provision for loan losses were significantly impacted by expectations for future losses due to governmental reactions to the pandemic. Refer to our discussion of the ALL in Note 6 of our financial statements as well as additional discussion in MD&A. Should economic conditions worsen, we could experience further increases in our required ALL and record additional loan loss expense. It is possible that our asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 are prolonged.
The Company’s fee income has been reduced due to COVID-19. Consumer spending behavior has proven to be very conservative during the pandemic resulting in a decrease in overdraft behavior that generates NSF and other fee income. Should the pandemic and the global response escalate further, it is possible that the Company could see further decreases in fees in future periods; however, at this time, the Company is unable to project the materiality of such an impact on the results of operations in future periods.
The Company’s interest income could be reduced due to COVID-19. In keeping with guidance from regulators, the Company continues to work with COVID-19 affected borrowers to defer their payments, interest, and fees. While interest and fees continue to accrue to income, through normal GAAP accounting, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments emerge, the related loans would be placed on nonaccrual status and interest income and fees accrued would be reversed. In such a scenario, interest income in future periods could be negatively impacted. As of December 31, 2020, the Company carried $3.47 million of accrued interest income and fees on outstanding deferrals made to COVID-19 affected borrowers. At this time, the Company is unable to project the materiality of such an impact on future deferrals to COVID-19 affected borrowers, but recognizes the breadth of the economic impact may affect its borrowers’ ability to repay in future periods.
Capital and liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, the Company continued to meet all capital adequacy requirements and were classified as well-capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. Management believes there have been no conditions or events since those notifications that would change the Bank’s classification. Additionally, our capital ratios were in excess of the minimum standards under the Basel III capital rules on a fully phased-in basis, if such requirements were in effect, as of December 31, 2020. While we believe that we have sufficient capital, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by loan losses and other negative trends initiated by the pandemic. We rely on cash on hand as well as dividends from the Bank to pay dividends to our shareholders. If our capital deteriorates such that the Bank is unable to pay dividends for an extended period of time, we may not be able to pay dividends to our shareholders.
We maintain access to multiple sources of liquidity. Wholesale funding markets remain open to us, however, short-term funding rates have been volatile throughout 2020. If funding costs are elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on our net interest margin. In addition, if an extended recession caused large numbers of our deposit customers to withdraw their funds, we might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
Asset valuation
Currently, we do not expect COVID-19 to affect our ability to account timely for the assets on our balance sheet; however, this could change in future periods. While certain valuation assumptions and judgments will change to account for pandemic-related circumstances such as widening credit spreads, we do not anticipate significant changes in methodology used to determine the fair value of assets measured in accordance with GAAP.
As of December 31, 2020, our goodwill was not impaired. Management performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2020. The goodwill impairment test did not identify any goodwill impairment for our one reporting unit, nor was it at risk of failing the quantitative test. COVID-19 could cause a decline in our stock price or the occurrence of what management would deem to be a triggering event that could, under certain circumstances, cause us to perform a goodwill impairment test and result in an impairment charge being recorded for that period. In the event that we conclude that all or a portion of our goodwill is impaired, a non-cash charge for the amount of such impairment would be recorded to earnings. Such a charge would have no impact on tangible capital or regulatory capital. At December 31, 2020, we had goodwill of $129.57 million, representing approximately 30.36% of equity.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any impairment with respect to our intangible assets or other long-lived assets. It is possible that the lingering effects of COVID-19 could cause the occurrence of what management would deem to be a triggering event that could, under certain circumstances, cause us to perform an intangible asset impairment test and result in an impairment charge being recorded for that period. In the event that we conclude that all or a portion of our intangible assets are impaired, a non-cash charge for the amount of such impairment would be recorded to earnings. Such a charge would have no impact on tangible capital or regulatory capital. At December 31, 2020 we had intangible assets of $7.07 million, representing approximately 1.66% of equity.
Our processes, controls and business continuity plan
The Company maintains an Enterprise Risk Management team to respond to, prepare, and execute responses to unforeseen circumstances, such as, natural disasters and pandemics. Upon the WHO’s pandemic declaration, the Company’s Enterprise Risk Management team implemented its Board approved Business Continuity Plan. The Company appointed an internal pandemic preparedness task force comprised of the Company’s management to address both operational and financial risks posed by COVID-19. Shortly after invoking the Plan, the Company deployed a successful remote working strategy, provided timely communication to team members and customers, implemented protocols for team member safety, and initiated strategies for monitoring and responding to local COVID-19 impacts - including customer relief efforts. The Company’s preparedness efforts, coupled with quick and decisive plan implementation, resulted in minimal impacts to operations as a result of COVID-19. At December 31, 2020, a significant portion of our backroom operations employees continue to work remotely with no disruption to our operations. We have not incurred additional material cost related to our remote working strategy to date, nor do we anticipate incurring material cost in future periods.
As of December 31, 2020, we don’t anticipate significant challenges to our ability to maintain our systems and controls in light of the measures we have taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The Company does not currently face any material resource constraint through the implementation of our business continuity plans.
Lending operations and accommodations to borrowers
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act included a provision allowing banks to not apply the guidance on accounting for troubled debt restructurings to loan modifications, such as extensions or deferrals, related to COVID-19 made between March 1, 2020, and the earlier of (i) December 31, 2020, or (ii) 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The relief can only be applied to modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Company elected to adopt this provision of the CARES Act. Through December 31, 2020, we have modified 3,625 commercial and consumer loans totaling $458.17 million. Those modifications were generally short-term payment deferrals and are not considered TDR's based on the CARES Act. Our policy is to downgrade commercial loans modified for COVID-19 to special mention, which caused the significant increase in loans in that rating. Subsequent upgrade or downgrade will be on a case by case basis. The Company is upgrading these loans back to pass once the modification period has ended and timely contractual payments resume. Further downgrade would be based on a number of factors, including but not limited to additional modifications, payment performance and current underwriting. As of December 31, 2020, current commercial and consumer COVID-19 loan deferrals stood at $26.54 million and $5.72 million, respectively. It is possible that these deferrals could be extended further under the CARES Act; as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 ("CAA") signed into law on December 27, 2000, that extended the ability to provide necessary loan modifications to our customers and not consider these troubled debt restructurings. However, the volume of these future potential extensions is unknown. It is also possible that in spite of our best efforts to assist our borrowers and achieve full collection of our investment, these deferred loans could result in future charge-offs with additional credit loss expense charged to earnings; however, the amount of any future charge-offs on deferred loans is unknown.
With the passage of the PPP, administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) small businesses and other entities and individuals can apply for loans from existing SBA lenders and other approved regulated lenders that enroll in the program, subject to numerous limitations and eligibility criteria. The Bank is participating as a lender in the PPP. The PPP opened on April 3, 2020, and on or about April 16, 2020, the SBA notified lenders that the $349 billion earmarked for the PPP was exhausted. Congress approved additional funding for the PPP of approximately $320 billion on April 24, 2020. As part of the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act ("Economic Aid Act") enacted on December 27, 2020, in January, 2021, the SBA released applications for the second round of PPP loans for second draw loans for borrowers who received funding in the first round and first draw loans to first time borrowers. As of December 31, 2020, we have funded approximately 803 loans with original principal balances totaling $62.74 million through the PPP program. Through December 31, 2020, $3.94 million, or 6.46%, of the Company’s PPP loan balances had been forgiven by the SBA. It is the Company’s understanding that loans funded through the PPP program are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government. Should those circumstances change, the Company could be required to establish an allowance for credit loss through additional credit loss expense charged to earnings.
The Company is committed to assisting our customers in this time of need. Branch locations have converted to drive-thru only in order to ensure the health and safety of our customers and team members with lobbies available on a limited appointment-only basis. In addition, we have increased our emphasis on digital banking platforms.
The safety, health and wellness of our employees is a top priority. The COVID-19 pandemic presented a unique challenge with regard to maintaining employee safety while continuing successful operations. Within a short period of time, through teamwork and the adaptability of our management and staff, we were able to transition and provide remote access to non-customer facing employees to effectively work from remote locations and were able to ensure a safely-distanced working environment for employees performing customer facing activities at branches and operations centers. All employees are asked not to come to work when they experience signs or symptoms of a possible communicable illness, including COVID-19, and have been provided additional paid time off to cover compensation during such absences.
It is impossible to predict the full extent to which COVID-19 and the resulting measures to prevent its spread will affect the Company’s operations. Although there is a high degree of uncertainty around the magnitude and duration of the economic impact of COVID-19, the Company’s management believes its financial position, including high levels of capital and liquidity, will allow it to successfully endure the negative economic impacts of the crisis.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the U.S. and prevailing practices in the banking industry. Our accounting policies, as presented in Note 1, “Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report are fundamental in understanding MD&A and the disclosures presented in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this report. Management may be required to make significant estimates and assumptions that have a material impact on our financial condition or operating performance. Due to the level of subjectivity and the susceptibility of such matters to change, actual results could differ significantly from management’s assumptions and estimates. Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates used, we have identified the allowance for loan losses and goodwill as the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments or are the most susceptible to change.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We review our allowance for loan losses quarterly to determine if it is sufficient to absorb probable loan losses in the portfolio. This determination requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions. While management uses its best judgment and available information, the ultimate adequacy of the allowance is dependent upon a variety of factors beyond our control, including the performance of our loan portfolio, the economy, changes in interest rates, and the view of regulatory authorities towards loan classifications. These uncertainties may result in material changes to the allowance for loan losses in the near term; however, the amount of the change cannot reasonably be estimated.
Our allowance for loan losses consists of specific reserves assigned to impaired loans and credit relationships and general reserves assigned to unimpaired loans that have been segmented into loan classes with similar risk characteristics such as the type of loan and collateral. General reserve allocations are based on management’s judgments of qualitative and quantitative factors that include, but are not limited to, probable losses from loan and other credit arrangements, general economic conditions, changes in credit concentrations or pledged collateral, historical loan loss experience, and trends in portfolio volume, maturities, composition, delinquencies, and nonaccruals. Historical loss rates for loans classified as special mention and substandard within each loan class in the commercial loan segment are adjusted by an additional qualitative factor. Loans are considered impaired when, in the opinion of management and based on current information and events, the collection of principal and interest payments due under the contractual terms of the loan agreements are uncertain. The Company conducts quarterly reviews of loans with balances of $500 thousand or greater that are deemed to be impaired. Factors considered in determining impairment include, but are not limited to, the borrower’s cash flow and capacity for debt repayment, the valuation of collateral, historical loss percentages, and economic conditions. Impairment allowances allocated to individual loans, including individual credit relationships and loan pools grouped by similar risk characteristics, are reviewed quarterly by management, Impairment is measured based upon the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan's effective interest rate or the net realizable value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. No allowance for loan losses is carried over or established at acquisition for purchased loans acquired in business combinations. A provision for loan losses is recorded for any credit deterioration in purchased performing loans after the acquisition date. Loans acquired in business combinations that are deemed impaired at acquisition, purchased credit impaired (“PCI”) loans, are grouped into pools and evaluated separately from the non-PCI portfolio. The estimated cash flows to be collected on PCI loans are discounted at a market rate of interest. Management believed the allowance was adequate to absorb probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020. For additional information, see Note 6, “Allowance for Loan Losses,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually, on October 31st, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate there may be impairment. We have one reporting unit, Community Banking. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment, we evaluate factors such as macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, changes in stock price, and progress towards stated objectives in determining if it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative test is performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. The quantitative test consists of comparing the fair value of our reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of our reporting unit is greater than its book value, no goodwill impairment exists. If the carrying amount of our reporting unit is greater than its calculated fair value, a goodwill impairment charge is recognized for the difference. We performed a quantitative assessment for the annual test on October 31, 2020, which resulted in no goodwill impairment.
Quantitative goodwill impairment testing involves significant management judgement, requiring an assessment of whether the carrying value of the reporting unit can be supported by its fair value. The process to determine fair value of our reporting unit utilizes widely accepted valuation techniques, such as the market approach (earnings multiples and transaction multiples) and the income approach (discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method). The Company engaged an independent valuation specialist to assist with goodwill impairment testing utilizing both the market and DCF methods. The resulting fair values from the aforementioned methods were appropriately weighted to determine the final fair value of our reporting unit.
Under the market approach, the key assumptions are selected price to earnings ratios and price to tangible book value multiples. The selection of the multiples considers the operating performance and financial condition of our reporting unit as compared with those of a group of selected publicly traded guideline companies. Among other factors considered, are the level and expected growth in return on tangible equity relative to the guideline companies selected, implied control premiums, recent transaction prices, as well as data in comparable macroeconomic environments.
Under the DCF approach, the key assumptions used are the cash flows for the forecasted period, the terminal growth rate, and the discount rate. The cash flows for the forecasted period are estimated based on management’s most recent projections available as of the testing date, given consideration to minimum equity capital requirements. The projections include macroeconomic variables developed at the same time. The terminal growth rate is selected based on management’s long-term expectation for the reporting unit. The discount rate is based on the reporting unit’s estimated cost of equity capital, computed under the capital asset pricing model and reflects the risk and uncertainty in the financial markets in the internally generated cash flow projections.
At October 31, 2020, the fair value of the Company’s reporting unit compared to the carrying value resulted in no impairment of goodwill. While the inherent risk related to uncertainty is embedded in the key assumptions used in the valuations, the current environment continues to evolve due to the challenge and uncertainties related to the pandemic. Further deterioration in macroeconomic and market conditions, potential adverse effects to economic forecasts due to the severity and duration of the pandemic, as well as the responses of governments, customers, and clients, could negatively impact the assumptions used in the valuation. If the future should differ from management’s best estimate of key assumptions, the Company could potentially experience goodwill impairment charges in the future. For additional information, see Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures that provide useful information for financial and operational decision making, evaluating trends, and comparing financial results to other financial institutions. The non-GAAP financial measures presented in this report include certain financial measures presented on a fully taxable equivalent (“FTE”) basis. While we believe certain non-GAAP financial measures enhance the understanding of our business and performance, they are supplemental and not a substitute for, or more important than, financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to those reported by other financial institutions. The reconciliations of non-GAAP to GAAP measures are presented below.
We believe FTE basis is the preferred industry measurement of net interest income and provides better comparability between taxable and tax exempt amounts. We use this non-GAAP financial measure to monitor net interest income performance and to manage the composition of our balance sheet. FTE basis adjusts for the tax benefits of income from certain tax exempt loans and investments using the federal statutory income tax rate of 21% for periods after January 1, 2018. The following table reconciles net interest income and margin, as presented in our consolidated statements of income, to net interest income on a FTE basis for the periods indicated:
(1)
FTE basis of 21%.
Performance Overview
Highlights of our results of operations in 2020, and financial condition as of December 31, 2020, include the following:
●
For the full year, the Company earned $35.93 million, or $2.02 per diluted share, a decrease of $2.88 million, or 7.41% over 2019.
●
Return on average assets remained strong at 1.24% for the twelve-month period.
●
Net interest margin decreased 30 basis points to 4.29% for the full year 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease is reflective of the current historic low interest rate environment partially offset by purchase accounting accretion from the Highlands portfolio as well as accelerated paydowns of acquired loans.
●
The Company booked loan loss provision of $12.67 million; an increase of $9.10 million compared to the year 2019. The increase was primarily related to the economic uncertainty caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
●
The Company booked $239.60 million of new residential mortgage loans during the year.
● The Company processed 803 loans with original balances totaling $62.74 million through the SBA's Paycheck Protection Program to assist small businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, $3.94 million, or 6.46%, of these loan balances had been forgiven by the SBA.
● Interest-free deposits grew $144.93 million during 2020, and total deposits grew $216.34 million, or 9.29% , during 2020.
●
Book value per common share increased $0.75 to $24.08 compared to December 31, 2019.
●
The Company completed its stock repurchase authorization in the first quarter of 2020 with the repurchase of 734,653 shares for approximately $21.87 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company continues to significantly exceed regulatory "well capitalized" targets, as well as all capital targets of its capital management plan.
Results of Operations
Net Income
The following table presents the changes in net income and related information for the periods indicated:
2020 Compared to 2019. Pre-tax income decreased $3.68 million, or 7.40%, due to an increase in noninterest expense of $9.86 million, an increase in the provision for loan losses of $9.10 million, and a decrease in noninterest income of $3.84 million. The decreases to income were offset by a increase in net interest income of $19.12 million. Income tax expense decreased $808 thousand primarily as a result of the decrease in pre-tax income.
2019 Compared to 2018. Pre-tax income increased $4.67 million, or 10.36%, due to an increase in noninterest income of $7.23 million partially offset by a decrease in net interest income of $1.39 million and an increase in the provision for loan losses of $1.18 million. Income tax expense increased $2.21 million due to an increase in the effective rate from 19.46% in 2019 to 22.08% in 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income, our largest contributor to earnings, is analyzed on a fully taxable equivalent (“FTE”) basis, a non-GAAP financial measure. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above. The following table presents the consolidated average balance sheets and net interest analysis on a FTE basis for the dates indicated:
(1)
FTE basis based on the federal statutory rate of 21%.
(2)
Nonaccrual loans are included in average balances; however, no related interest income is recognized during the period of nonaccrual.
(3)
Interest on loans include non-cash purchase accounting accretion of $7.99 million in 2020, $3.23 million in 2019, and $6.39 million in 2018.
The following table presents the impact to net interest income on a FTE basis due to changes in volume (average volume times the prior year’s average rate), rate (average rate times the prior year’s average volume), and rate/volume (average volume times the change in average rate), for the periods indicated:
(1)
FTE basis based on the federal statutory rate of 21%.
2020 Compared to 2019. Net interest income comprised 78.45% of total net interest and noninterest income in 2020 compared to 72.65% in 2019. Net interest income increased $19.12 million, or 21.37%, compared to a increase of $18.92 million, or 20.95%, on a FTE basis. The FTE net interest margin decreased 30 basis points and the FTE net interest spread decreased 28 basis points. The decrease in the net interest margin and the net interest spread are primarily attributable to the current historically low interest rate environment partially offset by purchase accounting accretion from the Highlands portfolio as well as accelerated paydowns of acquired loans.
Average earning assets increased $575.82 million, or 29.25%, primarily due to an increase in average loans and average interest-bearing deposits offset by a decrease in average debt securities. The yield on earning assets decreased 36 basis points as the yields on interest-bearing deposits and debt securities decreased primarily due to the historically low rate environment. Average loans increased $420.22 million, or 24.40%, and the average loan to deposit ratio decreased to 88.08% from 93.35%. The increase in average loans was primarily due to the addition of Highlands. Non-cash accretion income related to PCI loans increased $4.76 million, or 147.37%, to $7.99 million due the addition of Highlands and the fourth quarter payoff of a large acquired loan relationship. The impact of non-cash purchase accounting accretion income on the FTE net interest margin was 31 basis points compared to 17 basis points in the prior year.
Average interest-bearing liabilities, which consist of interest-bearing deposits and borrowings, increased $343.45 million, or 24.84%, primarily due to an increase in average interest-bearing deposits. The yield on interest-bearing liabilities decreased 8 basis points. Average interest-bearing deposits increased $348.51 million, or 25.32%, which was driven by the December 31, 2019, Highlands acquisition with increases of $207.75 million, or 41.21%, in average savings deposits, $102.46 million, or 22.58%, in average interest-bearing demand deposits, and $38.31 million, or 9.15%, in average time deposits.
2019 Compared to 2018. Net interest income comprised 72.65% of total net interest and noninterest income in 2019 compared to 77.45% in 2018. Net interest income decreased $1.39 million, or 1.53%, compared to a decrease of $1.44 million, or 1.57%, on a FTE basis. The FTE net interest margin increased 18 basis points and the FTE net interest spread increased 19 basis points.
Average earning assets decreased $110.44 million, or 5.31%, primarily due to a decrease in average loans and debt securities offset by an increase in interest-bearing deposits. The yield on earning assets increased 10 basis points as the yields on debt securities, and interest-bearing deposits increased. Average loans decreased $72.97 million, or 4.06%, and the average loan to deposit ratio decreased to 93.35% from 94.74%. Non-cash accretion income related to PCI loans decreased $3.16 million, or 49.46%, to $3.23 million due to continued acquired portfolio attrition. The impact of non-cash purchase accounting accretion income on the FTE net interest margin was 17 basis points compared to 30 basis points in the prior year.
Average interest-bearing liabilities, which consist of interest-bearing deposits and borrowings, decreased $129.36 million, or 8.56%, primarily due to a decline in average interest-bearing deposits and average borrowings. The yield on interest-bearing liabilities decreased 9 basis points. Average borrowings decreased $59.62 million, or 90.53%, largely due to a $22.77 million, or 78.50%, decrease in average retail and wholesale repurchase agreements and a $36.85 million, or 100.00%, decrease in average FHLB advances. Average interest-bearing deposits decreased $69.74 million, or 4.82%, which was driven by a $52.89 million, or 11.22%, decrease in average time deposits, and a $12.58 million, or 2.70%, decrease in average interest-bearing demand deposits.
Provision for Loan Losses
2020 Compared to 2019. The provision charged to operations increased $9.10 million, or 254.75%. The increase was primarily related to the economic uncertainty caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
2019 Compared to 2018. The provision charged to operations increased $1.18 million, or 49.23%, to $3.57 million, as we effectively covered net charge-offs for the year.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents the components of, and changes in, noninterest income for the periods indicated:
2020 Compared to 2019. Noninterest income comprised 21.55% of total net interest and noninterest income in 2020 compared to 27.35% in 2019. Noninterest income decreased $3.84 million, or 11.41%, primarily due to $7.00 million received in litigation settlements in 2019. Service charges on deposits decreased $1.58 million, or 10.79%; the decrease was primarily attributable to pandemic shutdowns throughout 2020. Other service charges and fees increased $2.05 million, or 24.78%, primarily from an increase in net interchange income for the addition of Highlands accounts. Other operating income increased $1.57 million, or 55.81%, and was primarily driven by third party incentives associated with debit cards.
2019 Compared to 2018. Noninterest income comprised 27.35% of total net interest and noninterest income in 2020 compared to 22.55% in 2019. Noninterest income increased $7.23 million, or 27.36%, primarily due to the receipt of $7.00 million received in litigation settlements. Other service charges and fees increased $548 thousand, or 7.09%, primarily from an increase in net interchange income. Net securities losses decreased $575 thousand, or 93.04%. Other operating income increases were offset by a $966 thousand decrease in insurance commissions due to the divestiture of the Company’s remaining insurance agency assets in 2019.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents the components of, and changes in, noninterest expense for the periods indicated:
2020 Compared to 2019. Noninterest expense increased $9.86, or 14.14%. The increase was primarily due to an increase in salaries and benefits of $6.86 million, or 18.46%, which was largely due to the addition of Highlands employees. In addition, occupancy and furniture and equipment expense increase a combined total of $1.81 million and was primarily driven by the addition of branch locations acquired in the Highlands transaction.
2019 Compared to 2018. Noninterest expense decreased $10 thousand, or 0.01%, which was largely due to one-time charges recognized in 2019 for goodwill impairment related to the divestiture of the Company’s remaining insurance agency assets of $1.49 million and the loss on extinguishment of the Company’s remaining FHLB debt of $1.10 million. In addition, other operating expense decreased $798 thousand due to property write-downs that occurred in 2019 and FDIC premiums decreased $588 thousand due to small bank assessment credits received from the FDIC. These decreases were offset by an increase in merger expenses of $2.12 million related to the Highlands acquisition as well as increases in service fees, furniture and equipment expense, and an increase in salaries and employee benefits totaling $1.52 million.
Income Tax Expense
The Company’s effective tax rate, income tax as a percent of pre-tax income, may vary significantly from the statutory rate due to permanent differences and available tax credits. Permanent differences are income and expense items excluded by law in the calculation of taxable income. The Company’s most significant permanent differences generally include interest income on municipal securities and increases in the cash surrender value of life insurance policies. The Tax Reform Act enacted on December 22, 2017, reduced our federal statutory income tax rate from 35% to 21% beginning January 1, 2018.
2020 Compared to 2019. Income tax expense decreased $808 thousand, or 7.35%, and is primarily attributable to the decrease in pre-tax net income. The effective tax rate increased to 22.09% in 2020 compared to 22.08% in 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. Income tax expense increased $2.21 million, or 25.19%, and the effective tax rate increased to 22.08% in 2019 compared to 19.46% in 2018. The lower effective rate in 2019 was primarily due to the enactment of the Tax Reform Act and the completion of the deferred tax asset revaluation, which resulted in a $1.67 million reduction in tax expense.
Financial Condition
Total assets as of December 31, 2020, increased $212.29 million, or 7.58%, to $3.01 billion from $2.80 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to the increase in overnight funds of $247.76 million, or 167.40%. Total liabilities as of December 31, 2020, increased $214.38 million, or 9.05%, to $2.58 billion from $2.37 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily the result of an increase in total deposits of $216.34 million, or 9.29%. The increase in deposits is primarily attributable to the significant increase in demand deposits due to the unprecedented level of stimulus payments from the Federal Government in response to the pandemic.
Investment Securities
Our investment securities are used to generate interest income through the deployment of excess funds, to fund loan demand or deposit liquidation, to pledge as collateral where required, and to make selective investments for Community Reinvestment Act purposes. The composition of our investment portfolio changes from time to time as we consider our liquidity needs, interest rate expectations, asset/liability management strategies, and capital requirements. Available-for-sale debt securities as of December 31, 2020, decreased $86.22 million, or 50.84%, compared to December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributable to sales of $51.03 million primarily due to the liquidation of the Highlands portfolio, as well as maturities, prepayments, and calls of $44.68 million offset by purchases of $10.27 million. The market value of debt securities available for sale as a percentage of amortized cost was 101.71% as of December 31, 2020 compared to 100.65% as of December 31, 2019. There were no held-to-maturity debt securities as of December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. The remaining debt securities in the held-to-maturity category in 2018 matured during the first quarter of 2019. The funds were used to repay the Company’s remaining wholesale repurchase agreement of $25 million. The following table presents the amortized cost and fair value of debt securities as of the dates indicated:
The following table provides information about our investment portfolio as of the dates indicated:
There were no holdings of any one issuer, other than the U.S. government and its agencies, in an amount greater than 10% of our total consolidated shareholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The following table presents the amortized cost, fair value, and weighted-average yield of available-for-sale debt securities by contractual maturity, as of December 31, 2020. Actual maturities could differ from contractual maturities because issuers may have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without penalties.
(1)
FTE basis of 21%
Investment securities are reviewed quarterly for indications of other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) charges. We recognized no OTTI charges in earnings associated with debt securities in 2020 or 2019. For additional information, see Note 1, “Basis of Presentation and Accounting Policies,” and Note 3, “Debt Securities,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Loans Held for Investment
Loans held for investment, our largest component of interest income, are grouped into commercial, consumer real estate, and consumer and other loan segments. Each segment is divided into various loan classes based on collateral or purpose. Certain loans acquired in FDIC-assisted transactions are covered under loss share agreements (“covered loans”). The general characteristics of each loan segment are as follows:
●
Commercial loans - This segment consists of loans to small and mid-size industrial, commercial, and service companies that include, but are not limited to, natural gas producers, retail merchants, and wholesale merchants. Commercial real estate projects represent a variety of sectors of the commercial real estate market, including single family and apartment lessors, commercial real estate lessors, and hotel/motel operators. Commercial loan underwriting guidelines require that comprehensive reviews and independent evaluations be performed on credits exceeding predefined size limits. Updates to these loan reviews are done periodically or annually depending on the size of the loan relationship.
●
Consumer real estate loans - This segment consists of loans to individuals within our market footprint for home equity loans and lines of credit and for the purchase or construction of owner occupied homes. Residential real estate loan underwriting guidelines require that borrowers meet certain credit, income, and collateral standards at origination.
●
Consumer and other loans - This segment consists of loans to individuals within our market footprint that include, but are not limited to, personal lines of credit, credit cards, and the purchase of automobiles, boats, mobile homes, and other consumer goods. Consumer loan underwriting guidelines require that borrowers meet certain credit, income, and collateral standards at origination.
Total loans held for investment, net of unearned income, as of December 31, 2020, increased $72.17 million, or 3.41%, compared to December 31, 2019. Covered loans decreased $3.18 million, or 24.73%, as the Waccamaw Bank (“Waccamaw”) covered loan portfolio continues to pay down. We had no foreign loans or loan concentrations to any single borrower or industry, which are not otherwise disclosed as a category of loans that represented 10% or more of outstanding loans, as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. For additional information, see Note 4, “Loans,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The following table presents loans, net of unearned income and by loan class, as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents covered loans, by loan class, as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents the percentage of loans to total loans in the non-covered portfolio, by loan class, as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents the percentage of loans to total loans in the covered portfolio, by loan class, as of the dates indicated:
The following table presents the maturities and rate sensitivities of the non-covered loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Construction loans with maturities due after five years include construction to permanent loans that have not converted to principal and interest payments.
The following table presents the maturities and rate sensitivities of the covered loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
Risk Elements
We seek to mitigate credit risk by following specific underwriting practices and by ongoing monitoring of our loan portfolio. Our underwriting practices include the analysis of borrowers’ prior credit histories, financial statements, tax returns, and cash flow projections; valuation of collateral based on independent appraisers’ reports; and verification of liquid assets. We believe our underwriting criteria are appropriate for the various loan types we offer; however, losses may occur that exceed the reserves established in our allowance for loan losses. We track certain credit quality indicators that include: trends related to the risk rating of commercial loans, the level of classified commercial loans, net charge-offs, nonperforming loans, and general economic conditions. The Company’s loan review function generally analyzes all commercial loan relationships greater than $4.00 million annually and at various times during the year. Smaller commercial and retail loans are sampled for review during the year.
Nonperforming assets consist of nonaccrual loans, accrual loans contractually past due 90 days or more, unseasoned troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”), and OREO. Ongoing activity in the classification and categories of nonperforming loans include collections on delinquencies, foreclosures, loan restructurings, and movements into or out of the nonperforming classification due to changing economic conditions, borrower financial capacity, or resolution efforts. Loans acquired with credit deterioration, with a discount, continue to accrue interest based on expected cash flows; therefore, PCI loans are not generally considered nonaccrual. For additional information, see Note 5, “Credit Quality,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The following table presents the components of nonperforming assets and related information as of the periods indicated:
(1)
TDRs restructured within the past six months and nonperforming TDRs exclude nonaccrual TDRs of $1.18 million, $95 thousand, $898 thousand, $169 thousand, and $224 thousand for the five years ended December 31, 2020. They are included in nonaccrual loans.
(2)
TDRs with six months or more of satisfactory payment performance exclude nonaccrual TDRs of $637 thousand, $2.25 million, $1.68 million, $1.76 million, and $1.06 million for the five years ended December 31, 2020. They are included in nonaccrual loans.
(3)
Total accruing TDRs exclude nonaccrual TDRs of $1.81 million, $2.34 million, $2.58 million, $1.93 million, and $1.28 million for the five years ended December 31, 2020. They are included in nonaccrual loans.
Non-covered nonperforming assets as of December 31, 2020, increased $3.33 million, or 15.87%, from December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase of $5.59 million, or 34.71%, in non-covered nonaccrual loans offset by a $1.89 million, or 47.52% decrease in non-covered OREO, and a $533 thousand, or 74.03%, decrease in non-covered, non-performing troubled debt restructurings. Non-covered OREO, which is carried at the lesser of estimated net realizable value or cost, consisted of 22 properties with an average holding period of 16 months as of December 31, 2020. The net loss on the sale of OREO was $316 thousand in 2020, $1.25 million in 2019, and $1.33 million in 2018. The following table presents the changes in OREO during the periods indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, non-covered nonaccrual loans were largely attributed to single family owner occupied (36.67%) and non-farm, non-residential (29.22%) loans. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $6.09 million, or 28.06%, of non-covered nonaccrual loans were attributed to performing loans acquired in business combinations. Certain loans included in the nonaccrual category have been written down to estimated realizable value or assigned specific reserves in the allowance for loan losses based on management’s estimate of loss at ultimate resolution.
Certain TDRs are classified as nonperforming when modified and are returned to performing status after six months of satisfactory payment performance; however, these loans remain identified as impaired until full payment or other satisfaction of the obligation occurs. Total TDRs as of December 31, 2020, increased $3.15 million, or 35.27%, to $12.06 million from December 31, 2019. Nonperforming accruing TDRs as of December 31, 2020, decreased $533 thousand, or 74.03%, to $187 thousand from December 31, 2019. Nonperforming accruing TDRs as a percent of total accruing TDRs totaled 1.82% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 13.69% as of December 31, 2019. Specific reserves on TDRs totaled $233 thousand as of December 31, 2020, compared to $353 thousand as of December 31, 2019. When restructuring loans for borrowers experiencing financial difficulty, we generally make concessions in interest rates, loan terms, or amortization terms.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act included a provision allowing banks to not apply the guidance on accounting for troubled debt restructurings to loan modifications, such as extensions or deferrals, related to COVID-19 made between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) December 31, 2020 or (ii) 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The relief can only be applied to modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Company elected to adopt this provision of the CARES Act.
Through December 31, 2020, we have modified 3,625 commercial and consumer loans totaling $458.17 million. Those modifications were generally short-term payment deferrals and are not considered TDR's based on the CARES Act. Our policy is to downgrade commercial loans modified for COVID-19 to special mention, which caused the significant increase in loans in that rating. Subsequent upgrade or downgrade will be on a case by case basis. The Company is upgrading these loans back to pass once the modification period has ended and timely contractual payments resume. Further downgrade would be based on a number of factors, including but not limited to additional modifications, payment performance and current underwriting. As of December 31, 2020, current commercial and consumer COVID-19 loan deferrals stood at $26.54 million and $5.72 million, respectively.
Commercial Loans Modified Under CARES Act
The following table details the balance of commercial loans modified for short-term payment deferral under provision of the CARES Act as of the dates indicated.
Non-covered delinquent loans, comprised of loans 30 days or more past due and nonaccrual loans, totaled $35.72 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $97 thousand, or 0.27%, compared to $35.62 million as of December 31, 2019. Non-covered delinquent loans as a percent of total non-covered loans totaled 1.64% as of December 31, 2020, which includes past due loans (0.64%) and nonaccrual loans (1.00%), compared to 1.69% as of December 31, 2019.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level management deems sufficient to absorb probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The allowance is increased by the provision for loan losses and recoveries of prior loan charge-offs and decreased by loans charged off. The provision for loan losses is calculated and charged to expense to bring the allowance to an appropriate level using a systematic process of measurement that requires significant judgments and estimates. As of December 31, 2020, our qualitative risk factors reflect a increased risk of possible loan losses due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The loan portfolio is continually monitored for deterioration in credit, which may result in the need to increase the allowance for loan losses in future periods. Management considered the allowance adequate as of December 31, 2020; however, no assurance can be made that additions to the allowance will not be required in future periods. For additional information, see “Allowance for Loan Losses” in the “Critical Accounting Policies” section above and Note 6, “Allowance for Loan Losses,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
The allowance for loan losses as of December 31, 2020, increased $7.76, or 42.10%, from December 31, 2019, primarily due the increased potential for loan defaults and losses related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The non-PCI allowance as a percent of non-covered loans totaled 1.20% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 0.88% as of December 31, 2019. PCI loans were aggregated into fifteen loan pools as of December 31, 2020 and five loan pools in 2019. The Highlands transaction added ten additional pools to the five existing pools from 2019. Effective January 1, 2020, the Company collapsed the PCI loans and discounts for Peoples and Waccamaw acquired loans into the non-PCI loan portfolio. The Highlands transaction added the following pools: 1-4 Family, Senior-Consumer, 1-4 Family Senior-Commercial, 1-4 Family, Junior and Home Equity Lines, Commercial Land and Development, Farmland and Agricultural, Multi-family, Commercial Real Estate - Owner Occupied, Commercial Real Estate - Non-owner Occupied, Commercial and Industrial, and Consumer. Net charge-offs increased $1.50 million, or 43.89% in 2020 compared to 2019.
The following table presents the changes in the allowance for loan losses, by loan class, during the periods indicated:
The following table presents the allowance for loan losses, excluding PCI loans, by loan class, as of the dates indicated:
There was no allowance related to PCI loans as of December 31, 2020, nor for December 31, 2019, 2018, or 2017. As of December 31, 2016 there was an allowance of $12 thousand related to PCI loans.
Deposits
Total deposits as of December 31, 2020, increased $216.34 million, or 9.29%, compared to December 31, 2019. Time deposits, which consist of certificates of deposit and individual retirement accounts, decreased $95.00 million; savings deposits, which consist of money market accounts and savings accounts, increased $65.73 million; interest-bearing demand deposits increased $100.68 million while noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased $144.93 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019. We attribute the significant increase in demand deposits to the unprecedented level of stimulus payments from the Federal Government in response to the pandemic. We had no material deposit concentrations to any single customer or industry that represented 10% or more of outstanding deposits as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The following schedule presents the contractual maturities of time deposits of $100 thousand or more as of December 31, 2020:
Borrowings
Total borrowings as of December 31, 2020, decreased $637 thousand, or 39.79%, compared to December 31, 2019. Total borrowings for 2020 were comprised entirely of short-term borrowings, which consist of retail repurchase agreements. The weighted average rate increased 18 basis points to 0.32% as of December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019.
The following table presents the balances and weighted average rates paid on short-term borrowings for the periods indicated:
Long-term borrowings consisted of a $40 thousand amortizing advance with the FHLB of Atlanta that was assumed in the Highlands transaction. That small borrowing was repaid early in 2020. In the first quarter of 2019, the Company’s remaining wholesale repurchase agreement of $25.00 million with a weighted average rate of 3.18% matured. During 2018, the prepayment of the FHLB advance resulted in a prepayment penalty of $1.10 million. The prepayment was funded with cash and equivalents on hand, as well as proceeds from the sale of single issue trust preferred investment securities, and resulted in annualized net pre-tax savings of approximately $800 thousand.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to convert assets to cash or raise cash to meet financial obligations. We believe that liquidity management should encompass an overall balance sheet approach that draws together all sources and uses of liquidity. Poor or inadequate liquidity risk management may result in a funding deficit that could have a material impact on our operations. We maintain a liquidity risk management policy and contingency funding policy (“Liquidity Plan”) to detect potential liquidity issues and protect our depositors, creditors, and shareholders. The Liquidity Plan includes various internal and external indicators that are reviewed on a recurring basis by our Asset/Liability Management Committee (“ALCO”) of the Board of Directors. ALCO reviews liquidity risk exposure and policies related to liquidity management; ensures that systems and internal controls are consistent with liquidity policies; and provides accurate reports about liquidity needs, sources, and compliance. The Liquidity Plan involves ongoing monitoring and estimation of potentially credit sensitive liabilities and the sources and amounts of balance sheet and external liquidity available to replace outflows during a funding crisis. The liquidity model incorporates various funding crisis scenarios and a specific action plan is formulated, and activated, when a financial shock that affects our normal funding activities is identified. Generally, the plan will reflect a strategy of replacing liability outflows with alternative liabilities, rather than balance sheet asset liquidity, to the extent that significant premiums can be avoided. If alternative liabilities are not available, outflows will be met through liquidation of balance sheet assets, including unpledged securities.
As a financial holding company, the Company’s primary source of liquidity is dividends received from the Bank, which are subject to certain regulatory limitations. Other sources of liquidity include cash, investment securities, and borrowings. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash reserves totaled $10.09 million and availability on an unsecured, committed line of credit with an unrelated financial institution totaled $15.00 million. There was no outstanding balance on the line of credit as of December 31, 2020. The Company’s cash reserves and investments provide adequate working capital to meet obligations, projected dividends to shareholders, and anticipated debt repayments for the next twelve months.
In addition to cash on hand and deposits with other financial institutions, we rely on customer deposits, cash flows from loans and investment securities, and lines of credit from the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank (“FRB”) Discount Window to meet potential liquidity demands. These sources of liquidity are immediately available to satisfy deposit withdrawals, customer credit needs, and our operations. Secondary sources of liquidity include approved lines of credit with correspondent banks and unpledged available-for-sale securities. As of December 31, 2020, our unencumbered cash totaled $456.56 million, unused borrowing capacity from the FHLB totaled $292.92 million, available credit from the FRB Discount Window totaled $6.08 million, available lines from correspondent banks totaled $85.00 million, and unpledged available-for-sale securities totaled $46.79 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the components of cash flow for the periods indicated:
2020 Compared to 2019. Cash and cash equivalents increased $239.55 million compared to a increase of $140.14 million in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to an increase in both interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing deposits for a total of $216.34 million. The increase in deposits was largely due to the significant inflow of unprecedented government stimulus in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and changes in consumer spending.
2019 Compared to 2018. Cash and cash equivalents increased $140.14 million compared to a decrease of $81.08 million in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a $121.98 million increase in net cash used in investing activities due to a net decrease in funds used to purchase investment securities and an increase in loan proceeds received. Net cash provided by financing activities increased $92.08 million largely due to a reduction in the net decrease in deposits year over year, and a net decrease in the repayment of borrowings. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $7.16 million primarily due to an increase in net income and a decrease in accretion income on acquired loans.
Capital Resources
We are committed to effectively managing our capital to protect our depositors, creditors, and shareholders. Failure to meet certain capital requirements may result in actions by regulatory agencies that could have a material impact on our operations. Total stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020, decreased $2.09 million, or 0.49%, to $426.73 million from $428.82 million as of December 31, 2019. The Company earned $35.93 million, which was offset by repurchasing 734,653 shares of our common stock totaling $21.87 million and declaring dividends on our common stock of $17.88 million. Our book value per common share increased $0.75 to $24.08 as of December 31, 2020, from $23.33 as of December 31, 2019.
Capital Adequacy Requirements
Risk-based capital guidelines, issued by state and federal banking agencies, include balance sheet assets and off-balance sheet arrangements weighted by the risks inherent in the specific asset type. Our current risk-based capital requirements are based on the international capital standards known as Basel III. Our current required capital ratios are as follows:
●
4.5% Common Equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets (effectively 7.00% including the capital conservation buffer)
●
6.0% Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets (effectively 8.50% including the capital conservation buffer)
●
8.0% Total capital to risk-weighted assets (effectively 10.50% including the capital conservation buffer)
●
4.0% Tier 1 capital to average consolidated assets (“Tier 1 leverage ratio”)
The following table presents our capital ratios as of the dates indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, we continued to meet all capital adequacy requirements and were classified as well-capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. Management believes there have been no conditions or events since those notifications that would change the Bank’s classification. Additionally, our capital ratios were in excess of the minimum standards under the Basel III capital rules on a fully phased-in basis, if such requirements were in effect, as of December 31, 2020. For additional information, see “Capital Requirements” in Part I, Item 1 and Note 21, “Regulatory Requirements and Restrictions,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Commitments, Contingencies, and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
We enter into certain contractual obligations in the normal course of business that require future cash payments. Management believes we have adequate resources to fund our outstanding commitments and the ability to adjust rates on certificates of deposit, in a changing interest rate environment; attract new deposits; and replace deposits with FHLB advances or other fund providers, if cost effective. The following table presents our contractual cash obligations, by payment date, as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Excludes interest
(2)
Includes interest on fixed and variable rate obligations (changes in market interest rates may materially affect the variable rate obligation to be paid, which is reflected using the rates in effect as of December 31, 2020)
(3)
Excludes unamortized premiums and discounts
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We extend contractual commitments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. Our exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by other parties to financial instruments is the same as the contractual amount of the instrument.
The following table presents our off-balance sheet arrangements, by commitment expiration, as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Lines of credit with no stated maturity date are included in the less than one year expiration category.
(2)
Includes FHLB letters of credit
The reserve for the risk inherent in unfunded lending commitments totaled $66 thousand as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. For additional information, see Note 20, “Litigation, Commitments, and Contingencies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Market Risk and Interest Rate Sensitivity
Market risk represents the risk of loss due to adverse changes in current and future cash flows, fair values, earnings, or capital due to movements in interest rates and other factors. Our profitability is largely dependent upon net interest income, which is subject to variation due to changes in the interest rate environment and unbalanced repricing opportunities. We are subject to interest rate risk when interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities reprice at differing times, when underlying rates change at different levels or in varying degrees, when there is an unequal change in the spread between two or more rates for different maturities, and when embedded options, if any, are exercised. ALCO reviews our mix of assets and liabilities with the goal of limiting exposure to interest rate risk, ensuring adequate liquidity, and coordinating sources and uses of funds while maintaining an acceptable level of net interest income given the current interest rate environment. ALCO is also responsible for overseeing the formulation and implementation of policies and strategies to improve balance sheet positioning and mitigate the effect of interest rate changes.
In order to manage our exposure to interest rate risk, we periodically review internal and third-party simulation models that project net interest income at risk, which measures the impact of different interest rate scenarios on net interest income, and the economic value of equity at risk, which measures potential long-term risk in the balance sheet by valuing our assets and liabilities at fair value under different interest rate scenarios. Simulation results show the existence and severity of interest rate risk in each scenario based on our current balance sheet position, assumptions about changes in the volume and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and estimated yields earned on assets and rates paid on liabilities. The simulation model provides the best tool available to us and the industry for managing interest rate risk; however, the model cannot precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in interest rates on net interest income due to the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Actual results will differ from simulated results due to the timing, magnitude, and frequency of interest rate changes; changes in market conditions and customer behavior; and changes in our strategies that management might undertake in response to a sudden and sustained rate shock.
During 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee decreased the benchmark federal funds rate 150 basis points to a range of 0 to 25 basis points. The following table presents the sensitivity of net interest income from immediate and sustained rate shocks in various interest rate scenarios over a twelve-month period for the periods indicated. Due to the current target Fed Funds rate as of December 31, 2020, we do not reflect a decrease of more than 100 basis points from current rates in our analysis.
We have established policy limits for tolerance of interest rate risk in various interest rate scenarios and exposure limits to changes in the economic value of equity. As of December 31, 2020, we feel our exposure to interest rate risk was adequately mitigated for the scenarios presented.
The Company primarily uses derivative instruments to manage exposure to market risk and meet customer financing needs. As of December 31, 2020, we maintained interest rate swap agreements with notional amounts totaling $16.70 million to modify our exposure to interest rate risk caused by changes in the LIBOR curve in relation to certain designated fixed rate loans. The total of the fair value of the swap agreements on the balance sheet, which are accounted for as fair value hedges, was recorded as a derivative liability totaling $1.13 million as of December 31, 2020, and a derivative liability totaling $510 thousand as of December 31, 2019. For additional information, see Note 12, “Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Inflation and Changing Prices
Our consolidated financial statements and related notes are presented in accordance with GAAP, which requires the measurement of results of operations and financial position in historical dollars. Inflation may cause a rise in price levels and changes in the relative purchasing power of money. These inflationary effects are not reflected in historical dollar measurements. The primary effect of inflation on our operations is increased operating costs. In management’s opinion, interest rates have a greater impact on our financial performance than inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily fluctuate in the same direction, or to the same extent, as the price of goods and services; therefore, the effect of inflation on businesses with large investments in property, plant, and inventory is generally more significant than the effect on financial institutions. The U.S. inflation rate continues to be relatively stable, and management believes that any changes in inflation will not be material to our financial performance.