Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis identifies significant factors that have affected our financial position and operating results during the periods included in the accompanying financial statements. We encourage you to read this discussion and analysis in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and the other statistical information also included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are headquartered in Lexington, South Carolina and serve as the bank holding company for the Bank. We engage in a general commercial and retail banking business characterized by personalized service and local decision making, emphasizing the banking needs of small to medium-sized businesses, professional concerns and individuals. We operate from our main office in Lexington, South Carolina, and our 21 full-service offices located in the South Carolina counties of Lexington County (6 offices), Richland County (4 offices), Newberry County (2 offices), Kershaw County (1 office), Aiken County (1 office), Greenville County (2 offices), Anderson County (1 office), and Pickens County (1 office); and in the Georgia counties of Richmond County (2 offices) and Columbia County (1 office).
The following discussion describes our results of operations for 2020, as compared to 2019 and 2018, and also analyzes our financial condition as of December 31, 2020, as compared to December 31, 2019. Like most community banks, we derive most of our income from interest we receive on our loans and investments. A primary source of funds for making these loans and investments is our deposits, on which we pay interest. Consequently, one of the key measures of our success is our amount of net interest income, or the difference between the income on our interest-earning assets, such as loans and investments, and the expense on our interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings.
We have included a number of tables to assist in our description of these measures. For example, the “Average Balances” table shows the average balance during 2020, 2019 and 2018 of each category of our assets and liabilities, as well as the yield we earned or the rate we paid with respect to each category. A review of this table shows that our loans typically provide higher interest yields than do other types of interest earning assets, which is why we intend to channel a substantial percentage of our earning assets into our loan portfolio. Similarly, the “Rate/Volume Analysis” table helps demonstrate the impact of changing interest rates and changing volume of assets and liabilities during the years shown. We also track the sensitivity of our various categories of assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates, and we have included a “Sensitivity Analysis Table” to help explain this. Finally, we have included a number of tables that provide detail about our investment securities, our loans, and our deposits and other borrowings.
There are risks inherent in all loans, so we maintain an allowance for loan losses to absorb probable losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible. We establish and maintain this allowance by charging a provision for loan losses against our operating earnings. In the following section, we have included a detailed discussion of this process, as well as several tables describing our allowance for loan losses and the allocation of this allowance among our various categories of loans.
In addition to earning interest on our loans and investments, we earn income through fees and other expenses we charge to our customers. We describe the various components of this noninterest income, as well as our noninterest expense, in the following discussion. The discussion and analysis also identifies significant factors that have affected our financial position and operating results during the periods included in the accompanying financial statements. We encourage you to read this discussion and analysis in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and the other statistical information also included in this report.
Recent Events - COVID-19 Pandemic
Our financial performance generally, and in particular the ability of our borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral securing those loans, as well as demand for loans and other products and services we offer, is highly dependent on the business environment in our primary markets where we operate and in the United States as a whole. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to create extensive disruptions to the global economy and financial markets and to businesses and the lives of individuals throughout the world. In particular, the COVID-19 pandemic has severely restricted the level of economic activity in our markets. Federal and state governments have taken, and may continue to take, unprecedented actions to contain the spread of the disease, including quarantines, travel bans, shelter-in-place orders, closures of businesses and schools, fiscal stimulus, and legislation designed to deliver monetary aid and other relief to businesses and individuals impacted by the pandemic. Although in various locations certain activity restrictions have been relaxed and businesses and schools have reopened with some level of success, in many states and localities the number of individuals diagnosed with COVID-19 has increased significantly, which may cause a freezing or, in certain cases, a reversal of previously announced relaxation of activity restrictions and may prompt the need for additional aid and other forms of relief.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is fluid and continues to evolve. The unprecedented and rapid spread of COVID-19 and its associated impacts on trade (including supply chains and export levels), travel, employee productivity, unemployment, consumer spending, and other economic activities has resulted in less economic activity, significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. In addition, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, market interest rates have declined significantly, with the 10-year Treasury bond falling below 1.00% on March 3, 2020, for the first time. The 10-year Treasury bond was 0.69% at September 30, 2020 compared to 0.66% at June 30, 2020 and 1.92% at December 31, 2019. Further, long-term bond yields have recently begun to rise, nearing where they were before the pandemic in February 2020. In March 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the targeted federal funds interest rate range to 0% to 0.25%. These reductions in interest rates and the other effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have had, and are expected to continue to have, possibly materially, an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. For instance, the pandemic has had negative effects on the Bank’s net interest margin, provision for loan losses, deposit service charges, salaries and benefits, occupancy expense, and equipment expense. The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations is currently uncertain and will depend on various developments and other factors, including the effect of governmental and private sector initiatives, the effect of the recent rollout of vaccinations for the virus, whether such vaccinations will be effective against any resurgence of the virus, including any new strains, and the ability for customers and businesses to return to their pre-pandemic routine.
Our business, financial condition and results of operations generally rely upon the ability of our borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral underlying our secured loans, and demand for loans and other products and services we offer, which are highly dependent on the business environment in our primary markets where we operate and in the United States as a whole. We have a business continuity plan that covers a variety of potential impacts to business operations. These plans are periodically reviewed and tested and have been designed to protect the ongoing viability of bank operations in the event of a disruption such as a pandemic. Beginning in March 2020, we activated our pandemic preparedness plan and began to roll it out in phases related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Following recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, we implemented enhanced cleaning of bank facilities and provided guidance to employees and customers on best practices to minimize the spread of the virus. As part of our efforts to exercise social distancing, we modified our delivery channels with a shift to drive thru only service at the banking offices supplemented by appointments for service in the office lobbies. We have encouraged the use of online and mobile channels and have seen the number of online banking users increase, as well as the dollar volume of bill payment, Zelle, and mobile deposit transactions trend higher. To support the health and well-being of our employees, a portion of our workforce is working from home. We have enhanced our remote work capabilities by providing additional laptops and various audio and video meeting technologies. Communication channels for employees and customers were created to provide periodic updates during this rapidly changing environment. These are still in place and in use.
We are focused on servicing the financial needs of our commercial and consumer customers with flexible loan payment arrangements, including short-term loan modifications or forbearance payments and reducing or waiving certain fees on deposit accounts. Future governmental actions may require these and other types of customer-related responses. Beginning in March 2020, we proactively offered payment deferrals for up to 90 days to our loan customers. We continue to consider potential deferrals with respect to certain customers, which we evaluate on a case-by-case basis. Loans on which payments have been deferred declined to $16.1 million at December 31, 2020 from $27.3 million at September 30, 2020. At its peak, which occurred during the second quarter of 2020, we granted payment deferments on loans totaling $206.9 million. As a result of payments being resumed at the conclusion of their payment deferral period, loans in which payments have been deferred decreased from the peak of $206.9 million to $175.0 million at June 30, 2020, to $27.3 million at September 30, 2020, to $16.1 million at December 31, 2020, and to $8.7 million at March 5, 2021. We had no loans on which payments were deferred related to the COVID-19 pandemic at December 31, 2019. We had no loans remaining on initial deferral status in which both principal and interest were deferred at December 31, 2020 and March 5, 2021. The $16.1 million in deferrals at December 31, 2020 consists of seven loans on which only principal is being deferred. We had three loans totaling $8.7 million in continuing deferral status in which only principal is being deferred at March 5, 2021. Two of the continuing deferrals at March 5, 2021 totaling $4.5 million are in the retail industry segment identified by us as one of the industry segments most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic; the other continuing deferral totaling $4.2 million is a mixed use office space that we do not consider to be in an industry segment most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of these deferments were to businesses that temporarily closed or reduced operations and some were requested as a pre-cautionary measure to conserve cash. We proactively offered deferrals to our customers regardless of the impact of the pandemic on their business or personal finances.
We are also a small business administration approved lender and participated in the PPP, established under the CARES Act. We had PPP loans totaling $43.3 million gross of deferred fees and costs and $42.2 million net of deferred fees and costs at December 31, 2020. We had PPP loans totaling $58.5 million gross of deferred fees and costs and $57.1 million net of deferred fees and costs at January 31, 2021. The PPP deferred fees net of deferred costs will be recognized as interest income over the remaining life of the PPP loans.
Our asset quality metrics as of December 31, 2020 remained sound. The non-performing asset ratio was 0.50% of total assets with the nominal level of $7.0 million in non-performing assets. Loans past due 30 days or more represented 0.23% of the loan portfolio. The ratio of classified loans plus OREO was 6.89% of total bank regulatory risk-based capital. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we experienced net loan recoveries of $142 thousand and net overdraft charge-offs of $43 thousand.
At December 31, 2020, our non-performing assets were not yet materially impacted by the economic pressures of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the increase in non-performing assets to $7.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $3.7 million at December 31, 2019 was related to one credit relationship, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As we closely monitor credit risk and our exposure to increased loan losses resulting from the impact of COVID-19 on our customers, we evaluated and identified our exposure to certain industry segments most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as of December 31, 2020:
We are also monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the operations and value of our investments. We mark to market our publicly traded investments and review our investment portfolio for impairment at, a minimum, quarterly. We do not consider any securities in our investment portfolio to be other-than-temporarily impaired at December 31, 2020. However, because of changing economic and market conditions affecting issuers, we may be required to recognize future impairments on the securities we hold as well as reductions in other comprehensive income. We cannot currently determine the ultimate impact of the pandemic on the long-term value of our portfolio.
Our capital remained strong and exceeded the well-capitalized regulatory requirements at December 31, 2020. Total shareholders’ equity increased $16.1 million or 13.4% to $136.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $120.2 million at December 31, 2019. In 2018, the Federal Reserve increased the asset size to qualify as a small bank holding company. As a result of this change, we are generally not subject to the Federal Reserve capital requirements unless advised otherwise. The Bank remains subject to capital requirements including a minimum leverage ratio and a minimum ratio of “qualifying capital” to risk weighted assets. These requirements are essentially the same as those that applied to the Company prior to the change in the definition of a small bank holding company. Each of the regulatory capital ratios for the Bank exceeds the well capitalized minimum levels currently required by regulatory statute at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Refer to the Liquidity Management section for more details.
Based on our strong capital, conservative underwriting, and internal stress testing, we expect to remain well capitalized throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the Bank’s reported regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by future credit losses related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We recognize that we face extraordinary circumstances, and we intend to monitor developments and potential impacts on our capital.
We believe that we have ample liquidity to meet the needs of our customers and to manage through the COVID-19 pandemic through our low cost deposits; our ability to borrow against approved lines of credit (federal funds purchased) from correspondent banks; and our ability to obtain advances secured by certain securities and loans from the Federal Home Loan Bank.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have adopted various accounting policies that govern the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and with general practices within the banking industry in the preparation of our financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this report.
Certain accounting policies inherently involve a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments and, as such, have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations. We consider these accounting policies and estimates to be critical accounting policies. We have identified the determination of the allowance for loan losses, goodwill and other intangibles, income taxes and deferred tax assets, other-than-temporary impairment, business combinations, and method of accounting for loans acquired to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new or additional information becomes available or circumstances change, including overall changes in the economic climate and/or market interest rates. Therefore, management has reviewed and approved these critical accounting policies and estimates and has discussed these policies with our Audit and Compliance Committee.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We believe the allowance for loan losses is the critical accounting policy that requires the most significant judgment and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Some of the more critical judgments supporting the amount of our allowance for loan losses include judgments about the credit worthiness of borrowers, the estimated value of the underlying collateral, the assumptions about cash flow, determination of loss factors for estimating credit losses, the impact of current events and conditions, and other factors impacting the level of probable inherent losses. Under different conditions or using different assumptions, the actual amount of credit losses incurred by us may be different from management’s estimates provided in our consolidated financial statements. Refer to the portion of this discussion that addresses our allowance for loan losses for a more complete discussion of our processes and methodology for determining our allowance for loan losses.
FASB has issued a new credit impairment model, the Current Expected Credit Loss, or CECL model. The CECL model will become effective for us on January 1, 2023 and for interim periods within that year. Under the CECL model, we will be required to present certain financial assets carried at amortized cost, such as loans held for investment and held-to-maturity debt securities, at the net amount expected to be collected. The measurement of expected credit losses is to be based on information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount. This measurement will take place at the time the financial asset is first added to the balance sheet and periodically thereafter. This differs significantly from the “incurred loss” model currently required under GAAP, which delays recognition until it is probable a loss has been incurred. Accordingly, we expect that the adoption of the CECL model will materially affect how we determine our allowance for loan losses and could require us to significantly increase our allowance. Moreover, the CECL model may create more volatility in the level of our allowance for loan losses. If we are required to materially increase our level of allowance for loan losses for any reason, such increase could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We are currently evaluating the impact the CECL model will have on our accounting, but we expect to recognize a one-time cumulative-effect adjustment to our allowance for loan losses as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the new standard is effective, consistent with regulatory expectations set forth in interagency guidance issued at the end of 2016. We cannot yet determine the magnitude of any such one-time cumulative adjustment or of the overall impact of the new standard on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
On December 21, 2018, the federal banking agencies issued a joint final rule to revise their regulatory capital rules to (i) address the implementation of CECL; (ii) provide an optional three-year phase-in period for the day-one adverse regulatory capital effects that banking organizations are expected to experience upon adopting CECL; and (iii) require for certain banking organizations that are subject to stress testing, the use of CECL in stress tests beginning with the 2020 capital planning and stress testing cycle.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the sum of the estimated fair values of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired less the estimated fair value of the liabilities assumed. Goodwill has an indefinite useful life and is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the asset’s fair value. Qualitative factors are assessed to first determine if it is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the carrying value of goodwill is less than fair value. These qualitative factors include but are not limited to overall deterioration in general economic conditions, industry and market conditions, and overall financial performance. If determined that it is more likely than not that there has been a deterioration in the fair value of the carrying value then the first of a two-step process would be performed. The first step, used to identify potential impairment, involves comparing each reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If the carrying value exceeds estimated fair value, there is an indication of potential impairment and the second step is performed to measure the amount of impairment.
If required, the second step involves calculating an implied fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit for which the first step indicated impairment. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined in a manner similar to the amount of goodwill calculated in a business combination, by measuring the excess of the estimated fair value of the reporting unit, as determined in the first step, over the aggregate estimated fair values of the individual assets, liabilities and identifiable intangibles as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of goodwill exceeds the carrying value of goodwill assigned to the reporting unit, there is no impairment. If the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit exceeds the implied fair value of the goodwill, an impairment charge is recorded for the excess. An impairment loss cannot exceed the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit, and the loss establishes a new basis in the goodwill. Subsequent reversal of goodwill impairment losses is not permitted. Management has determined that the Company has four reporting units.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, which simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment for all entities by requiring impairment charges to be based on the first step in the two-step impairment test under ASC Topic 350 and eliminating the second step from the goodwill impairment test. This guidance was effective for us as of January 1, 2020.
Core deposit intangibles represent the estimated value of long-term deposit relationships acquired in bank or branch acquisition transactions. These costs are amortized over the estimated useful lives of the deposit accounts acquired on a method that we believe reasonably approximates the anticipated benefit stream from the accounts. The estimated useful lives are periodically reviewed for reasonableness.
We performed our required annual goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2020 and there was no impairment. Throughout 2020, financial institution stocks in general as well as our market capitalization declined because of events surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we performed qualitative goodwill impairment analyses as of March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020, and December 31, 2020. These qualitative analyses included a review of our earnings, pretax pre-provision earnings (PTPPE), net interest income, mortgage banking income, investment advisory fees and non-deposit commissions, non-PPP loan growth and asset quality trends, loan charge-offs and recoveries, deposit growth, capital levels, and the economic conditions in our markets. Based on our analyses, we do not believe the decline in our publicly-traded common stock is indicative of a permanent deterioration of the fundamental value of the Company. Furthermore, our common stock has traded above both book value and tangible book value during the first quarter of 2021. As such, we do not believe that it is more-likely-than-not a goodwill impairment exists at December 31, 2020, September, 30, 2020, June 30, 2020, and March 31, 2020. Depending on, among other things, the duration and severity of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may have to reevaluate our financial condition and potential impairment of our goodwill.
Income Taxes, Deferred Tax Assets, and Deferred Tax Liabilities
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of the transactions reported in our consolidated financial statements and consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes related to differences between the tax basis and accounting basis of certain assets and liabilities, including available-for-sale securities, allowance for loan losses, write-downs of OREO properties, write-downs on premises held-for-sale, accumulated depreciation, net operating loss carry forwards, accretion income, deferred compensation, intangible assets, and pension plan and post-retirement benefits. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax return consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at income tax rates applicable to the period in which the deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is “more likely than not” that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes. We file a consolidated federal income tax return for the Bank. We were in a $538 thousand net deferred tax liability position at December 31, 2020 and a $1.0 million net deferred tax asset position at December 31, 2019. The change to a net deferred tax liability position at December 31, 2020 from a net deferred tax asset position at December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the deferred tax impact related to an $11.1 million increase in our pretax unrealized gains net of unrealized losses on our available-for-sale investments to $14.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $3.2 million at December 31, 2019. The $11.1 million increase in our pretax unrealized gains net of unrealized losses on our available-for-sale securities was primarily due to a reduction in market interest rates at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment
We evaluate securities for other-than-temporary impairment at least on a quarterly basis. Consideration is given to (1) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, (2) the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, (3) the outlook for receiving the contractual cash flows of the investments, (4) the anticipated outlook for changes in the general level of interest rates, and (5) our intent and ability to retain our investment in the issuer for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in fair value or for a debt security whether it is more-likely-than-not that we will be required to sell the debt security prior to recovering its fair value (See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Our management has determined there are no other-than-temporary impaired securities as of December 31, 2020 and that we have the ability to hold any of the securities in which the fair value is less than cost until maturity or until these securities recover their book value.
Business Combinations, Method of Accounting for Loans Acquired
We account for acquisitions under FASB ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, which requires the use of the acquisition method of accounting. All identifiable assets acquired, including loans, are recorded at fair value. No allowance for loan losses related to the acquired loans is recorded on the acquisition date because the fair value of the loans acquired incorporates assumptions regarding credit risk.
Acquired credit-impaired loans are accounted for under the accounting guidance for loans and debt securities acquired with deteriorated credit quality, found in FASB ASC Topic 310-30, Receivables-Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality and initially measured at fair value, which includes estimated future credit losses expected to be incurred over the life of the loans. Loans acquired in business combinations with evidence of credit deterioration are considered impaired. Loans acquired through business combinations that do not meet the specific criteria of FASB ASC Topic 310-30, but for which a discount is attributable, at least in part to credit quality, are also accounted for under this guidance. Certain acquired loans, including performing loans and revolving lines of credit (consumer and commercial), are accounted for in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 310-20, where the discount is accreted through earnings based on estimated cash flows over the estimated life of the loan.
Results of Operations
Our net income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $10.1 million, or $1.35 diluted earnings per common share, as compared to $11.0 million, or $1.45 diluted earnings per common share, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $872 thousand decrease in net income between the two periods is primarily due to increases in provision for loan losses expense of $3.5 million and non-interest expense of $2.9 million, partially offset by an increase in net interest income of $3.2 million, an increase in non-interest income of $2.0 million, and a decrease in income tax expense of $362 thousand. The increase in provision for loan losses is primarily related to an increase in the qualitative factors in our allowance for loan losses methodology related to the deteriorating economic conditions and economic uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in non-interest expense is primarily related to increased salaries and employee benefits expense of $2.8 million, FDIC assessments of $347 thousand, other real estate expense of $120 thousand, and data processing expense of $289 thousand, partially offset by a lower equipment expense of $256 thousand and amortization of intangibles of $160 thousand. The increase in net interest income results from an increase of $180.4 million in average earning assets partially offset by a 28 basis point decline in the net interest margin between the two periods. The increase in non-interest income is primarily related to increases in mortgage banking income of $1.0 million, investment advisory fees and non-deposit commissions of $699 thousand, gains on sale of securities of $99 thousand, gains on sale of other real estate owned of $147 thousand, non-recurring bank owned life insurance (BOLI) income of $311 thousand, and ATM debit card income of $197 thousand, partially offset by a $528 thousand decrease in deposit service charges. Our effective tax rate was 19.82% during twelve months of 2020 compared to 20.67% during the twelve months of 2019. The $311 thousand in non-recurring BOLI income was recorded as non-taxable income.
Net income was $11.0 million, or $1.45 diluted earnings per common share, for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to net income of $11.2 million, or $1.45 diluted earnings per common share, for the year ended December 31, 2018. Net interest income increased $1.1 million, or 3.1% to $36.8 million, in 2019 from $35.7 million in 2018. The increase in net interest income is primarily due to a $37.3 million increase in average earning assets, which was partially offset by a four basis points decline in the net interest margin in 2019 as compared to 2018. Net interest margin on a fully tax equivalent basis was 3.65% in 2019 as compared to 3.69% in 2018. Provision for loan losses declined $207 thousand to $139 thousand in 2019 from $346 thousand in 2018. Noninterest income increased $1.1 million, or 10.3% to $11.7 million, in 2019 from $10.6 million in 2018. The increase in noninterest income was primarily due to increases in mortgage banking income, investment advisory fees and non-deposit commissions, gains/(losses) on sale of securities, and ATM debit card income, which were partially offset by lower deposit service charges and a write-down on bank premises held-for-sale. We conducted business from a mortgage loan production office in Richland County, South Carolina until January 24, 2020 and have since consolidated such business with other existing Bank offices. This closure and consolidation resulted in a write-down of the real estate of $282 thousand during the fourth quarter of 2019 based on the appraised value of the real estate less estimated selling costs. The real estate is recorded at $591 thousand in Premises held-for-sale at December 31, 2019. Once the real estate is sold, our occupancy expense will decline by approximately $91 thousand annually. Noninterest expense increased $2.5 million, or 7.8% to $34.6 million, in 2019 from $32.1 million in 2018. The increase in noninterest expense was primarily due to increases in salaries and employee benefits, occupancy expense, ATM/debit card and data processing expense, and marketing and public relations expense, which were partially offset by lower FDIC /FICO premiums in 2019 as compared to 2018. During 2019, we made significant strategic investments in our franchise, including two new full-service offices, our mobile and digital banking platforms, and hiring additional team members. Income tax expense increased $164 thousand, or 6.1%, to $2.9 million, in 2019 as compared to $2.7 million in 2018. Our effective tax rate was 20.67% in 2019 as compared to 19.35% in 2018.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is our primary source of revenue. Net interest income is the difference between income earned on assets and interest paid on deposits and borrowings used to support such assets. Net interest income is determined by the rates earned on our interest-earning assets and the rates paid on our interest-bearing liabilities, the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and the degree of mismatch and the maturity and repricing characteristics of our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
Net interest income increased $3.2 million, or 8.6%, to $40.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from $36.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Our net interest margin declined by 28 basis points to 3.34% during the twelve months of 2020 from 3.62% during the twelve months of 2019. Our net interest margin, on a taxable equivalent basis, was 3.37% for the twelve months of 2020 compared to 3.65% for the twelve months of 2019. Average earning assets increased $180.4 million, or 17.7%, to $1.2 billion for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1.0 billion in the same period of 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to a higher level of average earning assets partially offset by lower net interest margin. The increase in average earning assets was due to increases in loans, securities, and other short-term investments primarily due to Non-PPP loan growth, PPP loans, organic deposit growth, and excess liquidity from PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decline in net interest margin was primarily due to the Federal Reserve reducing the target range of the federal funds rate three times totaling 75 basis points during 2019 and two times totaling 150 basis points during the first quarter of 2020, lower yields on PPP loans, and the excess liquidity generated from PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic being deployed in lower yielding securities and other short-term investments. Lower market rates, the competitive loan pricing environment, and the COVID-19 pandemic put downward pressure on our net interest margin during 2020.
Average loans increased $99.7 million, or 13.6%, to $835.1 million for the twelve months of 2020 from $735.3 million for the twelve months of 2019. Average PPP loans increased $32.3 million and average Non-PPP loans increased $67.4 million to $32.3 million and $802.8 million, respectively, for the twelve months of 2020. We had no PPP loans at December 31, 2019. Average loans represented 69.7% of average earning assets during the twelve months of 2020 compared to 72.2% of average earning assets during the twelve months of 2019. The decline in average loans as a percentage of average earning assets was primarily due to increases in deposits of $152.5 million and securities sold under agreements to repurchase of $14.1 million. The growth in our deposits and securities sold under agreements to repurchase was higher than the growth in our loans, which resulted in the excess funds being deployed in our securities portfolio and other short-term investments and to reduce our Federal Home Loan Bank advances. The yield on loans declined 38 basis points to 4.44% in the twelve months of 2020 from 4.82% in the twelve months of 2019. The yield on PPP loans was 3.32% and the yield on Non-PPP loans was 4.48% in the twelve months of 2020. Average securities and average other short-term investments for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 increased $43.3 million and $37.3 million, respectively, from the prior year period. The yield on our securities portfolio declined to 2.15% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 2.58% for the same period in 2019 while the yield on our other short-term investments declined to 0.44% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 2.14% for the same period in 2019. These declines were primarily related to the Federal Reserve reducing the target range of the federal funds rate as described above. The yield on earning assets for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 3.65% and 4.19%, respectively. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was at 46 basis points in the twelve months of 2020 compared to 80 basis points in the twelve months of 2019. We continue to focus on growing our pure deposits (demand deposits, interest-bearing transaction accounts, savings deposits and money market accounts) as these accounts tend to be low-cost deposits and assist us in controlling our overall cost of funds. In the twelve months of 2020, these deposits averaged 84.7% of total deposits as compared to 81.1% in the same period of 2019.
Net interest income totaled $40.0 million in 2020, $36.8 million in 2019, and $35.7 million in 2018. The yield on earning assets was 3.65%, 4.19%, and 4.05% in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities was 0.46%, 0.80%, and 0.55% in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The fully taxable equivalent net interest margin was 3.37% in 2020, 3.65% in 2019, and 3.69% in 2018. Loans typically provide a higher yield than other types of earning assets and, thus, one of our goals continues to be growing the loan portfolio as a percentage of earning assets in order to improve the overall yield on earning assets and the net interest margin. Our average loan portfolio (including loans held-for-sale) as a percentage of average earning assets was 69.7% in 2020, 72.2% in 2019, and 70.0% in 2018. The loan portfolio as a percentage of earning assets declined to 65.1% at December 31, 2020 from 68.9% at December 31, 2019. Our loan (including loans held-for-sale) to deposit ratio on average during 2020 was 76.8%, as compared to 78.7% during 2019, and 75.0% during 2018. The loan to deposit ratio declined to 74.8% at December 31, 2020 as compared to 75.7% at December 31, 2019. This decline was due to our deposit growth of $201.2 million exceeding our loan growth of $141.0 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
The net interest margin and the net interest margin on a fully tax equivalent basis declined by two basis points and four basis points, respectively, in 2019 as compared to 2018. The yield on earning assets increased by 14 basis points while our cost of interest-bearing liabilities increased by 25 basis points in 2019 as compared to 2018. The decline in net interest margin in 2019 as compared to 2018 was partially a result of the Federal Reserve reducing the federal funds target rate in 2019 after increasing it in 2018 and a flat-to-inverted yield curve during periods of 2019. In 2018, the federal funds target rate was increased four times. These increases over time positively impact our net interest margin because the yields on our variable rate assets in the loan and investment portfolios, and our short term investments reprice at higher rates faster than the rates that we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities reprice higher in a rising rate environment. However, the Federal Reserve reduced the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points at each of its meetings in in July 2019, September 2019, and October 2019, which resulted in a total reduction of 75 basis points during 2019. These reductions, along with a flat-to-inverted yield curve during periods of 2019, negatively impacted our net interest margin during the second half of 2019 because the yields on our variable rate assets in the loan and investment portfolios, and our short term investments reprice at lower rates faster than the rates that we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities reprice lower in a declining rate environment. Furthermore, the three reductions in the federal funds target rate, the flat-to-inverted yield curve during periods of 2019, and the competitive environment put downward pressure on the pricing of new loan originations in 2019. The yield on our earning assets increased 14 basis points to 4.19% in 2019 from 4.05% in 2018. However, the cost of our interest-bearing liabilities increased 25 basis points to 0.80% in 2019 from 0.55% in 2018. The positive impact from the 2018 federal funds target rate increases were more than offset by the negative impacts from the 2019 federal funds target rate reductions, the flat-to-inverted yield curve, and the competitive loan pricing environment during periods of 2019. The average loan balance as a percentage of average earning assets was 72.2% in 2019 as compared to 70.0% in 2018. This increase in earning asset mix along with the increases in short term rates noted previously accounted for the improved yield on our earning assets. Our lower cost funding sources include non-interest bearing transaction accounts, interest-bearing transaction accounts, money-market accounts and savings deposits. During 2018, the average balance in these accounts represented 79.5% of total deposits whereas in 2019 they represented 81.1% of total deposits. Our average other borrowings, which are typically a higher cost funding source, increased $6.3 million in 2019 as compared to 2018. Managing this interest rate risk continues to be a primary focus of management (see discussion of Market Rate and Interest Rate Sensitivity discussion below).
Average Balances, Income Expenses and Rates. The following table depicts, for the periods indicated, certain information related to our average balance sheet and our average yields on assets and average costs of liabilities. Such yields are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balance of the corresponding assets or liabilities. Average balances have been derived from daily averages.
(1) All loans and deposits are domestic. Average loan balances include non-accrual loans and loans held for sale.
(2) The computation includes federal funds sold, securities purchased under agreement to resell and interest bearing deposits.
(3) Based on a 21.0% marginal tax rate for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense attributable to changes in volume and the amount attributable to changes in rate. The combined effect related to volume and rate which cannot be separately identified, has been allocated proportionately, to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
Market Risk and Interest Rate Sensitivity
Market risk reflects the risk of economic loss resulting from adverse changes in market prices and interest rates. The risk of loss can be measured in either diminished current market values or reduced current and potential net income. Our primary market risk is interest rate risk. We have established an Asset/Liability Management Committee (the “ALCO”) to monitor and manage interest rate risk. The ALCO monitors and manages the pricing and maturity of our assets and liabilities in order to diminish the potential adverse impact that changes in interest rates could have on our net interest income. The ALCO has established policy guidelines and strategies with respect to interest rate risk exposure and liquidity.
A monitoring technique employed by us is the measurement of our interest sensitivity “gap,” which is the positive or negative dollar difference between assets and liabilities that are subject to interest rate repricing within a given period of time. Simulation modeling is performed to assess the impact varying interest rates and balance sheet mix assumptions will have on net interest income. We model the impact on net interest income for several different changes, to include a flattening, steepening and parallel shift in the yield curve. For each of these scenarios, we model the impact on net interest income in an increasing and decreasing rate environment of 100 and 200 basis points. We also periodically stress certain assumptions such as loan prepayment rates, deposit decay rates and interest rate betas to evaluate our overall sensitivity to changes in interest rates. Policies have been established in an effort to maintain the maximum anticipated negative impact of these modeled changes in net interest income at no more than 10% and 15%, respectively, in a 100 and 200 basis point change in interest rates over a 12-month period. Interest rate sensitivity can be managed by repricing assets or liabilities, selling securities available-for-sale, replacing an asset or liability at maturity or by adjusting the interest rate during the life of an asset or liability. Managing the amount of assets and liabilities repricing in the same time interval helps to hedge the risk and minimize the impact on net interest income of rising or falling interest rates. Neither the “gap” analysis or asset/liability modeling are precise indicators of our interest sensitivity position due to the many factors that affect net interest income including, the timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in the volume and mix of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
The following table illustrates our interest rate sensitivity at December 31, 2020.
Interest Sensitivity Analysis
(1) Loans classified as non-accrual as of December 31, 2020 are not included in the balances.
(2) Securities based on amortized cost.
Based on the many factors and assumptions used in simulating the effect of changes in interest rates, the following table estimates the hypothetical percentage change in net interest income at December 31, 2020 and 2019 over the subsequent 12 months. At December 31, 2020, we are slightly liability sensitive over the first three month period and over the balance of a 12-month period are asset sensitive on a cumulative basis. As a result, our modeling reflects slight exposure to falling rates and our rising rate exposure trends from neutral to slightly liability sensitive as rates move higher over the first 12 months. This negative impact of rising rates reverses and net interest income is favorably impacted over a 24-month period. In a declining rate environment, the model reflects a decline in net interest income. This primarily results from the current level of interest rates being paid on our interest bearing transaction accounts as well as money market accounts. The interest rates on these accounts are at a level where they cannot be repriced in proportion to the change in interest rates. The increase and decrease of 100 and 200 basis points, respectively, reflected in the table below assume a simultaneous and parallel change in interest rates along the entire yield curve.
Net Interest Income Sensitivity
We perform a valuation analysis projecting future cash flows from assets and liabilities to determine the Present Value of Equity (“PVE”) over a range of changes in market interest rates. The sensitivity of PVE to changes in interest rates is a measure of the sensitivity of earnings over a longer time horizon. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the PVE exposure in a plus 200 basis point increase in market interest rates was estimated to be 11.47% and 5.85%, respectively. The PVE exposure in a down 100 basis point decrease was estimated to be (14.32)% at December 31, 2020 compared to (7.68)% at December 31, 2019.
Provision and Allowance for Loan Losses
We account for our allowance for loan losses under the incurred loss model. As discussed above, the CECL model will become effective for us on January 1, 2023. At December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses was $10.4 million, or 1.23% of total loans (excluding loans held-for-sale), compared to $6.6 million, or 0.90% of total loans (excluding loans held-for-sale) at December 31, 2019. Excluding PPP loans and loans held-for-sale, the allowance for loan losses was 1.30% of total loans at December 31, 2020. The increase in the allowance for loan losses is primarily related to an increase in the qualitative factors in our allowance for loan losses methodology related to the deteriorating economic conditions and economic uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loans that were acquired in the acquisition of Cornerstone Bancorp, otherwise referred to herein as Cornerstone, in 2017 as well as in the acquisition of Savannah River Financial Corp., otherwise referred to herein as Savannah River, in 2014 are accounted for under FASB ASC 310-30. These acquired loans were initially measured at fair value, which includes estimated future credit losses expected to be incurred over the life of the loans. The credit component on loans related to cash flows not expected to be collected is not subsequently accreted (non-accretable difference) into interest income. Any remaining portion representing the excess of a loan’s or pool’s cash flows expected to be collected over the fair value is accreted (accretable difference) into interest income. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the remaining credit component on loans attributable to acquired loans in the Cornerstone and Savannah River transactions was $264 thousand and $534 thousand, respectively.
Our provision for loan losses was $3.7 million in 2020, $139 thousand in 2019, and $346 thousand in 2018. The increase in the provision for loan losses is primarily related to an increase in the qualitative factors in our allowance for loan losses methodology related to the deteriorating economic conditions and economic uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The allowance for loan losses represents an amount which we believe will be adequate to absorb probable losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible. Our judgment as to the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is based on assumptions about future events, which we believe to be reasonable, but which may or may not prove to be accurate. Our determination of the allowance for loan losses is based on evaluations of the collectability of loans, including consideration of factors such as the balance of impaired loans, the quality, mix, and size of our overall loan portfolio, the knowledge and depth of lending personnel, economic conditions (local and national) that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, the amount and quality of collateral securing the loans, our historical loan loss experience, and a review of specific problem loans. We also consider qualitative factors such as changes in the lending policies and procedures, changes in the local/national economy, changes in volume or type of credits, changes in volume/severity of problem loans, quality of loan review and board of director oversight, and concentrations of credit. During the first quarter of 2020, we added a new qualitative factor related to the economic uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. We charge recognized losses to the allowance and add subsequent recoveries back to the allowance for loan losses. There can be no assurance that charge-offs of loans in future periods will not exceed the allowance for loan losses as estimated at any point in time or that provisions for loan losses will not be significant to a particular accounting period, especially considering the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We perform an analysis quarterly to assess the risk within the loan portfolio. The portfolio is segregated into similar risk components for which historical loss ratios are calculated and adjusted for identified changes in current portfolio characteristics. Historical loss ratios are calculated by product type and by regulatory credit risk classification (See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). The annualized weighted average loss ratios over the last 36 months for loans classified as substandard, special mention and pass have been approximately 0.05%, 0.00% and 0.01%, respectively. The allowance consists of an allocated and unallocated allowance. The allocated portion is determined by types and ratings of loans within the portfolio. The unallocated portion of the allowance is established for losses that exist in the remainder of the portfolio and compensates for uncertainty in estimating the loan losses. The allocated portion of the allowance is based on historical loss experience as well as certain qualitative factors as explained above. The qualitative factors have been established based on certain assumptions made as a result of the current economic conditions and are adjusted as conditions change to be directionally consistent with these changes. The unallocated portion of the allowance is composed of factors based on management’s evaluation of various conditions that are not directly measured in the estimation of probable losses through the experience formula or specific allowances. The overall risk as measured in our three-year lookback, both quantitatively and qualitatively, does not encompass a full economic cycle. Net charge-offs in the 2009 to 2011 period averaged 63 basis points annualized in our loan portfolio. Over the most recent three-year period, our net charge-offs have experienced a modest net recovery. We currently believe the unallocated portion of our allowance represents potential risk associated throughout a full economic cycle; however, the COVID-19 pandemic and the government and economic responses thereto may materially affect the risk within our loan portfolios.
We have a significant portion of our loan portfolio with real estate as the underlying collateral (see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for concentrations of credit). At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, approximately 87.5% and 91.6%, respectively, of the loan portfolio had real estate collateral. The reduction in the percent of our loan portfolio with real estate as the underlying collateral is due to the increase in PPP loans, which increased to $42.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $0 at December 31, 2019. When loans, whether commercial or personal, are granted, they are based on the borrower’s ability to generate repayment cash flows from income sources sufficient to service the debt. Real estate is generally taken to reinforce the likelihood of the ultimate repayment and as a secondary source of repayment. We work closely with all our borrowers that experience cash flow or other economic problems, and we believe that we have the appropriate processes in place to monitor and identify problem credits. There can be no assurance that charge-offs of loans in future periods will not exceed the allowance for loan losses as estimated at any point in time or that provisions for loan losses will not be significant to a particular accounting period. The allowance is also subject to examination and testing for adequacy by regulatory agencies, which may consider such factors as the methodology used to determine adequacy and the size of the allowance relative to that of peer institutions. Such regulatory agencies could require us to adjust our allowance based on information available to them at the time of their examination.
Non-performing assets were $7.0 million (0.50% of total assets) at December 31, 2020 as compared to $3.7 million (0.32% of total assets) at December 31, 2019, and $4.0 million (0.37% of total assets) at December 31, 2018. This increase was related to one credit relationship, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. While this is the appropriate recognition of the current status of this credit, there are encouraging signs of ultimate resolution of this matter and based on current appraisals, this credit relationship is well collateralized. While we believe the non-performing assets to total assets ratios are favorable in comparison to current industry results (both nationally and locally), we continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customer base of local businesses and professionals. There were 19 loans totaling $4.6 million (0.54% of total loans) included in non-performing status (non-accrual loans and loans past due 90 days and still accruing) at December 31, 2020. The largest loan included in non-accrual status is in the amount of $1.7 million and is secured by commercial real estate located in North Augusta, South Carolina. The average balance of the remaining 18 loans is approximately $160 thousand with a range between $3 and $1.2 million, and the majority of these loans are secured by first mortgage liens. Furthermore, we had $1.6 million in accruing trouble debt restructurings, or TDRs, at December 31, 2020 compared to $1.7 million at December 31, 2019. We consider a loan impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due, including both principal and interest, according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Nonaccrual loans and accruing TDRs are considered impaired. At December 31, 2020, we had 23 impaired loans totaling $6.1 million compared to 33 impaired loans totaling $4.0 million at December 31, 2019. These loans were measured for impairment under the fair value of collateral method or present value of expected cash flows method. For collateral dependent loans, the fair value of collateral method is used and the fair value is determined by an independent appraisal less estimated selling costs. At December 31, 2020, we had loans totaling $665 thousand that were delinquent 30 days to 89 days representing 0.08% of total loans compared to $476 thousand or 0.06% of total loans at December 31, 2019.
During the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and because of our proactive offering of payment deferrals, loans on which payments have been deferred declined to $16.1 million at December 31, 2020, from $27.3 million at September 30, 2020, from $175.0 million at June 30, 2020 and from $118.3 million at March 31, 2020. We had no loans on which payments were deferred related to the COVID-19 pandemic at December 31, 2019. The $16.1 million in deferrals at December 31, 2020 consist of seven loans on which only principal is being deferred. We had three loans totaling $8.7 million in continuing deferral status in which only principal is being deferred at March 5, 2021. Two of the continuing deferrals at March 5, 2021 totaling $4.5 million are in the retail industry segment identified by us as one of the industry segments most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic; the other continuing deferral totaling $4.2 million is a mixed use office space that we do not consider to be in an industry segment most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of these deferments were to businesses that temporarily closed or reduced operations and some were requested as a pre-cautionary measure to conserve cash. We proactively offered initial deferrals to our customers regardless of the impact of the pandemic on their business or personal finances. We obtained additional information from customers who requested second deferrals and we performed additional analyses to justify the need for the second deferral requests. Our management continuously monitors non-performing, classified and past due loans to identify deterioration regarding the condition of these loans and given the ongoing and uncertain impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to monitor our loan portfolio for potential risks.
The following table summarizes the activity related to our allowance for loan losses.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table presents an allocation of the allowance for loan losses at the end of each of the past five years. The allocation is calculated on an approximate basis and is not necessarily indicative of future losses or allocations. The entire amount is available to absorb losses occurring in any category of loans.
Allocation of the Allowance for Loan Losses
Loans acquired in the Cornerstone transaction are excluded from our evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance as they were measured at fair value at acquisition. The assumptions used in this evaluation included a credit component and an interest rate component. These loans amounted to approximately $16.7 million and $26.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Accrual of interest is discontinued on loans when we believe, after considering economic and business conditions and collection efforts that a borrower’s financial condition is such that the collection of interest is doubtful. A delinquent loan is generally placed in nonaccrual status when it becomes 90 days or more past due. At the time a loan is placed in nonaccrual status, all interest, which has been accrued on the loan but remains unpaid, is reversed and deducted from earnings as a reduction of reported interest income. No additional interest is accrued on the loan balance until the collection of both principal and interest becomes reasonably certain.
Non-interest Income and Expense
Non-interest Income. A significant source of noninterest income is service charges on deposit accounts. We also originate and sell residential loans on a servicing released basis in the secondary market. These loans are fixed rate residential loans that are originated in our name. The loans have locked in price commitments to be purchased by investors at the time of closing. Therefore, these loans present very little market risk for us. We typically deliver to, and receive funding from, the investor within 30 days. Other sources of noninterest income are derived from investment advisory fees and commissions on non-deposit investment products, ATM/debit card fees, commissions on check sales, safe deposit box rent, wire transfer and official check fees.
Non-interest income was $13.8 million in 2020 as compared to $11.7 million during the same period in 2019. Deposit service charges decreased $528 thousand during the twelve months of 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to customers holding higher balances in their deposit accounts due to proceeds from PPP loans and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Mortgage banking income increased by $1.0 million from $4.6 million in 2019 to $5.6 million in 2020. Mortgage production including loans held-for-sale and portfolio loans in 2020 was $199.3 million as compared to $139.7 million in the same period of 2019. With the decline in mortgage interest rates, refinance activity increased during 2020 and represented 55.5% of production. The gain on sale margin declined to 2.79% from 3.26% due to disruptions in the mortgage market causing certain loans not to be sold. As capacity rebuilds, this issue will be mitigated. Investment advisory fees increased $699 thousand to $2.7 million in 2020 from $2.0 million in 2019. Total assets under management, or AUM, were $502 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to $370 million at December 31, 2019. Management continues to focus on increasing both the mortgage banking income as well as the investment advisory fees and commissions. Gain on sale of securities was $99 thousand in 2020 compared to $136 thousand in 2019. Gain on sale of other assets was $147 thousand in 2020 compared to a $3 thousand loss on sale of other assets in 2019. The $147 thousand gain on sale of other assets in 2020 is primarily due to the sale of an other real estate owned property. The $311 thousand in non-recurring BOLI income was due to insurance benefits on two former members of the boards of directors of acquired banks who passed away during the third quarter of 2020. Noninterest income other increased $154 thousand to $3.8 million in 2020 from $3.7 million in 2019 primarily due to increases in ATM debit card income and recurring BOLI income.
Non-interest income was $11.7 million and $10.6 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. From 2019 to 2018, the deposit service charges decreased by $120 thousand, or 6.8%. Changes in the regulatory requirements related to overdraft protection fees continue to contribute to the decrease in the overall fees from deposit service charges. Our mortgage banking income increased $660 thousand in 2019, as compared to 2018. Mortgage loan production was $139.6 million in 2019 (including construction to permanent loans to be sold upon completion of construction) as compared to $119.7 million in 2018. Investment advisory fees and non-deposit commissions increased by $338 thousand in 2019 compared to 2018. Total assets under management at December 31, 2019 were $369.7 million as compared to $288.5 million at December 31, 2018. The net gain on sale of securities for 2019 amounted to $136 thousand as compared to a loss of $342 thousand in 2018. The sales in 2019 and 2018 resulted from modest restructurings of the investment portfolio. These sales were made after evaluating specific investments and comparing them to an alternative asset or liability strategy. We recognized a gain on sale of other real estate of $24 thousand in 2018 as compared to a loss of $3 thousand in 2019. ATM debit card income increased by $216 thousand or 11.7% in 2019 as compared to 2018. The overall increase in ATM debit card fees was due to the increase in transaction accounts. Further, a write-down of Bank premises held-for-sale decreased our Non-interest income by $282 thousand in 2019. Income on recurring BOLI declined from $649 thousand in 2018 to $687 thousand in 2019. Non-interest income other decreased from $535 thousand in 2018 to $361 thousand in 2019. In addition, we received proceeds of approximately $73 thousand related to a death benefit on BOLI, which was credited to “Non-recurring BOLI income” in 2018.
The following table sets forth for the periods indicated the primary components of other noninterest income:
Non-interest Expense. In the very competitive financial services industry, we recognize the need to place a great deal of emphasis on expense management and continually evaluate and monitor growth in discretionary expense categories in order to control future increases.
Non-interest expense increased $2.9 million to $37.5 million in 2020 from $34.6 million in 2019 primarily due to increases in salaries and benefits expense, FDIC assessments, other real estate owned expense, data processing expense, insurance, legal and professional fees, and COVID-19 related expenses partially offset by lower equipment expense, marketing and public relations, amortization of intangibles, telephone expense, subscriptions, and loss on limited partnership interest. Salary and benefit expense increased $2.8 million from $21.2 million in 2019 to $24.0 million in 2020 primarily due to increased production and new hires in the mortgage line of business, normal salary adjustments, temporary bonuses related to the COVID-19 pandemic paid to certain employees, and the opening of our full-service de novo office in June 2019 in Evans, Georgia in Columbia County, a suburb of Augusta, Georgia, which was partially offset by a reduction in salaries and benefits related to deferred origination costs on PPP loans originated in 2020. We had 244 full time equivalent employees at December 31, 2020 compared to 237 at December 31, 2019. Furthermore, we incurred COVID-19 related expenses in occupancy expense for additional cleaning of our offices and personal protective equipment for our employees and offices and in equipment expense for laptops and other technology to promote a remote work environment. FDIC assessments increased $347 thousand due to a higher assessment rate in 2020 related to a reduction in our leverage ratio and an increase in our assessment base due to higher average assets. Both the reduction in our leverage ratio and the increase in our assessment base were partially related to PPP loans and the excess liquidity generated from PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, we received more FDIC small bank assessment credits during the twelve months in 2019 compared to the twelve months in 2020. The FDIC small bank assessment credits were fully utilized during the first quarter of 2020. Other real estate owned expense increased $120 thousand in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to write-downs on several other real estate owned properties.
Non-interest expense, other increased $159 thousand in 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to higher data processing expense, which includes ATM debit card expense, insurance, and legal and professional fees.
Total non-interest expense increased $2.5 million in 2019 to $34.6 million as compared to $32.1 million in in 2018. Salary and benefit expense increased $1.8 million to $21.3 million in 2019 as compared to $19.5 million in 2018. This increase is primarily a result of the normal salary adjustments, as well as the addition of two new full-service offices opened in the first half of 2019. In February 2019, we opened a downtown Greenville, South Carolina office and later in June 2019, we opened an Evans, Georgia office. Prior to opening, we hired staff for these offices, as such, the cost for such staffing and benefits impacts substantially all of 2019. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had 242 and 226 full time equivalent employees, respectively. Our Occupancy expense increased $316 thousand from $2.4 million in 2018 to $2.7 million in 2019, which was a result of the two additional offices opened during 2019. Our ATM/debit card and Data processing expense increased by $534 thousand in 2019 compared to 2018, which was largely due to our increased investment in our mobile platform and growing customer base. Our FDIC assessments decreased by $318 thousand in 2019 as compared to 2018 due to outstanding credits as a result of overpayments.
The following table sets forth for the periods indicated the primary components of noninterest expense:
*Data processing includes core processing, bill payment, online banking, remote deposit capture, and postage costs for mailing customer notices and statements.
Income Tax Expense
Our Income tax expense for 2020 was $2.5 million as compared to income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $2.9 million and $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 (see Note 15 “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information). We recognize deferred tax assets for future deductible amounts resulting from differences in the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities and operating loss carry forwards. The deferred tax assets are established based on the amounts expected to be paid/recovered at existing tax rates. A valuation allowance is established to reduce the deferred tax asset to the level that it is more likely than not that the tax benefit will be realized. In 2018, we purchased a $205 thousand South Carolina rehabilitation tax credit. We did not purchase any tax credits in 2019 or 2020. The cost of this credit for 2018 was $164 thousand and is included in “Other” non-interest expense. As a result of our current level of tax exempt securities in our investment portfolio and our BOLI holdings, assuming the current corporate rate remains unchanged, our effective tax rate is expected to be approximately 20.5% to 21.0%.
Financial Position
Assets totaled $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020 and $1.2 billion at December 31, 2019. Loans (excluding loans held-for-sale) increased $107.1 million, or 14.5%, to $844.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $737.0 million at December 31, 2019. Non-PPP loans increased $64.9 million, or 8.8%, to $801.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $737.0 million at December 31, 2019. PPP loans totaled $43.3 million gross of deferred fees and costs and $42.2 million net of deferred fees and costs at December 31, 2020. We originated 843 PPP loans totaling $51.2 million gross of deferred fees and costs and $49.8 million net of deferred fees and costs in 2020. Furthermore, we facilitated the origination of 111 PPP loans totaling $31.2 million related to our customers with a third party prior to establishing our own PPP platform. 159 PPP loans totaling $8.0 million were forgiven through the SBA PPP forgiveness process in 2020. As of March 10, 2021, there were 326 PPP loans totaling $17.8 million that were forgiven. We had no PPP loans at December 31, 2019. The $1.0 million in PPP deferred fees net of deferred costs at December 31, 2020 will be recognized as interest income over the remaining life of the PPP loans. Total loan production excluding PPP loans and a PPP related credit facility was $177.1 million during the twelve months of 2020 compared to $137.8 million during the same period in 2019. Loans held-for-sale increased to $45.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $11.2 million at December 31, 2019 due to strong mortgage production of $199.3 million during the twelve months of 2020 compared to $139.6 million during the same period in 2019. The loan-to-deposit ratio (including loans held-for-sale) at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was 74.8% and 75.7%, respectively. The loan-to-deposit ratio (excluding loans held-for-sale) at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was 71.0% and 74.6%, respectively. Investment securities increased to $361.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $288.8 million at December 31, 2019. Other short-term investments increased to $46.1 million at December 31, 2020 from $32.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increases in investments and other short-term investments are primarily due to organic deposit growth and excess liquidity from customer’s PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
One of our goals as a community bank has been, and continues to be, to grow our assets through quality loan growth by providing credit to small and mid-size businesses and individuals within the markets we serve. We remain committed to meeting the credit needs of our local markets.
Deposits increased $201.2 million, or 20.4%, to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020 as compared to $988.2 million at December 31, 2019. Our pure deposits, which are defined as total deposits less certificates of deposits, increased $211.6 million, or 25.0%, to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020 from $847.3 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in pure deposits was primarily due to organic deposit growth and customer’s proceeds from PPP loans and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We had no brokered deposits and no listing services deposits at December 31, 2020. Our securities sold under agreements to repurchase, which are related to our customer cash management accounts, increased $7.6 million, or 22.9%, to $40.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $33.3 million at December 31, 2019. We continue to focus on growing our pure deposits as a percentage of total deposits in order to better manage our overall cost of funds.
Total shareholders’ equity increased $16.1 million, or 13.4%, to $136.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $120.2 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in shareholders’ equity is primarily due to an increase in retention of earnings less dividends paid of $6.5 million, an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income of $8.8 million, $0.4 thousand related to executive and director stock awards, and $0.4 thousand related to our dividend reinvestment plan. The increase in accumulated other comprehensive income was due to a reduction in market interest rates, which resulted in an increase in the net unrealized gains in our investment securities portfolio. During 2019, we completed a repurchase plan approved in May 2019 of 300,000 shares of our outstanding common stock at a cost of approximately $5.6 million with an average price of $18.79 per share. As of June 30, 2019, we repurchased 185,361 shares of our outstanding common stock of approximately $3.4 million with an average price of $18.41 per share. The remaining 114,639 shares were repurchased in July 2019. We announced during the third quarter of 2019 the approval of a new share repurchase plan, which was the second share repurchase plan announced during 2019, of up to 200,000 shares of our outstanding common stock. No share repurchases were made under this second share repurchase plan prior to its expiration on December 31, 2020.
Earning Assets
Loans and loans held for sale
Loans typically provide higher yields than the other types of earning assets. During 2020, loans accounted for 69.7% of average earning assets. The loan portfolio (including held-for-sale) averaged $835.1 million in 2020 as compared to $735.3 million in 2019. Quality loan portfolio growth continued to be a strategic focus of ours in 2020. However, with the higher loan yields, there are inherent credit and liquidity risks, which we attempt to control and counterbalance. One of our goals as a community bank continues to be to grow our assets through quality loan growth by providing credit to small and mid-size businesses, as well as individuals within the markets we serve. In 2020, we funded new loans (excluding loans originated for sale, PPP loans, and a PPP related credit facility) of approximately $137.8 million, as compared to $177.1 million in 2019. We originated $51.7 million in PPP loans and $10.0 million in a PPP related credit facility in 2020. PPP loans net of deferred fees and costs were $42.2 million and the PPP related credit facility was $5.2 million at December 31, 2020. We did not have any PPP loans or the PPP related credit facility at December 31, 2019. We remain committed to meeting the credit needs of our local markets, but adverse national and local economic conditions, as well as deterioration of our asset quality, could significantly impact our ability to grow our loan portfolio. Significant increases in regulatory capital expectations beyond the traditional “well capitalized” ratios and significantly increased regulatory burdens could impede our ability to leverage our balance sheet and expand the loan portfolio.
The following table shows the composition of the loan portfolio by category:
In the context of this discussion, a real estate mortgage loan is defined as any loan, other than loans for construction purposes, secured by real estate, regardless of the purpose of the loan. We follow the common practice of financial institutions in our market area of obtaining a security interest in real estate whenever possible, in addition to any other available collateral. This collateral is taken to reinforce the likelihood of the ultimate repayment of the loan and tends to increase the magnitude of the real estate loan components. Generally, we limit the loan-to-value ratio to 80%. The principal components of our loan portfolio at year-end 2020 and 2019 were commercial mortgage loans in the amount of $573.3 million and $527.4 million, respectively, representing 67.9% and 71.6% of the portfolio, respectively, excluding loans held for sale. Significant portions of these commercial mortgage loans are made to finance owner-occupied real estate. We continue to maintain a conservative philosophy regarding our underwriting guidelines, and believe it will reduce the risk elements of the loan portfolio through strategies that diversify the lending mix.
The previously referenced PPP loans and PPP related credit facility are included in “Commercial, financial & agricultural” loans above.
The repayment of loans in the loan portfolio as they mature is a source of liquidity. The following table sets forth the loans maturing within specified intervals at December 31, 2020.
Loan Maturity Schedule and Sensitivity to Changes in Interest Rates
Loans maturing after one year with:
The information presented in the above table is based on the contractual maturities of the individual loans, including loans which may be subject to renewal at their contractual maturity. Renewal of such loans is subject to review and credit approval, as well as modification of terms upon their maturity.
Investment Securities
Our investment securities portfolio is a significant component of our total earning assets. Total investment securities averaged $300.9 million in 2020, as compared to $257.6 million in 2019, which represents 25.1% and 25.3% of the average earning assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our investment securities portfolio amounted to $359.9 million and $286.8 million, respectively. The increase in investment securities in 2020 is primarily due to organic deposit growth and excess liquidity from customer’s PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
At December 31, 2020, the estimated weighted average life of our investment portfolio was approximately 5.3 years, duration of approximately 3.7, and a weighted average tax equivalent yield of approximately 2.16%. At December 31, 2019, the estimated weighted average life of our investment portfolio was approximately 5.1 years, duration of approximately 3.3, and a weighted average tax equivalent yield of approximately 2.71%.
We held no debt securities rated below investment grade at December 31, 2020.
The following table shows the investment portfolio composition.
We hold other investments carried at cost which represents our investment in FHLB stock. This investment amounted to $1.1 million and $991.4 thousand at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Investment Securities Maturity Distribution and Yields
The following table shows, at amortized cost, the expected maturities and average yield of securities held at December 31, 2020:
(1) Yield calculated on tax equivalent basis
Short-Term Investments
Short-term investments, which consist of federal funds sold, securities purchased under agreements to resell and interest bearing deposits, averaged $62.9 million in 2020, as compared to $25.6 million in 2019. The increase in short-term investments in 2020 is primarily due to organic deposit growth and excess liquidity from customer’s PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We maintain the majority of our short term overnight investments in our account at the Federal Reserve rather than in federal funds at various correspondent banks due to the lower regulatory capital risk weighting. At December 31, 2020, short-term investments including funds on deposit at the Federal Reserve totaled $46.1 million. These funds are an immediate source of liquidity and are generally invested in an earning capacity on an overnight basis.
Deposits and Other Interest-Bearing Liabilities
Deposits. Average deposits were $1.1 billion during 2020, compared to $934.9 million during 2019. Average interest-bearing deposits were $743.4 million during 2020, as compared to $670.9 million during 2019. These increases are primarily due to organic deposit growth and PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic being held in customers deposit accounts.
The following table sets forth the deposits by category:
Large certificate of deposit customers, whom we identify as those of $100 thousand or more, tend to be extremely sensitive to interest rate levels, making these deposits less reliable sources of funding for liquidity planning purposes than core deposits. Core deposits, which exclude time deposits of $100 thousand or more, provide a relatively stable funding source for the loan portfolio and other earning assets. Core deposits were $1.1 billion and $902.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Time deposits greater than $250 thousand, the FDIC deposit insurance coverage limit, amounted to $28.6 million and $32.2 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
A stable base of deposits is expected to continue to be the primary source of funding to meet both our short-term and long-term liquidity needs in the future. The maturity distribution of time deposits is shown in the following table.
Maturities of Certificates of Deposit and Other Time Deposit of $100,000 or more
Borrowed funds. Borrowed funds consist of securities sold under agreements to repurchase, FHLB advances and long-term debt as a result of issuing $15.0 million in trust preferred securities. Short-term borrowings in the form of securities sold under agreements to repurchase averaged $49.5 million, $34.2 million and $27.0 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The maximum month-end balances during 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $73.0 million, $36.7 million and $33.4 million, respectively. The average rates paid during these periods were 0.38%, 1.12% and 1.08%, respectively. The balances of securities sold under agreements to repurchase were $40.9 million and $33.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The repurchase agreements all mature within one to four days and are generally originated with customers that have other relationships with us and tend to provide a stable and predictable source of funding. As a member of the FHLB, the Bank has access to advances from the FHLB for various terms and amounts. During 2020 and 2019, the average outstanding advances amounted to $2.0 million and $3.2 million, respectively.
The following is a schedule of the maturities for FHLB Advances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
In addition to the above borrowings, we issued $15.5 million in trust preferred securities on September 16, 2004. During the fourth quarter of 2015, we redeemed $500 thousand of these securities. The securities accrue and pay distributions quarterly at a rate of three month LIBOR plus 257 basis points. The remaining debt may be redeemed in full anytime with notice and matures on September 16, 2034.
Capital Adequacy and Dividend Policy
Capital Adequacy
Total shareholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020 was $136.3 million as compared to $120.2 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in shareholders’ equity is primarily due to an increase in retention of earnings less dividends paid of $6.5 million, an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income of $8.8 million, $0.4 thousand related to executive and director stock awards, and $0.4 thousand related to our dividend reinvestment plan. The increase in accumulated other comprehensive income was due to a reduction in market interest rates, which resulted in an increase in the net unrealized gains in our investment securities portfolio. During the third quarter of 2019, we completed the repurchase of 300,000 shares of our outstanding common stock at a cost of approximately $5.6 million with an average price per share of $18.79. We also announced during the third quarter of 2019 the approval of a new repurchase plan of up to 200,000 shares of our outstanding common stock. No share repurchases were made under the new repurchase plan prior to its expiration on December 31, 2020.
In 2018, we paid a dividend of $0.10 per share each quarter and during each quarter of 2019, we paid a dividend on our common stock of $0.11 per share. During each quarter in 2020, we paid an $0.12 per share dividend on our common stock.
In addition, a dividend reinvestment plan was implemented in the third quarter of 2003. The plan allows existing shareholders the option of reinvesting cash dividends as well as making optional purchases of up to $5,000 in the purchase of common stock per quarter.
The following table shows the return on average assets (net income divided by average total assets), return on average equity (net income divided by average equity), and equity to assets ratio for the three years ended December 31, 2020.
While the Company is currently a small bank holding company and so generally is not subject to Basel III capital requirements, our Bank remains subject to such capital requirements. As of December 31, 2018, the Company and the Bank met all capital adequacy requirements under the Basel III rules. See “Supervision and Regulation-Basel Capital Standards” for additional information on Basel III and the Dodd-Frank Act.
The Bank exceeded the regulatory capital ratios at December 31, 2020 and 2019, as set forth in the following table:
(1) As a small bank holding company, the Company is generally not subject to the Basel III capital requirements unless otherwise advised by the Federal Reserve.
(2) Ratios do not include the capital conservation buffer of 2.5%.
Dividend Policy
Since we are a bank holding company, our ability to declare and pay dividends is dependent on certain federal and state regulatory considerations, including the guidelines of the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve has issued a policy statement regarding the payment of dividends by bank holding companies. In general, the Federal Reserve’s policies provide that dividends should be paid only out of current earnings and only if the prospective rate of earnings retention by the bank holding company appears consistent with the organization’s capital needs, asset quality and overall financial condition. The Federal Reserve’s policies also require that a bank holding company serve as a source of financial strength to its subsidiary banks by standing ready to use available resources to provide adequate capital funds to those banks during periods of financial stress or adversity and by maintaining the financial flexibility and capital-raising capacity to obtain additional resources for assisting its subsidiary banks where necessary. In addition, under the prompt corrective action regulations, the ability of a bank holding company to pay dividends may be restricted if a subsidiary bank becomes undercapitalized. These regulatory policies could affect our ability to pay dividends or otherwise engage in capital distributions.
Because the Company is a legal entity separate and distinct from the Bank and does not conduct stand-alone operations, the Company’s ability to pay dividends depends on the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Company, which is also subject to regulatory restrictions. As a South Carolina-chartered bank, the Bank is subject to limitations on the amount of dividends that it is permitted to pay. Unless otherwise instructed by the S.C. Board, the Bank is generally permitted under South Carolina state banking regulations to pay cash dividends of up to 100% of net income in any calendar year without obtaining the prior approval of the S.C. Board. In addition, the Bank must maintain a capital conservation buffer, above its regulatory minimum capital requirements, consisting entirely of Common Equity Tier 1 capital, in order to avoid restrictions with respect to its payment of dividends to First Community Corporation. The FDIC also has the authority under federal law to enjoin a bank from engaging in what in its opinion constitutes an unsafe or unsound practice in conducting its business, including the payment of a dividend under certain circumstances.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity management involves monitoring sources and uses of funds in order to meet our day-to-day cash flow requirements while maximizing profits. Liquidity represents our ability to convert assets into cash or cash equivalents without significant loss and to raise additional funds by increasing liabilities. Liquidity management is made more complicated because different balance sheet components are subject to varying degrees of management control. For example, the timing of maturities of the investment portfolio is very predictable and subject to a high degree of control at the time investment decisions are made. However, net deposit inflows and outflows are far less predictable and are not subject to nearly the same degree of control. Asset liquidity is provided by cash and assets which are readily marketable, or which can be pledged, or which will mature in the near future. Liability liquidity is provided by access to core funding sources, principally the ability to generate customer deposits in our market area. In addition, liability liquidity is provided through the ability to borrow against approved lines of credit (federal funds purchased) from correspondent banks and to borrow on a secured basis through securities sold under agreements to repurchase. The Bank is a member of the FHLB and has the ability to obtain advances for various periods of time. These advances are secured by eligible securities pledged by the Bank or assignment of eligible loans within the Bank’s portfolio.
As of December 31, 2020, we have not experienced any unusual pressure on our deposit balances or our liquidity position as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We had no brokered deposits and no listing services deposits at December 31, 2020. We believe that we have ample liquidity to meet the needs of our customers and to manage through the COVID-19 pandemic through our low cost deposits; our ability to borrow against approved lines of credit (federal funds purchased) from correspondent banks; and our ability to obtain advances secured by certain securities and loans from the Federal Home Loan Bank.
We generally maintain a high level of liquidity and adequate capital, which along with continued retained earnings, we believe will be sufficient to fund the operations of the Bank for at least the next 12 months. Shareholders’ equity declined to 9.8% of total assets at December 31, 2020 from 10.3% at December 31, 2019 primarily due to PPP loans and excess liquidity from customer’s PPP loan proceeds and other stimulus funds related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Bank maintains federal funds purchased lines in the total amount of $60.0 million with two financial institutions, although these were not utilized at December 31, 2020 and $10.0 million through the Federal Reserve Discount Window. The FHLB of Atlanta has approved a line of credit of up to 25% of the Bank’s assets, which, when utilized, is collateralized by a pledge against specific investment securities and/or eligible loans. We had PPP loans totaling $43.3 million gross of deferred fees and costs and $42.2 million net of deferred fees and costs at December 31, 2020. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve provided us a lending facility, the PPPLF, that permitted us to obtain funding specifically for loans that we made under the PPP; however, the Bank had sufficient liquidity to fund PPP loans without accessing the PPPLF. The PPP program expired on August 8, 2020.
Through the operations of our Bank, we have made contractual commitments to extend credit in the ordinary course of our business activities. These commitments are legally binding agreements to lend money to our customers at predetermined interest rates for a specified period of time. At December 31, 2020, we had issued commitments to extend unused credit of $142.6 million, including $42.3 million in unused home equity lines of credit, through various types of lending arrangements. At December 31, 2019, we had issued commitments to extend unused credit of $135.7 million, including $39.8 million in unused home equity lines of credit, through various types of lending arrangements. We evaluate each customer’s credit worthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by us upon extension of credit, is based on our credit evaluation of the borrower. Collateral varies but may include accounts receivable, inventory, property, plant and equipment, commercial and residential real estate. We manage the credit risk on these commitments by subjecting them to normal underwriting and risk management processes.
We regularly review our liquidity position and have implemented internal policies establishing guidelines for sources of asset-based liquidity and evaluate and monitor the total amount of purchased funds used to support the balance sheet and funding from noncore sources. Although uncertain, we may encounter stress on liquidity management as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Bank’s participation in the PPP as a participating lender. As customers manage their own liquidity stress, we could experience an increase in the utilization of existing lines of credit.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of operations, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not recorded in the financial statements, or are recorded in amounts that differ from the notional amounts. These transactions involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit, interest rate, and liquidity risk. Such transactions are used by the company for general corporate purposes or for customer needs. Corporate purpose transactions are used to help manage credit, interest rate, and liquidity risk or to optimize capital. Customer transactions are used to manage customers’ requests for funding. Please refer to Note 16 of our financial statements for a discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
Unlike most industrial companies, the assets and liabilities of financial institutions such as the Company and the Bank are primarily monetary in nature. Therefore, interest rates have a more significant effect on our performance than do the effects of changes in the general rate of inflation and change in prices. In addition, interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. As discussed previously, we continually seek to manage the relationships between interest sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against wide interest rate fluctuations, including those resulting from inflation.