Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the information included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless otherwise indicated, the terms “Company”, “FuelCell Energy”, “we”, “us”, and “our” refer to FuelCell Energy, Inc. and its subsidiaries. All tabular dollar amounts are in thousands. In certain instances, the capitalized terms used in this section are defined elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. Please see the section of this Annual Report entitled “Forward-Looking Statement Disclaimer” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements, as well as the other risks set forth in our filings with the SEC including those set forth under the section entitled “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Overview
Headquartered in Danbury, Connecticut, FuelCell Energy has leveraged five decades of research and development to become a global leader in delivering environmentally responsible distributed baseload power platform solutions through our proprietary fuel cell technology. As an innovator and an American manufacturer of clean fuel cell power platforms, our current commercial technology delivers clean, distributed generation and distributed hydrogen, as well as heat, carbon separation and utilization, and water. We plan to increase our investment in developing and commercializing future technologies expected to deliver hydrogen and long duration hydrogen-based energy storage through our solid oxide technologies, as well as carbon capture solutions.
As a leading global manufacturer of proprietary fuel cell technology platforms, we are uniquely positioned to serve customers worldwide with sustainable products and solutions for businesses, utilities, governments, and municipalities. Our solutions are designed to enable a world empowered by clean energy, enhancing the quality of life for people around the globe. We target large-scale power users with our megawatt-class installations globally, and currently offer sub-megawatt solutions for smaller power consumers in Europe. To provide a frame of reference, one megawatt is adequate to continually power approximately 1,000 average sized U.S. homes. Our customer base includes utility companies, municipalities, universities, hospitals, government entities/military bases and a variety of industrial and commercial enterprises. Our leading geographic markets are currently the United States and South Korea, and we are pursuing opportunities in other countries around the world. Our product offerings drive our mission to help our customers realize their environmental goals, strengthen resiliency, manage energy and other commodity costs, and deliver valuable goods and services to their customers.
Recent Developments
The events described in this “Recent Developments” section relate, in part, to matters discussed in more detail below in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section and/or in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In certain instances, the capitalized terms used in this “Recent Developments” section are defined elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Amendment No. 1 to Joint Development Agreement and Related Letter Agreement
On October 29, 2021, the Company and ExxonMobil Research and Engineering Company (“EMRE”) entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Joint Development Agreement between the Company and EMRE (“Amendment No. 1”).
The Joint Development Agreement between us and EMRE (the “Original Agreement”) was executed on November 5, 2019, became effective as of October 31, 2019, and had a term of two years from the effective date, ending on October 31, 2021. Under the Original Agreement, we have engaged in exclusive research and development efforts with EMRE to evaluate and develop new and/or improved carbonate fuel cells to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from industrial and power sources in exchange for (i) payment by EMRE of certain fees and costs as well as certain milestone-based payments to be paid only if certain technological milestones are met, two of which had not been satisfied as of the execution of Amendment No. 1, and (ii) certain licenses, in each case as described in the Original Agreement.
In Amendment No. 1, which became effective as of October 31, 2021, we and EMRE agreed, among other things, to extend the term of the Original Agreement for an additional six months, ending on April 30, 2022, unless terminated earlier in accordance with the provisions of the Original Agreement. Amendment No. 1 allows for the continuation of research that would enable incorporation of design improvements to our current fuel cell design in order to support a decision to use the improvements in a future demonstration of the technology for capturing carbon at ExxonMobil’s Rotterdam refinery in the Netherlands (such demonstration, the “Rotterdam Project”) and provides additional time to achieve Milestone 1, as defined in the Original Agreement. Under the terms set forth in the Original Agreement, upon achievement by us of Milestone 1 to EMRE’s satisfaction, we would be entitled to receive a milestone payment of $5.0 million from EMRE. However, there can be no assurance that we will achieve Milestone 1 (or any other milestone) to EMRE’s satisfaction. (The Original Agreement, as amended by Amendment No. 1, is referred to herein as the “EMRE Joint Development Agreement”).
In a related letter agreement between us and EMRE dated as of October 28, 2021 and executed on October 29, 2021 (the “EMRE Letter Agreement”), we agreed to invest with EMRE in the Rotterdam Project should EMRE move forward with the Rotterdam Project. In the EMRE Letter Agreement, we agreed that, if (i) we achieve Milestone 1, as set forth in the Original Agreement, as amended by Amendment No. 1, and (ii) we execute a contractual agreement with EMRE to proceed with the Rotterdam Project, then at EMRE’s option, we will either make an investment in the amount of $5.0 million in the Rotterdam Project or discount EMRE’s purchase of our fuel cell module and detailed engineering design, as agreed to by the parties, required for the Rotterdam Project by $5.0 million.
Franklin Park Tax Equity Financing Transaction
We closed on a tax equity financing transaction in November 2021 with Franklin Park Infrastructure, LLC (“Franklin Park”) for the 7.4 MW fuel cell project (the “LIPA Yaphank Project”) located in Yaphank Long Island. Franklin Park’s tax equity commitment totals $12.4 million.
This transaction was structured as a “partnership flip”, which is a structure commonly used by tax equity investors in the financing of renewable energy projects. Under this partnership flip structure, a partnership, in this case YTBFC Holdco, LLC (the “Yaphank Partnership”), was organized to acquire from FuelCell Energy Finance II, LLC, our wholly-owned subsidiary, all outstanding equity interests in Yaphank Fuel Cell Park, LLC (the “Yaphank Project Company”) which in turn owns the LIPA Yaphank Project and is the party to the power purchase agreement and all project agreements. At the closing of the transaction, the Yaphank Partnership is owned by Franklin Park, holding Class A Units, and Fuel Cell Energy Finance Holdco, LLC, a subsidiary of FuelCell Energy Finance, LLC, holding Class B Units. The acquisition of the Yaphank Project Company by the Yaphank Partnership was funded in part by an initial draw from Franklin Park and funds contributed downstream to the Yaphank Partnership by us. The initial funding occurred on December 13, 2021, upon the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent (including the receipt of an appraisal and confirmation that the LIPA Yaphank Project would be eligible for the investment tax credit (“ITC”) under Section 48 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended). In connection with the initial closing, we were able to draw down approximately $3.2 million, of which approximately $0.4 million was used to pay closing costs, including title insurance expenses and legal and consulting fees. We are eligible to draw the remaining amount of the commitment, approximately $9.2 million, once the LIPA Yaphank Project achieves commercial operation. When such funds are drawn down, the funds will be distributed upstream to us, as a reimbursement of prior construction costs incurred by us.
Under a partnership flip structure, tax equity investors agree to receive a minimum target rate of return, typically on an after-tax basis. Prior to receiving a contractual rate of return or a date specified in the contractual arrangements, Franklin Park will receive substantially all of the non-cash value attributable to the LIPA Yaphank Project, which includes accelerated depreciation and Section 48(a) investment tax credits; however, we will receive a majority of the cash distributions (based on the operating income of the LIPA Yaphank Project), which are paid quarterly. After Franklin Park receives its contractual rate of return, we will receive approximately 95% of the cash and tax allocations. We (through a separate wholly owned entity) may enter into a back leverage debt financing transaction and use the cash distributions from the Yaphank Partnership to service the debt.
Under this partnership flip structure, after the fifth anniversary following commercial operations, we have an option to acquire all of the equity interests that Franklin Park holds in the Yaphank Partnership starting after Franklin Park receives its contractual rate of return (the anticipated “flip” date) after the LIPA Yaphank Project is operational. If we exercise this option, we will be required to pay the greater of the following: (i) the fair market value of Franklin Park's equity interest
at the time the option is exercised or (ii) an amount equal 9.6% of Franklin Park’s capital contributions. This option payment is to be grossed up for federal taxes if it exceeds the tax basis of the Yaphank Partnership Class A Units.
Settlement Agreement with POSCO Energy Co., Ltd. and Korea Fuel Cell Co., Ltd.
In order to resolve various commercial and legal disputes among POSCO Energy Co., Ltd. (“POSCO Energy”), Korea Fuel Cell Co., Ltd. (“KFC”) and us, on December 20, 2021, we entered into a Settlement Agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”) with POSCO Energy and KFC (POSCO Energy and KFC may be collectively referred to herein as “PE Group”). The Settlement Agreement provides, among other things, that the parties will cooperate in good faith to effect a market transition to us of the molten carbonate fuel cell business in Korea in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Settlement Agreement. To that end, the Settlement Agreement provides that any and all past, current, or potential disputes and claims between us, on the one hand, and POSCO Energy and KFC, on the other, of any nature whatsoever, whether known or unknown, asserted or not asserted, based on actions or omissions of any party on or before the date of Settlement Agreement are fully and finally settled, including such disputes and claims, directly or indirectly, in connection with the legal disputes and License Agreements described elsewhere herein, with the exception of (i) an unfiled claim by us in the amount of approximately $1.8 million with respect to certain royalties we believe are owed by POSCO Energy with respect to replacement modules deployed by POSCO Energy at Gyenonggi Green Energy and other sites for which POSCO Energy has not paid royalties, and (ii) an unfiled claim by POSCO Energy in an unknown amount with respect to a series of purchase orders for materials and components which began in 2014 under a supply chain contract, both of which claims remain unsettled. We do not believe the claim by POSCO Energy with respect to purchase orders for materials and components under the supply chain contract has merit and we retain the right to file a counterclaim for damages we believe we have incurred with respect to such supply chain contract. With respect to certain attachments obtained by POSCO Energy from the Seoul Central District Court with respect to certain revenues owed to us by Korea Southern Power Company (“KOSPO”) (which are described in more detail elsewhere herein), the Settlement Agreement provides that, within five days of the date of the Settlement Agreement, POSCO Energy will file an application with the Seoul Central District Court to revoke the attachments. Thereafter, we expect to promptly receive the outstanding KOSPO accounts receivable of approximately $11.2 million held by the Seoul Central District Court.
Under the Settlement Agreement, the parties have also agreed that, within five days of the date thereof, we will withdraw our objection to the spin-off of KFC from POSCO Energy, and that the License Agreements are not terminated, but instead are deemed to be amended such that POSCO Energy and KFC only have the right (i) to provide maintenance and repair services to PE Group’s existing customers on existing molten carbonate power generation and thermal projects under long-term service agreements currently in force as well as long-term service agreements that have expired and are pending renewal as of the settlement date (collectively, “Existing LTSAs”), (ii) to supply replacement modules purchased from us only for their existing customers for existing molten carbonate power generation and thermal projects under Existing LTSAs and (iii) to own, operate and maintain all facilities and factories solely for the purposes set forth in (i) and (ii) above (collectively, the “Right to Service License”). POSCO Energy and KFC further agree that, as of the date of the Settlement Agreement, the License Agreements are deemed to be amended such that we exclusively enjoy all rights as to our technology in Korea and Asia, other than the Right to Service License. The Settlement Agreement further provides that the License Agreements will terminate automatically upon sixty days prior written notice to PE Group if (i) we enter into a business collaboration agreement with a Korean company to construct, assemble, manufacture, market, sell, distribute, import, export, install, commission, service, maintain, or repair products incorporating our technology, or otherwise conduct our business, in the Korean market; or (ii) we expand the capacity of our existing Korean entity such as to perform such activities itself. In the event of the termination of the License Agreements, the license granted to PE Group under the Right to Service License will continue notwithstanding the termination of the License Agreements, except that PE Group’s right to own, operate, and maintain all facilities and factories for the purpose of servicing any orders or requests made by us will terminate. For the avoidance of doubt, pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Agreement, PE Group has no right to manufacture modules or any other product incorporating our technology under the License Agreements as amended, the Right to Service License or otherwise unless requested and authorized by us to do so.
The Settlement Agreement further provides that, in order to service its existing customers under the Existing LTSAs, KFC will place a firm, non-cancelable order for twelve SureSource 3000 modules within two weeks after the date of the Settlement Agreement and an additional firm, non-cancelable order for eight SureSource 3000 modules on or before June 30, 2022, all at a price of $3.0 million per module. In addition, KFC agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts to order fourteen additional SureSource 3000 modules by December 31, 2022, at a price of $3.0 million per module if ordered by such date. If KFC materially breaches the Settlement Agreement by failing to make timely and full payment for the modules for which KFC is required to place orders under the Settlement Agreement and does not cure such material breach within fifteen days of notice of such breach by us, the License Agreements and the Right to Service License granted to PE
Group will be terminated. If we materially breach the Settlement Agreement by failing to supply the modules for which KFC is required to place orders under the Settlement Agreement, as long as KFC has made the payment for such modules and has otherwise satisfied its contractual obligations for those modules and such material breach is not cured within sixty days after notice from PE Group, PE Group will have the right to terminate the Settlement Agreement. With respect to any other alleged breach, material or otherwise, of the Settlement Agreement, the parties’ exclusive remedy consists solely of general damages.
Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, with respect to new modules to be supplied by us and deployed by PE Group to its existing customers, we will provide our standard warranty against module defects until the earlier of eighteen months from the date of shipment or twelve months from the date of installation. As part of the global settlement of the disputes among the parties and subject to the qualifications set forth in the Settlement Agreement, we will reimburse PE Group for any annual output penalty amount paid by PE Group to its customers pursuant to Existing LTSAs (whether such Existing LTSA is extended or renewed), caused by a shortfall or defect in the new modules for a period of up to seven years. The maximum annual reimbursement obligation with regard to any PE Group customer for any new module provided by us will not exceed an amount equal to 7.5% per year of the module purchase price. We will not be required to reimburse PE Group for any penalty paid by PE Group under the Existing LTSAs that is not caused by a shortfall or defect in the modules to be supplied by us including, without limitation, any shortfall or defect caused by a site-related problem, a problem with the balance of plant, or other components of the project.
Although we have the exclusive and unrestricted right under the Settlement Agreement to perform, pursue, and otherwise conduct our business in relation to new fuel cell projects (including new projects with PE Group’s existing customers) in Korea and Asia, the parties have agreed that, except as further provided in the Settlement Agreement with respect to PE Group’s existing customers Noeul Green Energy and Godeok Green Energy, we will not engage in discussions with PE Group’s existing customers regarding Existing LTSAs without PE Group’s consent. The parties have further agreed that if PE Group cannot enter into an agreement with its existing customers to extend or renew Existing LTSAs by December 31, 2022, PE Group will cooperate with us so that we may discuss and, at our sole discretion, enter into an extension of an Existing LTSA, a new long-term service agreement to replace an Existing LTSA, or a module sales agreement with PE Group’s existing customers; provided that (i) should we enter into such an arrangement with a PE Group existing customer, and (ii) we are required to provide replacement modules to such existing customer under such arrangement, and (iii) PE Group has not already deployed all or some the modules that PE Group ordered under Settlement Agreement, we will purchase the number of required replacement modules from PE Group at a price of $3.0 million per module (to the extent such modules are available and have not yet been deployed). The purchase of such replacement modules by us is contingent upon the modules being in proper condition as determined by inspection process to be agreed by the parties. Any modules purchased by us from PE Group under these terms will be included as part of the firm orders KFC is required to make pursuant to the Settlement Agreement.
With respect to operations and maintenance agreements, the Settlement Agreement provides that KFC will have the right of first refusal on providing operation and maintenance services on commercially reasonable terms for new long-term service agreements entered into by us in Korea for a period of the first to occur of either twenty-four months after the date of the Settlement Agreement or until such time as we engage a third party capable of providing such services in Korea. If we and KFC agree that KFC should provide operation and maintenance services pursuant to the right of first refusal, we and KFC will enter into one or more operation and maintenance agreements that reflect commercially reasonable terms and conditions as agreed by us and KFC at that time.
With respect to balance of plant (“BOP”), KFC currently has eight units of BOP available, and the Settlement Agreement provides that we have the option to purchase such units of BOP for any new molten carbonate fuel cell projects within Korea at a price of KRW 2,550,000,000 per unit. We will also have a non-exclusive, non-transferrable, non-sublicensable license to use the intellectual property imbedded in the BOP units in Korea in consideration for a reasonable license fee to be separately agreed by the parties. Detailed terms and conditions of BOP and related software and firmware supply will be discussed and agreed in good faith in separate BOP supply agreements in the event we exercise our option to purchase any of such BOP.
As previously disclosed, we retained outside counsel on a contingency basis to pursue our claims against POSCO Energy and KFC, and outside counsel entered into an agreement with a litigation finance provider to fund the legal fees and expenses of the arbitration proceedings brought by us against POSCO Energy and KFC. As we have entered into the Settlement Agreement, we are required to remit fees to our counsel, Wiley Rein, LLP (“Wiley”), subject to the terms of our engagement letter with Wiley. On December 23, 2021, we agreed that we will pay Wiley a total of $24.0 million to
satisfy all obligations to Wiley under our engagement letter, of which $14.0 million will be paid on or before December 30, 2021, $5.0 million will be paid on or before March 30, 2022, and $5.0 million will be paid on or before June 30, 2022.
For additional information regarding our relationship and legal proceedings with POSCO Energy and KFC, please see the section entitled “Business - License Agreements and Royalty Income; Relationship with POSCO Energy - License Agreements and Disputes with POSCO Energy; Settlement Agreement.”
Results of Operations
Management evaluates our results of operations and cash flows using a variety of key performance indicators, including revenues compared to prior periods and internal forecasts, costs of our products and results of our cost reduction initiatives, and operating cash use. These are discussed throughout the “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections. Results of Operations are presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following discussion and analysis of our Results of Operations and Liquidity and Capital Resources includes a comparison of the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 (“fiscal year 2021”) to the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 (“fiscal year 2020”). A similar discussion and analysis that compares fiscal year 2020 to the fiscal year ended October 31, 2019 (“fiscal year 2019”) may be found in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Comparison of the Years Ended October 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues and Costs of revenues
Revenues and costs of revenues for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Total revenues for the year ended October 31, 2021 decreased $1.3 million, or 2%, to $69.6 million from $70.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2020, primarily as a result of lower service revenues which were partially offset by higher generation revenues as further discussed below. Total costs of revenues for the year ended October 31, 2021 increased by $6.6 million, or 8%, to $85.2 million from $78.6 million for the year ended October 31, 2020.
The Company’s gross margin was (22.5)% in fiscal year 2021, as compared to a gross margin of (10.9)% in fiscal year 2020.
A discussion of the changes in product revenues, service and license revenues, generation revenues and Advanced Technologies contract revenues follows.
Product revenues
Product revenues, cost of product revenues and gross loss from product revenues for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
There were no product revenues for the years ended October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020. The primary reason for the lack of product revenues in recent years is that, in the United States, the Company chose to invest in retaining assets on its balance sheet and building its generation operating portfolio rather than selling these projects to customers or project investors, with the goal of benefitting from the long-term cash flows under the PPAs relating to the retained projects. In addition, internationally, South Korea and Europe have historically been product sale markets for the Company; however, we have not recognized meaningful product revenues in these geographies since 2018. Our activities in South Korea have been impacted by our prior dispute with POSCO Energy and, until fiscal year 2021, we moderated our investment in business development in Europe due to limited resources.
Cost of product revenues decreased $1.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 to $8.0 million, compared to $9.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. Both periods were impacted by the under-absorption of fixed overhead costs due to low production volumes. Manufacturing variances, primarily related to low production volumes and unabsorbed overhead costs, totaled approximately $6.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to approximately $8.7 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. The Company incurred approximately $2.1 million of manufacturing variances during the year ended October 31, 2020 due to the manufacturing facility shutdown, which negatively impacted overall gross margin. The decrease in manufacturing variances is primarily the result of increased production volumes during the year ended October 31, 2021.
For the year ended October 31, 2021, we operated at an annualized production rate of approximately 32.4 MW, which is an increase from the annualized production rate of 17.0 MW for the year ended October 31, 2020. The fiscal year 2020 production rate was primarily a result of the manufacturing facility shutdown that was implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of October 31, 2021 and 2020, there was no product revenues backlog.
Service agreements and license revenues
Service agreements and license revenues and associated cost of revenues for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Revenues for the year ended October 31, 2021 from service agreements and license fee agreements decreased $5.3 million to $19.8 million from $25.1 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. The primary reasons for the change in revenue were as follows:
● Service and license revenues for the year ended October 31, 2020 include license revenues of $4.0 million associated with the EMRE Joint Development Agreement and license revenues of $0.7 million related to the POSCO Energy License Agreements, while no comparable license revenues were recognized in the year ended October 31, 2021 with respect to the EMRE Joint Development Agreement or the License Agreements.
● We recorded a $1.0 million reduction in service revenues in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021 as a result of higher future cost estimates related to future module exchanges compared to our prior estimates. Because we recognize revenue on service contracts over time using a cost input method in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606 (“ASC 606”), we evaluate the cost estimates associated with each service contract periodically and adjust revenue accordingly. In fiscal year 2021, we reviewed our cost estimates relating to our service contracts and identified higher estimated costs than those that were previously identified. These higher estimated costs are due to our expectation that supply chain costs will remain high relative to prior years and that our production volumes will remain low, resulting in an increase in expected carrying costs. Because our estimated costs relating to the service contracts increased, we applied a reduction in revenue of $1.0 million in the year ended October 31, 2021 in accordance with ASC 606.
● The lower revenue of $5.7 million described above was partially offset by higher revenue of approximately $0.4 million related to module exchanges in fiscal year 2021 as such module exchanges occurred under contracts with a favorable margin profile compared to the contracts under which module exchanges occurred in fiscal year 2020.
● For the year ended October 31, 2021, performance penalties under our service agreements totaled approximately $1.6 million compared to approximately $1.4 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. The increase is the result of performance issues (which included lower operating output than guaranteed under certain service agreements) at certain sites. Performance guarantees represent variable consideration for service contracts and accordingly are recorded as an offset to service and license revenues.
Cost of service and license revenues increased $0.2 million to $24.7 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 from $24.5 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. We record loss accruals for service agreements when the estimated cost of future module exchanges and maintenance and monitoring activities exceeds the remaining unrecognized consideration. Estimates for future costs on service agreements are determined by a number of factors including the estimated remaining life of the module(s), used replacement modules available, and future operating plans for the power platform. The net increase of approximately $1.6 million to the loss accrual in fiscal year 2021 was a result of the higher future cost estimates related to future module exchanges, as further described above, as well as earlier timing of exchanges of certain modules during the fiscal year compared to our prior estimates as a result of lower than expected performance.
We work to continuously improve and mature our products and implement lessons learned into our product designs and manufacturing process subsequent to introduction. In 2021, we examined data related to module field performance, identified improvement opportunities and invested in improvement initiatives with respect to our core molten carbonate technology. We identified improvement opportunities ranging from improved thermal management by reducing internal temperature to improving the performance of our electrical balance of plant and began to implement design changes to our commercial platforms which are expected to improve overall product performance. As it relates to our fuel cell modules, these improvements centered around delivering more uniform temperature distribution within the stack modules with the intent of improving output over the life of the modules to achieve the product’s expected design life.
Cost of service and license revenues for both years include planned maintenance activities, module exchanges and continued investment in the service fleet in order to improve performance. Cost of service agreements includes maintenance and operating costs and module exchanges.
Overall gross loss from service agreements and license revenues was $4.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2021, which represents a decrease of $5.5 million from a gross profit of $0.6 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily a result of (i) the lack of revenue comparable to the revenue of $4.0 million associated with the EMRE Joint Development Agreement and $0.7 million associated with the POSCO Energy License Agreements, in each case recognized during the year ended October 31, 2020, and (ii) higher future cost estimates related to future module exchanges which resulted in a negative margin impact of approximately $2.6 million. These impacts to gross margin were partially offset by the favorable mix associated with module exchange activities as module exchanges in fiscal year 2021 were for higher margin projects, which increased margins by approximately $1.8 million. The overall gross margin was (25.0%) for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to a gross margin of 2.3% for the year ended October 31, 2020. Gross margin decreased during the year ended October 31, 2021 as a result of decreased revenues and increased costs of revenues as described above.
As of October 31, 2021, service agreements and license backlog totaled $125.9 million compared to $169.0 million as of October 31, 2020. This backlog is for service agreements of up to 20 years at inception and is expected to generate positive margins and cash flows based on current estimates. Service agreements and license backlog also includes $22.2 million of future license revenue.
Generation revenues
Generation revenues and related costs for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Revenues from generation for the year ended October 31, 2021 totaled $24.0 million, which represents an increase of $4.1 million from revenue recognized of $19.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2020 due to a larger operating portfolio, improved operating output of the generation fleet and sales of renewable energy credits. Generation revenues for the year ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 reflect revenue from electricity generated under our PPAs and the sale of renewable energy credits.
Cost of generation revenues totaled $36.0 million in the year ended October 31, 2021, which represents an increase from the year ended October 31, 2020, primarily due to higher plant maintenance costs in fiscal year 2021 in order to improve operating output and an increase in depreciation and amortization expense related to a higher installed base of operating assets in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Cost of generation revenues included depreciation and amortization of approximately $15.0 million and $13.9 million for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and the increase reflects accelerated depreciation expense recorded for module exchanges during the year ended October 31, 2021.
Fiscal years 2021 and 2020 both included an impairment charge for the Triangle Street Project. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, we reviewed the Triangle Street Project and, as a result of output and revenue projections given then-current development plans, recorded an impairment charge of $2.4 million. We performed an additional assessment during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 and, as a result, recorded an additional impairment charge of $0.4 million. We use the Triangle Street Project as a development platform for our advanced applications. Because we use the platform for development activities, generation revenue has been negatively impacted.
The Company also recorded an impairment charge in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 for the two Long Island Power Authority (“LIPA”) project awards for which there are no executed PPAs (which are referred to as the LIPA Brookhaven and Clare Rose Projects), which totaled approximately $1.8 million, representing the full value of the project assets. The impairment charge for the LIPA Brookhaven and Clare Rose Projects was recorded because we made a decision to no longer pursue development of the two projects.
The Company also recorded charges relating to the Toyota Project. In fiscal year 2021, the Company entered the construction phase of the 2.3 MW Toyota Project, however, our construction timeline for the project is delayed beyond the timeline required by our contract with Toyota and, as a result, we have incurred charges due to Toyota totaling approximately $1.0 million. In order to produce power and hydrogen for the off-takers (Toyota and Southern California Edison), the Company is required to procure renewable natural gas (“RNG”). Sourcing and risk mitigation strategies have been reviewed including the probabilities of certain outcomes. It was determined in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 that a potential source of RNG at favorable pricing was no longer sufficiently probable and that market pricing for RNG has significantly increased, resulting in the determination that the carrying value of the project asset is no longer recoverable. While the Company is pursuing alternative sources of RNG, a $2.8 million impairment charge was recorded, which represents the carrying value of the project asset less the carrying value of inventory components that could be redeployed for alternative use. The Company may continue to incur such charges in future periods.
Refer to Note 7. “Project Assets” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the impairment charges for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021.
The overall gross loss from generation revenues was $12.0 million for the year ended October 31, 2021, which represents an increase of $4.1 million from a gross loss of $7.9 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. This increase was a result of higher plant maintenance costs, depreciation expense, impairment charges and charges due to project delays, as discussed above.
As of October 31, 2021 and 2020, generation backlog totaled $1.1 billion.
Advanced Technologies contracts
Advanced Technologies contract revenues and related costs for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Advanced Technologies contract revenues remained consistent for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to the year ended October 31, 2020. Compared to the year ended October 31, 2020, Advanced Technologies contract revenues recognized under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement were approximately $1.3 million higher during the year ended October 31, 2021, reflecting continued performance under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement during the year ended October 31, 2021. However, the increased revenues under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement were offset by the $1.4 million less revenue recognized under government contracts during the year ended October 31, 2021 than during the year ended October 31, 2020. Cost of Advanced Technologies contract revenues increased $0.2 million to $16.5 million for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to $16.3 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. Advanced Technologies contracts for the year ended October 31, 2021 generated a gross margin of $9.3 million compared to a gross margin of $9.5 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. The decrease in Advanced Technologies contract gross margin is related to the mix of government contracts, which resulted in a higher cost share incurred by the Company on such contracts in the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to the year ended October 31, 2020.
As of October 31, 2021, Advanced Technologies contract backlog totaled $40.8 million compared to $49.2 million at October 31, 2020.
Administrative and selling expenses
Administrative and selling expenses were $37.9 million and $26.6 million for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year ended October 31, 2021 included higher legal expenses for tax equity financings (refer to Note 4. “Tax Equity Financing” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding the tax equity financings), additional expense for shared-based compensation of $2.2 million primarily due to the grants made in August 2020 and November 2020 under our Long-Term Incentive Plans (refer to Note 18. “Benefit Plans” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the August and November 2020 grants), increased compensation expense and proxy mailing expenses associated with the Company’s annual stockholder meeting. The year ended October 31, 2020 also included a legal settlement of $2.2 million which was recorded as an offset to administrative and selling expenses.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased to $11.3 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to $4.8 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. The increase relates to an increase in spending on the Company’s hydrogen commercialization initiatives compared to the year ended October 31, 2020. The year ended October 31, 2020 was impacted by restructuring initiatives implemented in 2019 and the reallocation of resources from Company-funded research and development projects to funded Advanced Technologies projects. During the year ended October 31, 2021, the Company successfully commenced operation and testing of a prototype solid oxide electrolysis hydrogen platform in Danbury, Connecticut.
Loss from operations
Loss from operations for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $64.9 million compared to $39.2 million for the year ended October 31, 2020. This increase was due to an increase in gross loss of $7.9 million and a $17.8 million increase in operating expenses for the year ended October 31, 2021.
As discussed above, impacting gross loss for the year ended October 31, 2021 were (i) lower service gross margin primarily due to lower revenues and higher cost of revenues resulting from, among other things, higher future cost estimates related to future module exchanges, whereas gross margin for the year ended October 31, 2020 included license revenues associated with the EMRE Joint Development Agreement which resulted in positive margins, (ii) lower generation gross margin primarily related to higher plant maintenance costs, increased depreciation expense, impairment charges and charges for project delays, and (iii) lower Advanced Technologies gross margin related to the mix of government contracts during the year ended October 31, 2021. These impacts were partially offset by lower manufacturing variances primarily resulting from increased production volumes.
Operating expenses were higher in the period as administrative and selling expenses and research and development expenses both increased for the year ended October 31, 2021. Administrative and selling expenses included legal expenses for tax equity financings, additional share-based compensation expense under our Long Term Incentive Plans approved in August 2020 and November 2021, an increase in compensation expense, and proxy mailing expenses associated with the Company’s annual stockholder meeting. In addition, administrative and selling expenses for the year ended October 31, 2020 included a $2.2 million legal settlement that offset administrative and selling expenses and there was no comparable gain for the year ended October 31, 2021. Research and development expenses were higher due to an increase in spending on the Company’s hydrogen commercialization initiatives compared to the year ended October 31, 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 was $7.4 million and $15.3 million, respectively. Interest expense for both periods presented includes interest related to financing obligations for sale-leaseback transactions and on the outstanding loans associated with the Bridgeport Fuel Cell Project. Interest expense for both periods also includes interest for the amortization of the redeemable preferred stock of subsidiary fair value discount. Amounts owed pursuant to the terms of the redeemable preferred stock issued by FCE Ltd. (which is referred to elsewhere herein as the Series 1 Preferred Shares) were paid, in full, in December 2020. The decrease in interest expense for the year ended October 31, 2021 is primarily due to the repayment of the $80.0 million principal balance outstanding under the Orion Credit Agreement (as defined below), which was fully repaid in December 2020.
Change in fair value of common stock warrant liability
The $16.0 million expense for the year ended October 31, 2021 represents an adjustment to the estimated fair value of the unexercised Orion Warrants outstanding during the year ended October 31, 2021, which were exercised, in full, during the year ended October 31, 2021. The $37.1 million expense for the year ended October 31, 2020 represents an adjustment to the estimated fair value of the Orion Warrants outstanding as of October 31, 2020. The expense is primarily a result of increases in the price of our common stock during the year ended October 31, 2020, which were used as an input to remeasure the Orion Warrants to fair value on a quarterly basis using a Black-Scholes model at October 31, 2020 for unexercised warrants as of October 31, 2020 and the dates of exercise compared to the stock price used in the Black-Scholes model upon the issuance of the Orion Warrants.
Loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt and financing obligation
The loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended October 31, 2021 represents costs associated with the repayment of the $80.0 million principal balance outstanding under the Orion Credit Agreement. The loss on extinguishment of debt amount includes an early prepayment penalty of $4.0 million and the write-off of unamortized debt discounts and deferred finance costs of $7.1 million. The $1.8 million gain for the year ended October 31, 2020 represents the difference between the amount of the payoff of the lease and the repurchase of the UCI Fuel Cell, LLC project asset and the carrying amount of the financing obligation.
Loss on extinguishment of Series 1 preferred share obligation
A charge of $0.9 million was recorded in the year ended October 31, 2021 for the extinguishment of preferred stock obligation of subsidiary to recognize the difference between the amount of the payoff of the obligation and the carrying amount of the Series 1 Preferred Share obligation.
Other (expense) income, net
Other (expense), net was ($0.7) million and Other income, net was $0.7 million for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Other (expense), net for the year ended October 31, 2021 primarily relates to a foreign exchange loss of $0.9 million related to the remeasurement of the Canadian Dollar denominated preferred stock obligation (the Series 1 Preferred Share obligation) of our U.S. Dollar functional currency Canadian subsidiary (FCE Ltd.) prior to the payoff of the preferred share obligation in December 2020. Other income, net for the year ended October 31, 2020 primarily relates to a net non-cash gain on the extinguishment accounting related to the modification of the Series 1 Preferred Shares in January 2020 including the extinguishment related to the embedded derivatives.
Provision for income taxes
We have not paid federal or state income taxes in several years due to our history of net operating losses, although we have paid foreign income and withholding taxes in South Korea. Income tax recorded for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2 thousand and $46 thousand, respectively.
Series B preferred stock dividends
Dividends recorded on our Series B Preferred Stock were $3.2 million and $3.3 million for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net loss attributable to common stockholders and loss per common share
Net loss attributable to common stockholders represents the net loss for the period less the preferred stock dividends on the Series B Preferred Stock. For the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, net loss attributable to common stockholders was $104.3 million and $92.4 million, respectively, and loss per common share was $0.31 and $0.42, respectively. The increase in the net loss attributable to common stockholders for the year ended October 31, 2021 is primarily due to incurring (i) a gross loss for fiscal year 2021 compared to a gross profit for fiscal year 2020, (ii) higher operating expenses for fiscal year 2021, (iii) an $11.2 million loss recorded on the extinguishment of the Orion Facility, and (iv) a $0.9 million charge for the extinguishment of the Series 1 Preferred Share obligation. These amounts were offset by lower interest expense due to repayment of the Orion Facility and a lower charge for the change in fair value of common stock warrant liability. The net loss attributable to common stockholders for the year ended October 31, 2020 reflected a $1.8 million gain on the extinguishment of a financing obligation. There was no comparable gain recorded in the year ended October 31, 2021. The lower loss per common share for the year ended October 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended October 31, 2020 is due to the higher weighted average shares outstanding as of October 31, 2021 as a result of share issuances since October 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview, Cash Position, Sources and Uses
Our principal sources of cash have been sales of our common stock through public equity offerings, proceeds from third party debt, project financing and tax monetization transactions, proceeds from the sale of our projects as well as research and development and service and license agreements with third parties. We have utilized this cash to develop and construct project assets, perform research and development on our Advanced Technologies, pay down existing outstanding indebtedness, and meet our other cash and liquidity needs.
As of October 31, 2021, unrestricted cash and cash equivalents totaled $432.2 million compared to $149.9 million as of October 31, 2020.
In December 2020, the Company closed an underwritten offering of 25.0 million shares of the Company’s common stock. Net proceeds to the Company were approximately $156.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. Proceeds from this offering have been utilized as follows:
● Extinguishment of Senior Secured Debt: On December 7, 2020, the Company paid $87.3 million to settle the outstanding principal, accrued but unpaid interest, prepayment premium, fees, costs and other expenses due
and owing to the Orion Agent and the lenders under the Orion Facility and the Orion Credit Agreement (in each case as defined elsewhere herein) and related loan documents. Concurrently, the Orion Agent released all of the collateral from the liens granted under the security documents associated with the Orion Facility, which included the release of $11.2 million of restricted cash to the Company.
● Extinguishment of the Series 1 Preferred Shares: On December 17, 2020, the Company paid all amounts owed to Enbridge Inc. (“Enbridge”) under the Series 1 Preferred Shares (as defined elsewhere herein), totaling Cdn. $27.4 million, or approximately $21.5 million in U.S. dollars. Following such payment, Enbridge surrendered its shares in FCE Ltd. (as defined elsewhere herein) and the related Guarantee and January 2020 Letter Agreement (in each case, as defined elsewhere herein) were terminated.
● Working Capital: The remaining $47.5 million of proceeds from the offering was utilized as working capital and included in unrestricted cash.
In February 2021, the Company further reduced its debt by repaying the outstanding $6.5 million Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note from Liberty Bank under the CARES Act.
On June 11, 2021, the Company entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies LLC and Barclays Capital Inc. with respect to an at the market offering program under which the Company may, from time to time, offer and sell shares of the Company’s common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $500 million. From the date of the Open Market Sale Agreement through October 31, 2021, approximately 44.1 million shares were sold under the Open Market Sale Agreement at an average sales price of $8.56 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $377.2 million, before deducting expenses and sales commissions. Net proceeds to the Company totaled approximately $369.7 million after deducting commissions and offering expenses totaling approximately $7.5 million. The remaining availability under the Open Market Sale Agreement as of the date of filing of this report is approximately $122.8 million. The Company plans to use the net proceeds from this offering to accelerate the development and commercialization of our Advanced Technologies products, including our solid oxide platform, for project development, for internal research and development, to invest in capacity expansion for solid oxide and carbonate fuel cell manufacturing, and for project financing, working capital support, and general corporate purposes.
We believe that our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, expected receipts from our contracted backlog, and release of short-term restricted cash less expected disbursements over the next twelve months will be sufficient to allow the Company to meet its obligations for at least one year from the date of issuance of these financial statements.
To date, we have not achieved profitable operations or sustained positive cash flow from operations. The Company’s future liquidity will depend on its ability to (i) timely complete current projects in process within budget, (ii) increase cash flows from its generation operating portfolio, including by meeting conditions required to timely commence operation of new projects, operating its generation operating portfolio in compliance with minimum performance guarantees and operating its generation operating portfolio in accordance with revenue expectations, (iii) obtain financing for project construction, (iv) obtain permanent financing for its projects once constructed, (v) increase order and contract volumes, which would lead to additional product sales, service agreements and generation revenues, (vi) obtain funding for and receive payment for research and development under current and future Advanced Technologies contracts, (vii) successfully commercialize its Advanced Technologies platforms, including its solid oxide, hydrogen and carbon capture platforms, (viii) implement the product cost reductions necessary to achieve profitable operations, (ix) manage working capital and the Company’s unrestricted cash balance and (x) access the capital markets to raise funds through the sale of equity securities, convertible notes, and other equity-linked instruments.
We are continually assessing different means by which to accelerate the Company’s growth, enter new markets, commercialize new products, and enable capacity expansion. Therefore, from time to time, the Company may consider and enter into agreements for one or more of the following: negotiated financial transactions, minority investments, collaborative ventures, license arrangements, joint ventures or other business transactions for the purpose(s) of geographic or manufacturing expansion and/or new product or technology development and commercialization.
Our business model requires substantial outside financing arrangements and satisfaction of the conditions of such financing arrangements to construct and deploy our projects and facilitate the growth of our business. The Company expects to seek long-term debt and tax equity (e.g., sale-leaseback and partnership transactions) for its project asset portfolio as these projects commence commercial operations. The proceeds of any such financing, if obtained, may allow the Company to
fund other projects. We may also seek to obtain additional financing in both the debt and equity markets in the future. If financing is not available to us on acceptable terms if and when needed, or on terms acceptable to us or our lenders, if we do not satisfy the conditions of our financing arrangements, if we spend more than the financing approved for projects, if project costs exceed an amount that the Company can finance, or if we do not generate sufficient revenues or obtain capital sufficient for our corporate needs, we may be required to reduce or slow planned spending, reduce staffing, sell assets, seek alternative financing and take other measures, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and operations.
Generation Operating Portfolio, Projects Assets and Backlog
To grow our generation operating portfolio, the Company will invest in developing and building turn-key fuel cell projects which will be owned by the Company and classified as project assets on the balance sheet. This strategy requires liquidity and the Company expects to continue to have increasing liquidity requirements as project sizes increase and more projects are added to backlog. We may commence building project assets upon the award of a project or execution of a multi-year PPA with an end-user that has a strong credit profile. Project development and construction cycles, which span the time between securing a PPA and commercial operation of the platform, vary substantially and can take years. As a result of these project cycles and strategic decisions to finance the construction of certain projects, we may need to make significant up-front investments of resources in advance of the receipt of any cash from the sale or long-term financing of such projects. To make these up-front investments, we may use our working capital, seek to raise funds through the sale of equity or debt securities, or seek other financing arrangements. Delays in construction progress and completing current projects in process within budget, or in completing financing or the sale of our projects may impact our liquidity in a material way.
Our generation operating portfolio (34.0 MW as of October 31, 2021) contributes higher long-term cash flows to the Company than if these projects had been sold. These projects currently generate approximately $26.0 million per year in annual revenue, but this amount may fluctuate from year to year depending on platform output, operational performance and management and site conditions. The Company plans to continue to grow this portfolio while also selling projects to investors. As of October 31, 2021, the Company had projects representing an additional 41.3 MW in various stages of development and construction, which projects are expected to generate operating cash flows in future periods, if completed. Retaining long-term cash flow positive projects, combined with our service fleet, is expected to result in reduced reliance on new project sales to achieve cash flow positive operations, however, operations and performance issues could impact results. We have worked with and are continuing to work with lenders and financial institutions to secure construction financing, long-term debt, tax equity and sale-leasebacks for our project asset portfolio, but there can be no assurance that such financing can be attained, or that, if attained, it will be retained and sufficient.
As of October 31, 2021, net debt outstanding related to project assets was $74.2 million. Future required payments totaled $43.2 million as of October 31, 2021. The outstanding financing obligations under our sale-leaseback transactions, which totaled $56.5 million as of October 31, 2021, include $34.8 million in excess of future required payments, not including amounts for the potential repurchase price of the project assets which is based on fair value.
Our generation operating portfolio provides us with the full benefit of future cash flows, net of any debt service requirements.
The following table summarizes our generation operating portfolio as of October 31, 2021:
(1) Rated capacity is the platform’s design rated output as of the date of initiation of commercial operations.
The following table summarizes projects in process, all of which are in backlog, as of October 31, 2021:
(1) Rated capacity is the platform’s design rated output as of the date of initiation of commercial operations.
The projects listed in the above table are in various stages of development or on-site construction and installation. Current project updates are as follows:
● Groton Sub Base - The Groton Project. In July 2020, the Company achieved mechanical completion, executed the interconnect agreement, and commenced the process of commissioning the 7.4 MW platform at the U.S. Navy Submarine Base in Groton, Connecticut (the “Groton Project”). On September 14, 2021, the Company disclosed that the process of commissioning the Groton Project was temporarily suspended due to a needed repair. The Company also disclosed that if commercial operations were delayed beyond October 18, 2021, an extension would be required from the Navy. Extensions were received from the Navy extending the date by which commercial operations are to be achieved to February 15, 2022. In November 2021, the Company completed all necessary repairs and resumed commissioning of the project. The Company expects
to complete commissioning and achieve commercial operations on or before January 15, 2022, although there is a possibility that schedule delays will occur.
In addition, as previously disclosed on September 14, 2021, in August 2021, the Company closed on a tax equity financing transaction with East West Bancorp, Inc. (“East West Bank”) for this project. East West Bank’s tax equity commitment totals $15 million. In connection with the initial closing, the Company was able to draw down $3.0 million. The Company is eligible to draw the remaining amount of the commitment, approximately $12 million, once the Groton Project achieves commercial operation. Under the terms of the Company’s agreement with East West Bank, the project had a required commercial operation deadline of October 18, 2021. On October 18, 2021, East West Bank granted an extension of the commercial operation deadline to December 31, 2021. On December 27, 2021, in exchange for a fee of $0.2 million, East West Bank granted a further extension of the commercial operation deadline to February 15, 2022. If commercial operations are delayed beyond February 15, 2022, extensions would be required from East West Bank and the Navy and those parties will determine whether such extensions will be granted in their sole discretion. In the event that extensions from East West Bank and the Navy become necessary, and East West Bank and/or the Navy do not grant an extension, such an event could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
Once completed, this platform is expected to demonstrate the ability of FuelCell Energy’s platforms to perform at high efficiencies and provide low CO2 to MWh output. Incorporation of the platform into a microgrid is expected to demonstrate the ability of FuelCell Energy’s platforms to increase grid stability and resilience while supporting the U.S. military’s efforts to fortify base energy supply and demonstrating the Navy’s commitment to clean reliable power.
● Toyota - Port of Long Beach, CA - The Toyota Project. This 2.3 MW trigeneration platform will produce electricity, hydrogen and water. Fuel cell platform equipment has been built and delivered to the site and civil construction work is underway. The project is expected to achieve commercial operations on or before June 30, 2022. If commercial operations are delayed beyond June 30, 2022, an extension to our Hydrogen Power Purchase Agreement would be required from Toyota who may or may not grant such extension in its sole discretion. In the event that an extension becomes necessary, and Toyota does not grant an extension, such an event could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
● LIPA - Yaphank (Long Island), NY - The LIPA Yaphank Project. On-site civil construction of this 7.4 MW project is materially complete and the project has achieved mechanical completion. In November 2021, the Company closed on a tax equity financing transaction with Franklin Park for this project. Franklin Park’s tax equity commitment totals $12.4 million. As part of the closing in November, the Company received approximately $3.2 million of the commitment following declaration of mechanical completion. Upon commercial operation being declared, the Company expects to draw the remaining amount of the commitment, approximately $9.2 million.
The project is expected to achieve commercial operations on or before December 31, 2021. If commercial operations are delayed beyond December 31, 2021, extensions would be required from LIPA and Franklin Park and those parties will determine whether such extensions will be granted in their sole discretion. In the event that extensions from LIPA and Franklin Park become necessary, and LIPA and/or Franklin Park do not grant an extension, such an event could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
● Derby, CT. On-site civil construction of this 14.0 MW project has advanced, the Company has largely completed the foundational construction and balance of plant components have been delivered and installed on site. This utility scale fuel cell platform will contain 5 SureSource 3000 fuel cell systems that will be installed on engineered platforms alongside the Housatonic River.
Backlog by revenue category is as follows:
● Service agreements backlog totaled $125.9 million as of October 31, 2021, compared to $146.8 million as of October 31, 2020. License backlog totaled $22.2 million as of October 31, 2021 and 2020. Service agreements
and license backlog includes future contracted revenue from maintenance and scheduled module exchanges for power plants under service agreements.
● Generation backlog totaled $1.1 billion as of October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020. Generation backlog represents future contracted energy sales under contracted PPAs or approved utility tariffs.
● There was no product sales backlog as of October 31, 2021 or October 31, 2020.
● Advanced Technologies contract backlog totaled $40.8 million as of October 31, 2021 compared to $49.2 million as of October 31, 2020. Advanced Technologies contract backlog represents remaining revenue under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement and government projects.
Backlog remained consistent at $1.29 billion as of October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020.
Backlog represents definitive agreements executed by the Company and our customers. Projects for which we have an executed PPA are included in generation backlog, which represents future revenue under long-term PPAs. Projects sold to customers (and not retained by the Company) are included in product sales and service agreements and license backlog, and the related generation backlog is removed upon sale. Together, the service and generation portion of backlog had a weighted average term of approximately 18 years, with weighting based on the dollar amount of backlog and utility service contracts of up to 20 years in duration at inception.
Factors that may impact our liquidity
Factors that may impact our liquidity in fiscal year 2022 and beyond include:
● The Company’s cash on hand and access to additional liquidity. As of October 31, 2021, unrestricted cash and cash equivalents totaled $432.2 million.
● We bid on large projects in diverse markets that can have long decision cycles and uncertain outcomes. We manage production rate based on expected demand and projects schedules. Changes to production rate take time to implement. The annualized production rate as of October 31, 2020 was 17.0 MW, which was impacted by the manufacturing facility shutdown from March 18, 2020 to June 22, 2020 that was implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During fiscal year 2020, we made a number of improvements in our manufacturing processes and capabilities, focusing on increasing throughput and simplifying and streamlining production steps, while implementing applicable social distancing protocols. During fiscal year 2021, we increased our production rate, and we achieved an annualized production rate of 32.4 MW as of October 31, 2021 and 45 MW as of the date of filing this report. We expect to maintain an annualized production rate in the range of 45 to 50 MW during fiscal year 2022.
● As project sizes and the number of projects evolves, project cycle times may increase. We may need to make significant up-front investments of resources in advance of the receipt of any cash from the financing or sale of our projects. These amounts include development costs, interconnection costs, costs associated with posting of letters of credit, bonding or other forms of security, and engineering, permitting, legal, and other expenses.
● The amount of accounts receivable and unbilled receivables as of October 31, 2021 and 2020 was $35.2 million ($11.6 million of which is classified as “Other assets”) and $26.5 million ($8.9 million of which is classified as “Other assets”), respectively. Unbilled accounts receivable represent revenue that has been recognized in advance of billing the customer under the terms of the underlying contracts. Such costs have been funded with working capital and the unbilled amounts are expected to be billed and collected from customers once we meet the billing criteria under the contracts. Our accounts receivable balances may fluctuate as of any balance sheet date depending on the timing of individual contract milestones and progress on completion of our projects.
● The amount of total inventory as of October 31, 2021 and 2020 was $71.7 million ($4.6 million is classified as long-term inventory) and $60.0 million ($9.0 million is classified as long-term inventory), respectively, which includes work in process inventory totaling $45.7 million and $38.2 million, respectively. Work in
process inventory can generally be deployed rapidly while the balance of our inventory requires further manufacturing prior to deployment. To execute on our business plan, we must produce fuel cell modules and procure balance of plant (“BOP”) components in required volumes to support our planned construction schedules and potential customer contractual requirements. As a result, we may manufacture modules or acquire BOP components in advance of receiving payment for such activities. This may result in fluctuations in inventory and in use of cash as of any given balance sheet date.
● The amount of total project assets as of October 31, 2021 and 2020 was $223.3 million and $161.8 million, respectively. Project assets consist of capitalized costs for fuel cell projects that are operating and producing revenue or are under construction. Project assets as of October 31, 2021 consisted of $96.4 million of completed, operating installations and $126.9 million of projects in development. As of October 31, 2021, we had 34.0 MW of operating project assets that generated $24.0 million of revenue during the year ended October 31, 2021.
● As of October 31, 2021, the Company had 41.3 MW of projects under development and construction, some of which are expected to generate operating cash flows beginning in fiscal year 2022. To build out this portfolio, we currently estimate the remaining investment in project assets to be $102.0 million. For fiscal year 2022, we forecast project asset expenditures to range between $40.0 million and $60.0 million compared to $66.9 million for fiscal year 2021. To fund such expenditures, the Company expects to use unrestricted cash on hand and to seek sources of construction financing. In addition, once the projects under development become operational, the Company will seek to obtain permanent financing (tax equity and debt) which would be expected to return cash to the business.
● Certain of our PPAs for project assets in our generation operating portfolio and project assets under construction expose us to fluctuating fuel price risks as well as the risk of being unable to procure the required amounts of fuel and the lack of alternative available fuel sources. We seek to mitigate our fuel risk using strategies including: (i) fuel cost reimbursement mechanisms in our PPAs to allow for pass through of fuel costs (full or partial) where possible which we have done with our 14.9 MW operating project in Bridgeport, CT and our 7.4 MW project under construction in Hartford, CT; (ii) procuring fuel under fixed price physical contracts with investment grade counterparties which we have done for twenty years for our Tulare BioMAT project and the initial seven years of the twenty year PPA for our LIPA Yaphank, NY project; and (iii) entering into future financial hedges with investment grade counterparties to offset potential negative market fluctuations.
We currently have three projects in development with fuel sourcing risk, which are the Toyota Project, which requires procurement of renewable natural gas (“RNG”), and our Derby, CT 14.0 MW and 2.8 MW projects, which require natural gas. Fuel sourcing and risk mitigation strategies for all three projects are being assessed and will be implemented as project operational dates become firm. Such strategies may require cash collateral or reserves to secure fuel or related contracts for these three projects.
● Capital expenditures are expected to range between $40 million to $50 million for fiscal year 2022, compared to capital expenditures of $6.4 million in fiscal year 2021, which includes expected investments in our factories for molten carbonate and solid oxide production capacity expansion, the addition of test facilities for new products and components, the expansion of our laboratories and upgrades to and expansion of our business systems.
● Company funded research and development activities are expected to increase to $45.0 million to $55.0 million in fiscal year 2022 (compared to approximately $11.3 million in fiscal year 2021) as we expect to accelerate commercialization of our Advanced Technologies solutions including distributed hydrogen, long duration hydrogen-based energy storage and hydrogen power generation.
● Under the terms of certain contracts, the Company will provide performance security for future contractual obligations. As of October 31, 2021, we had pledged approximately $28.0 million of our cash and cash equivalents as collateral for performance security and for letters of credit for certain banking requirements and contracts. This balance may increase with a growing backlog and installed fleet.
Depreciation and Amortization
As the Company builds project assets and makes capital expenditures, depreciation and amortization expenses are expected to increase. For the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, depreciation and amortization totaled $19.9 million and $19.4 million, respectively (of these totals, approximately $15.0 million and $13.9 million for the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, relate to depreciation and amortization of project assets in our generation operating portfolio).
Cash Flows
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents totaled $460.2 million as of October 31, 2021 compared to $192.1 million as of October 31, 2020. As of October 31, 2021, unrestricted cash and cash equivalents was $432.2 million compared to $149.9 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents as of October 31, 2020. As of October 31, 2021, restricted cash and cash equivalents was $28.0 million, of which $11.3 million was classified as current and $16.7 million was classified as non-current, compared to $42.2 million of restricted cash and cash equivalents as of October 31, 2020, of which $9.2 million was classified as current and $33.0 million was classified as non-current.
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows:
The key components of our cash inflows and outflows were as follows:
Operating Activities - Net cash used in operating activities was $70.4 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $36.8 million in fiscal year 2020 and net cash used in operating activities of $30.6 million in fiscal year 2019.
Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal year 2021 was primarily the result of the net loss of $101.1 million, increases in accounts receivable of $5.2 million, unbilled receivables of $3.6 million and inventory of $18.8 million and decreases in deferred revenue of $5.2 million. These amounts were partially offset by increases in accounts payable of $2.0 million and accrued liabilities of $0.3 million and net non-cash adjustments of $59.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal year 2020 was primarily the result of the net loss of $89.1 million, increases in accounts receivable of $6.3 million, unbilled receivables of $5.6 million and inventory of $2.1 million and a decrease in accounts payable of $7.1 million. These amounts were partially offset by increases in accrued liabilities of $5.5 million and deferred revenue of $1.7 million and net non-cash adjustments of $68.5 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal year 2019 was primarily the result of the net loss of $77.6 million and increases in inventory of $6.4 million and unbilled receivables of $4.5 million. These amounts were offset by increases in deferred revenue of $6.0 million and accrued liabilities of $2.4 million, decreases in accounts receivable of $4.8 million and other assets of $2.1 million and net non-cash adjustments of $42.7 million.
Investing Activities - Net cash used in investing activities was $73.2 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to $32.5 million in fiscal year 2020 and $69.3 million in fiscal year 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal year 2021 included $66.9 million of project asset expenditures and $6.4 million of capital expenditures.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal year 2020 included $31.5 million of project asset expenditures and a $0.6 million payment for a working capital adjustment for the May 2019 acquisition of the Bridgeport Fuel Cell Project.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal year 2019 included the purchase by the Company of all of the outstanding membership interests in Bridgeport Fuel Cell, LLC (“BFC”), the owner of the 14.9 MW Bridgeport Fuel Cell Project, for $35.5 million, $31.7 million invested in project assets to expand our generation operating portfolio and $2.2 million for capital expenditures.
Financing Activities - Net cash provided by financing activities was $411.9 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to $221.7 million in fiscal year 2020 and $59.7 million in fiscal year 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal year 2021 resulted from $525.9 million of proceeds from common stock sales, net of fees and expenses, $10.2 million of proceeds from the sale-leaseback transaction with Crestmark Equipment Finance, $3.0 million contribution received from a noncontrolling interest, and $0.9 million of proceeds received from warrant exercises, offset by debt repayments of $98.6 million primarily relating to the payoff of amounts owed under the Orion Credit Agreement and the PPP Note, a prepayment penalty of $4.0 million for the early payoff of the debt outstanding under the Orion Credit Agreement, payment of preferred dividends of $3.2 million under the terms of the Series B Preferred Stock, payment of $21.5 million to repay all remaining obligations under the terms of the Series 1 Preferred Shares and the payment of deferred financing costs of $0.4 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal year 2020 resulted from the receipt of $63.9 million of debt proceeds under the Orion Facility, which was net of a loan discount of $1.6 million, $14.4 million of proceeds from the sale-leaseback transaction with Crestmark Equipment Finance, $6.5 million of debt proceeds from Liberty Bank under the PPP Note, $3.0 million of debt proceeds from Connecticut Green Bank, $98.3 million of net proceeds from an underwritten equity offering that closed in October 2020, $73.6 million of net proceeds from at-the-market sales of common stock (after deducting commissions), and $1.3 million of net proceeds from warrant conversions, offset by debt repayments of $30.1 million, the payment of preferred dividends and return of capital of $6.5 million, and the payment of deferred financing costs of $2.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal year 2019 resulted from the receipt of $69.6 million of debt proceeds, which included $26.7 million to acquire all of the membership interest in BFC, $14.5 million under the Orion Facility and the remainder related to project level financings, offset by debt repayments of $48.4 million, the payment of deferred financing costs of $3.3 million and the payment of preferred dividends and return of capital of $1.8 million. The sale of common stock during fiscal year 2019 resulted in proceeds, net of expenses, of $43.6 million.
Commitments and Significant Contractual Obligations
A summary of our significant future commitments and contractual obligations as of October 31, 2021 and the related payments by fiscal year is summarized as follows:
(1) Purchase commitments with suppliers for materials, supplies and services incurred in the normal course of business.
(2) Future minimum lease payments on finance and operating leases.
(3) Represents payments due under sale-leaseback transactions and related financing agreements between certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries and PNC Energy Capital, LLC (“PNC”) and/or Crestmark Equipment Finance (“Crestmark”) (as applicable). Lease payments for each lease under these financing agreements are generally payable in fixed quarterly installments over a 10-year period.
(4) During fiscal year 2020, the Company entered into a 7-year natural gas contract with an estimated annual cost per year of $2.0 million which was set to begin on November 1, 2021. Actual service began under the contract on December
7, 2021 to coincide with our commissioning schedule. This gas contract is for the Company’s Yaphank project and the costs are expected to be offset by generation revenues on the project.
(5) The Company entered into an agreement with a customer on June 29, 2016 that includes a fee for the purchase of the customer’s power platforms by the Company at the end of the term of the agreement. The fee is payable in installments over the term of the agreement.
(6) We pay $3.2 million in annual dividends on our Series B Preferred Stock, if and when declared. The $3.2 million annual dividend payment, if dividends are declared, has not been included in this table as we cannot reasonably determine when or if we will be able to convert the Series B Preferred Stock into shares of our common stock. We may, at our option, convert these shares into the number of shares of our common stock that are issuable at the then prevailing conversion rate if the closing price of our common stock exceeds 150% of the then prevailing conversion price ($1,692 per share at October 31, 2021) for 20 trading days during any consecutive 30 trading day period.
Term and Construction Loans
A discussion of the key terms and conditions of the loans outstanding as of October 31, 2021 is included in Note 14. “Debt and Financing Obligations” to the consolidated financial statements and is incorporated by reference herein. The information included under the headings “Orion Energy Partners Investment Agent, LLC Credit Agreement,” “Connecticut Green Bank Loans,” “Bridgeport Fuel Cell Project Loans,” “State of Connecticut Loan,” “Liberty Bank Promissory Note” and “Finance obligations for sale-leaseback agreements” in Note 14. “Debt and Financing Obligations” to the consolidated financial statements is incorporated herein by reference.
Restricted Cash
We have pledged approximately $28.0 million of our cash and cash equivalents as performance security and for letters of credit for certain banking requirements and contracts. As of October 31, 2021, outstanding letters of credit totaled $6.5 million. These expire on various dates through December 2028. Under the terms of certain contracts, we will provide performance security for future contractual obligations. The restricted cash balance as of October 31, 2021 also included $8.4 million primarily to support obligations under the power purchase and service agreements related to the PNC and Crestmark sale-leaseback transactions and $11.9 million relating to future obligations associated with the Bridgeport Fuel Cell Project. Refer to Note 21. “Restricted Cash” for a detailed discussion of the Company’s restricted cash balance.
Power purchase agreements
Under the terms of our PPAs, customers agree to purchase power from our fuel cell power plants at negotiated rates. Electricity rates are generally a function of the customers’ current and estimated future electricity pricing available from the grid. We are responsible for all operating costs necessary to maintain, monitor and repair our fuel cell power platforms. Under certain agreements, we are also responsible for procuring fuel, generally natural gas or biogas, to run our fuel cell power platforms. In addition, under certain agreements, we are required to produce minimum amounts of power under our PPAs and we have the right to terminate PPAs by giving written notice to the customer, subject to certain exit costs. As of October 31, 2021, our generation operating portfolio was 34.0 MW.
Service and warranty agreements
We warranty our products for a specific period of time against manufacturing or performance defects. Our standard U.S. warranty period is generally 15 months after shipment or 12 months after acceptance of the product. In addition to the standard product warranty, we have contracted with certain customers to provide services to ensure the power plants meet minimum operating levels for terms of up to 20 years. Pricing for service contracts is based upon estimates of future costs, which could be materially different from actual expenses. Refer to “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” for additional details.
Advanced Technologies contracts
We have contracted with various government agencies and certain companies from private industry to conduct research and development as either a prime contractor or sub-contractor under multi-year, cost-reimbursement and/or cost-share type contracts or cooperative agreements. Cost-share terms require that participating contractors share the total cost of the project based on an agreed upon ratio. In many cases, we are reimbursed only a portion of the costs incurred or to be incurred on the contract. While government research and development contracts may extend for many years, funding is
often provided incrementally on a year-by-year basis if contract terms are met and Congress authorizes the funds. As of October 31, 2021, Advanced Technologies contract backlog totaled $40.8 million, of which $17.6 million is non-U.S. Government-funded, $23.0 million is U.S. Government-funded and $0.2 million is U.S. Government-unfunded. The amount that is non-U.S. Government-funded includes $10.0 million of milestone payments under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement that are contingent upon achieving technical milestones. If funding is terminated or delayed or if business initiatives change, we may choose to devote resources to other activities, including internally funded research and development.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet debt or similar obligations which are not classified as debt. We do not guarantee any third-party debt. See Note 22. “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended October 31, 2021 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are used in accounting for, among other things, revenue recognition, contract loss accruals, excess, slow-moving and obsolete inventories, product warranty accruals, loss accruals on service agreements, share-based compensation expense, allowance for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization, impairment of goodwill and in-process research and development intangible assets, impairment of long-lived assets (including project assets), lease liabilities and right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, and contingencies. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the period they are determined to be necessary. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making estimates, actual results in future periods may differ from those estimates.
Our critical accounting policies are those that are both most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our accounting policies are set forth below.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired in a business combination and is reviewed for impairment at least annually. The intangible asset represents indefinite-lived in-process research and development for cumulative research and development efforts associated with the development of solid oxide fuel cell stationary power generation and is also reviewed at least annually for impairment.
Accounting Standards Codification Topic 350, "Intangibles - Goodwill and Other" (“ASC 350”) permits the assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether events and circumstances lead to the conclusion that it is necessary to perform the goodwill impairment test required under ASC 350.
The Company completed its annual impairment analysis of goodwill and in-process research and development assets as of July 31, 2021. The Company performed a qualitative assessment for fiscal year 2021 and determined that it was more likely than not that there was no impairment of goodwill or the indefinite-lived intangible asset.
Impairment of Long Lived Assets (including Project Assets)
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset group may not be recoverable, we compare the carrying amount of an asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows, excluding interest costs, expected to be generated by the asset group and their ultimate disposition. If the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset group. During the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded certain project asset impairment charges. Refer to Note 7. “Project Assets” for details on these charges.
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606: Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”) effective as of November 1, 2018. Under Topic 606: Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the amount of revenue recognized for any goods or services reflects the consideration that the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods and services. To achieve this core principle, the Company applies the following five-step approach: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
A contract is accounted for when there has been approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Performance obligations under a contract are identified based on the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. In certain instances, the Company has concluded distinct goods or services should be accounted for as a single performance obligation that is a series of distinct goods or services that have the same pattern of transfer to the customer. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods or services, the Company must apply judgment to determine whether the customer can benefit from the goods or services either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (the goods or services are distinct) and if the promise to transfer the goods or services to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (the goods or services are distinct in the context of the contract). If these criteria are not met, the promised services are accounted for as a single performance obligation. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration that the Company will be entitled to in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, the Company estimates the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price, generally utilizing the expected value method. Determining the transaction price requires judgment. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling price is determined by the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately. If the standalone selling price is not observable through past transactions, the Company estimates the standalone selling price by taking into account available information such as market conditions and internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations. Performance obligations are satisfied either over time or at a point in time as discussed in further detail below. In addition, the Company’s contracts with customers generally do not include significant financing components or non-cash consideration. The Company has elected practical expedients in the accounting guidance that allow for revenue to be recorded in the amount that the Company has a right to invoice, if that amount corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the Company’s performance to date, and that allow the Company not to disclose related unsatisfied performance obligations. The Company records any amounts that are billed to customers in excess of revenue recognized as deferred revenue and revenue recognized in excess of amounts billed to customers as unbilled receivables.
Revenue streams are classified as follows:
Product. Includes the sale of completed project assets, sale and installation of fuel cell power platforms including site engineering and construction services, and the sale of modules, BOP components and spare parts to customers.
Service. Includes performance under long-term service agreements for power platforms owned by third parties.
License and royalty. Includes license fees and royalty income from the licensure of intellectual property.
Generation. Includes the sale of electricity under PPAs and utility tariffs from project assets retained by the Company. This also includes revenue received from the sale of other value streams from these assets including the sale of heat, steam, capacity and renewable energy credits.
Advanced Technologies. Includes revenue from customer-sponsored and government-sponsored Advanced Technologies projects.
See below for a discussion of revenue recognition under Topic 606 by disaggregated revenue stream.
Completed project assets
Contracts for the sale of completed project assets include the sale of the project asset, the assignment of the service agreement, and the assignment of the PPA. The relative stand-alone selling price is estimated and is used as the basis for allocation of the contract consideration. Revenue is recognized upon the satisfaction of the performance obligations, which includes the transfer of control of the project asset to the customer, which is when the contract is signed and the PPA is assigned to the customer. See below for further discussion regarding revenue recognition for service agreements.
Contractual payments related to the sale of the project asset and assignment of the PPA are generally received up-front. Payment terms for service agreements are generally ratable over the term of the agreement.
Service agreements
Service agreements represent a single performance obligation whereby the Company performs all required maintenance and monitoring functions, including replacement of modules, to ensure the power platform(s) under the service agreement generate a minimum power output. To the extent the power platform(s) under service agreements do not achieve the minimum power output, certain service agreements include a performance guarantee penalty. Performance guarantee penalties represent variable consideration, which is estimated for each service agreement based on past experience, using the expected value method. The consideration for each service agreement is recognized over time using costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion to measure progress.
The Company reviews its cost estimates on service agreements on a quarterly basis and records any changes in estimates on a cumulative catch-up basis.
Loss accruals for service agreements are recognized to the extent that the estimated remaining costs to satisfy the performance obligation exceed the estimated remaining unrecognized consideration. Estimated losses are recognized in the period in which losses are identified.
Payment terms for service agreements are generally ratable over the term of the agreement.
Advanced Technologies contracts
Advanced Technologies contracts include the promise to perform research and development services and, as such, this represents one performance obligation. Revenue from most government sponsored Advanced Technologies projects is recognized as direct costs are incurred plus allowable overhead less cost share requirements, if any. Revenue is only recognized to the extent the contracts are funded. Revenue from previous fixed price Advanced Technologies projects is recognized using the cost to cost input method. Revenue recognition for research performed under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement (as defined elsewhere herein) also falls into the practical expedient category where revenue is recorded consistent with the amounts that are to be invoiced.
Payments are based on costs incurred for government sponsored Advanced Technologies projects and upon completion of milestones for previous fixed-price Advanced Technologies projects. Payments under the EMRE Joint Development Agreement are based on time spent and material costs incurred.
License agreements
The Company entered into the License Agreements (as defined elsewhere herein) with POSCO Energy Co., Ltd. (“POSCO Energy”) in 2007, 2009 and 2012. In June 2020, the Company notified POSCO Energy that it was terminating the License Agreements and POSCO Energy disputed such termination (for more information, refer to Note 22. “Commitments and Contingencies” and Note 24. “Subsequent Events”).
Prior to the date of the Company’s notice of termination, in connection with the adoption of Topic 606, several performance obligations were identified under the License Agreements, including previously satisfied performance obligations for the transfer of licensed intellectual property, two performance obligations for specified upgrades of the previously licensed intellectual property, a performance obligation to deliver unspecified upgrades to the previously licensed intellectual
property on a when-and-if-available basis, and a performance obligation to provide technical support for previously delivered intellectual property.
● The performance obligations related to the specified upgrades would have been satisfied and the related consideration recognized as revenue upon the delivery of the specified upgrades. The Company did not recognize any revenue in fiscal years 2021 and 2020 related to specified upgrades.
● The performance obligations for unspecified upgrades and technical support were being recognized on a straight-line basis over the license term on the basis that this represented the method that best depicted the progress towards completion of the related performance obligations. The Company recognized revenue totaling $0.8 million for the year ended October 31, 2020 related to unspecified upgrades and technical support.
All fixed consideration for the License Agreements was previously collected. The Company discontinued revenue recognition of the deferred license revenue related to the License Agreements in July 2020 given the then pending arbitrations.
The Company entered into the EMRE Joint Development Agreement on November 5, 2019. The Company recorded license revenue of $4.0 million in association with this agreement for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020 which revenue was considered at a point-in-time upon the signing of the contract as the license is considered functional intellectual property because it has standalone functionality. The customer can use this intellectual property as it exists at a point in time and no further services are required from the Company.
Effective as of June 11, 2019, the Company entered into a License Agreement with EMRE (the “EMRE License Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company agreed, subject to the terms of the EMRE License Agreement, to grant EMRE and its affiliates a non-exclusive, worldwide, fully paid, perpetual, irrevocable, non-transferrable license and right to use the Company’s patents, data, know-how, improvements, equipment designs, methods, processes and the like to the extent it is useful to research, develop, and commercially exploit carbonate fuel cells in applications in which the fuel cells concentrate carbon dioxide from industrial and power sources and for any other purpose attendant thereto or associated therewith. Such right and license is sublicensable to third parties performing work for or with EMRE or its affiliates, but shall not otherwise be sublicensable. Upon the payment by EMRE to the Company of $10.0 million, which was received by the Company on June 14, 2019, EMRE and its affiliates were fully vested in the rights and licenses granted in the EMRE License Agreement, and any further obligations under the EMRE License Agreement are considered by the Company to be minimal. As a result, the total contract value of $10.0 million was recorded as revenue for the year ended October 31, 2019.
Generation revenue
For certain project assets where customers purchase electricity from the Company under PPAs, the Company has determined that these agreements should be accounted for as operating leases pursuant to ASC 842, Leases. Revenue is recognized when electricity has been delivered based on the amount of electricity delivered at rates specified under the contracts, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are met. Generation sales, to the extent the related PPAs are within the scope of Topic 606, are recognized as revenue in the period in which the Company provides the electricity and completes the performance obligation, which is the same as the monthly amount billed to customers.
Variable Interest Entity and Noncontrolling Interests
The Company closed on a tax equity financing transaction in August 2021 for the 7.4 MW fuel cell project (the “Groton Project”) located on the U.S. Navy Submarine Base in Groton, CT, which has been structured as a “partnership flip.” A partnership (the “Groton Partnership”) was organized with East West Bancorp, Inc. (“East West Bank”) to acquire from FuelCell Energy Finance II, LLC all of the outstanding equity interests in Groton Station Fuel Cell, LLC (“Groton Project Company”). East West Bank has a conditional withdrawal right which they can exercise and which would require the Company to pay 101% of the amount contributed by East West Bank to date. In addition, under this partnership flip structure, the Company has an option to acquire all of the equity interests that East West Bank holds in the Groton Partnership starting approximately five and a half years after the Groton Project is operational. If the Company exercises this option, the exercise price to be paid by the Company will be the greater of (1) the fair market value of East West
Bank’s equity interest at the time the option is exercised, (2) five percent of the $15 million tax equity commitment and (3) East West Bank’s claim in liquidation determined using the hypothetical liquidation at book value method.
The Groton Partnership is a Variable Interest Entity (VIE) under U.S. GAAP. The Company has determined that it is the primary beneficiary in the Groton Partnership for accounting purposes. The Company has considered the provisions within the financing-related agreements (including the limited liability company agreement for the Groton Partnership) which grant the Company power to manage and make decisions affecting the operations of the Groton Partnership. The Company considers the rights granted to East West Bank under the agreements to be more protective in nature than participatory. Therefore, the Company has determined under the power and benefits criterion of Accounting Standards Codification 810, Consolidations that it is the primary beneficiary of the Groton Partnership. As the primary beneficiary, the Company consolidates in its consolidated financial statements the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the Groton Partnership, and all intercompany balances and transactions between the Company and the Groton Partnership are eliminated in the consolidated financial statements. The Company recognized East West Bank’s share of the net assets of the Groton Partnership, which is $3.0 million as of October 31, 2021, as a noncontrolling interest in mezzanine equity on its Consolidated Balance Sheet and will continue to do so until the conditional withdrawal period lapses at the commencement of operations. Upon commencement of operations of the related project asset, the Company expects to allocate profits and losses to the noncontrolling interest under the hypothetical liquidation at book value ("HLBV") method. HLBV is a balance sheet-oriented approach for allocating net income or loss to the noncontrolling interest when there is a complex structure, such as the partnership flip structure.
See Note. 4 “Tax Equity Financing” for additional information regarding the tax equity financing transaction with East West Bank.
Sale-Leaseback Accounting
The Company, through certain wholly-owned subsidiaries, has entered into sale-leaseback transactions for commissioned project assets where we have entered into a PPA with a customer who is both the site host and end user of the power. Due to the Company not meeting criteria to account for the transfer of the project assets as a sale, sale accounting is precluded. Accordingly, the Company uses the financing method to account for these transactions.
Under the financing method of accounting for a sale-leaseback, the Company does not derecognize the project assets and does not recognize as revenue any of the sale proceeds received from the lessor that contractually constitutes payment to acquire the assets subject to these arrangements. Instead, the sale proceeds received are accounted for as financing obligations and leaseback payments made by the Company are allocated between interest expense and a reduction to the financing obligation. Interest on the financing obligation is calculated using the Company’s incremental borrowing rate at the inception of the arrangement on the outstanding financing obligation. While we receive financing for the related project asset, we have not recognized revenue on the sale-leaseback transactions. Instead, revenue is recognized with respect to the related PPAs in accordance with the Company’s policies for recognizing generation revenues.
Inventories
Inventories consist principally of raw materials and work-in-process. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out cost method. Included in our inventory balance are used modules that are brought back into inventory upon installation of new modules. When a new module is installed, a determination is made as to whether the module has remaining useful life or should be scrapped and materials recycled. Modules that are deemed to have remaining useful life are put into inventory at an estimated value based on the expected remaining life of the module and its projected output. Inventories are reviewed to determine if valuation allowances are required for excess, obsolete, and slow-moving inventory. This review includes analyzing inventory levels of individual parts considering the current design of our products and production requirements as well as the expected inventory requirements for maintenance on installed power platforms and inventory will be recorded at a new cost basis if a valuation allowance is required.
Service Expense Recognition
We have entered into service agreements with certain customers to provide monitoring, maintenance and repair services for fuel cell power platforms. Under the terms of these service agreements, the power platform must meet a minimum operating output during the term. If the minimum output falls below the contract requirement, we may be subject to performance penalties or may be required to repair and/or replace the customer’s fuel cell module.
The Company records loss accruals for service agreements when the estimated cost of future module exchanges and maintenance and monitoring activities exceeds the remaining unrecognized contract value. Estimates for future costs on service agreements are determined by a number of factors including the estimated remaining life of the module, used replacement modules available, and future operating plans for the power platform. Our estimates are performed on a contract by contract basis and include cost assumptions based on what we anticipate the service requirements will be to fulfill obligations for each contract. As of October 31, 2021 and 2020 our loss accruals on service agreements totaled $6.5 million and $5.5 million, respectively.
ACCOUNTING GUIDANCE UPDATE
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13 (ASU 2016-13), “Measurement of Credit Losses (Topic 326) on Financial Instruments,” which replaces the existing incurred impairment model for trade receivables with an expected loss model which requires the use of forward-looking information to calculate expected credit loss estimates. The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 as of November 1, 2020, which had no impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Guidance Not Yet Effective
There is no recent accounting guidance not yet effective that is expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements when adopted.