ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis represents an overview of the financial condition and the results of operations of First Commonwealth, and its subsidiaries, as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019. The purpose of this discussion is to focus on information concerning our financial condition and results of operations that is not readily apparent from the Consolidated Financial Statements. In order to obtain a more thorough understanding of this discussion, you should refer to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the notes thereto and other financial information presented in this Annual Report. Refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020 for a discussion and analysis of the factors that affected periods prior to 2019.
Company Overview
First Commonwealth provides a diversified array of consumer and commercial banking services through our bank subsidiary, FCB. We also provide trust and wealth management services through FCB and insurance products through FCIA. At December 31, 2020, FCB operated 120 community banking offices throughout western and central Pennsylvania and northeastern, central and southwestern Ohio, as well as loan production offices in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Cleveland, Columbus, Canton, Lewis Center, Hudson and Westlake, Ohio.
Our consumer services include Internet, mobile and telephone banking, an automated teller machine network, personal checking accounts, interest-earning checking accounts, savings accounts, health savings accounts, insured money market accounts, debit cards, investment certificates, fixed and variable rate certificates of deposit, mortgage loans, secured and unsecured installment loans, construction and real estate loans, safe deposit facilities, credit cards, credit lines with overdraft checking protection and IRA accounts. Commercial banking services include commercial lending, small and high-volume business checking accounts, on-line account management services, ACH origination, payroll direct deposit, commercial cash management services and repurchase agreements. We also provide a variety of trust and asset management services and a full complement of auto, home and business insurance as well as term life insurance. We offer annuities, mutual funds and stock and bond brokerage services through an arrangement with a broker-dealer and insurance brokers. Most of our commercial customers are small and mid-sized businesses in Pennsylvania and Ohio.
As a financial institution with a focus on traditional banking activities, we earn the majority of our revenue through net interest income, which is the difference between interest earned on loans and investments and interest paid on deposits and borrowings. Growth in net interest income is dependent upon balance sheet growth and maintaining or increasing our net interest margin, which is net interest income (on a fully taxable-equivalent basis) as a percentage of our average interest-earning assets. We also generate revenue through fees earned on various services and products that we offer to our customers and, less frequently, through sales of assets, such as loans, investments or properties. These revenue sources are offset by provisions for credit losses on loans, operating expenses, income taxes and, less frequently, loss on sale or other-than-temporary impairments on investment securities.
General economic conditions also affect our business by impacting our customers’ need for financing, thus affecting loan growth, as well as impacting the credit strength of existing and potential borrowers.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Accounting Estimates
First Commonwealth’s accounting and reporting policies conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and predominant practice in the banking industry. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Over time, these estimates, assumptions and judgments may prove to be inaccurate or vary from actual results and may significantly affect our reported results and financial position for the period presented or in future periods. We currently view the determination of the allowance for credit losses to be critical because it is highly dependent on subjective or complex judgments, assumptions and estimates made by management.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We account for the credit risk associated with our lending activities through the allowance and provision for credit losses. The allowance represents management’s best estimate of expected losses in our existing loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. The provision is a periodic charge to earnings in an amount necessary to maintain the allowance at a level that is appropriate
based on management’s assessment of expected losses. Management determines and reviews with the Board of Directors the appropriateness of the allowance on a quarterly basis in accordance with the methodology described below.
•Loans are segmented into groups with similar characteristics and risks and an allowance for credit losses is calculated for each segment based on the estimate of credit losses.
•The allowance for credit losses is calculated by pooling loans of similar credit risk characteristics and applying a discounted cash flow methodology after incorporating probability of default and loss given default estimates. Probability of default represents an estimate of the likelihood of default and loss given default measures the expected loss upon default. Inputs impacting the expected losses includes a forecast of macroeconomic factors, using a weighted forecast from a nationally recognized firm.
•Loans that do not have the same risks and characteristics of the loan pools are individually reviewed. These are generally large balance commercial loans and commercial mortgages that are rated less than “satisfactory” based on our internal credit-rating process.
•We assess whether the loans identified for review are “nonperforming,”. This means it is expected that all amounts will not be collected according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement, which generally represents loans that management has placed on nonaccrual status and accruing troubled debt restructurings.
•For individually analyzed loans we calculate the estimated fair value of the loans that are selected for review based on observable market prices, discounted cash flows or the value of the underlying collateral and record an allowance if needed.
•We then review the results to determine the appropriate balance of the allowance for credit losses. This review includes consideration of additional factors, such as the mix of loans in the portfolio, the balance of the allowance relative to total loans and nonperforming assets, trends in the overall risk profile in the portfolio, trends in delinquencies and nonaccrual loans, and local and national economic information and industry data, including trends in the industries we believe are higher risk.
There are many factors affecting the allowance for credit losses; some are quantitative, while others require qualitative judgment. These factors require the use of estimates related to the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, appraised values on nonperforming loans, estimated losses for each loan category based on historical loss experience by category, forecasts of economic trends and conditions, all of which may be susceptible to significant judgment and change. To the extent that actual outcomes differ from estimates, additional provisions for credit losses could be required that could adversely affect our earnings or financial position in future periods.
Results of Operations-2020 Compared to 2019
Net Income
Net income for 2020 was $73.4 million, or $0.75 per diluted share, as compared to net income of $105.3 million, or $1.07 per diluted share in 2019. The decline in net income was the result of $42.2 million in provision for credit losses recognized in order to provide for estimated losses related to the COVID-19 pandemic and expenses of $3.4 million and $2.7 million related to the voluntary early retirement program and branch consolidation initiatives, respectively. Partially offsetting the higher level of expenses was an increase in noninterest income of $9.0 million, due to gains on sale of mortgage loans of $18.8 million in 2020 compared to $7.8 million in 2019.
Our return on average equity was 6.8% and our return on average assets was 0.82% for 2020, compared to 10.3% and 1.31%, respectively, for 2019.
Average diluted shares for the year 2020 were 1% less than the comparable period in 2019 primarily due to $20.9 million of common stock buybacks completed during 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income, which is our primary source of revenue, is the difference between interest income from earning assets (loans and securities) and interest expense paid on liabilities (deposits, short-term borrowings and long-term debt). The amount of net interest income is affected by both changes in the level of interest rates and the amount and composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The net interest margin is expressed as the percentage of net interest income, on a fully taxable equivalent basis, to average interest-earning assets. To compare the tax exempt asset yields to taxable yields, amounts are adjusted to the pretax equivalent amounts based on the marginal corporate federal income tax rate of 21%. The taxable equivalent adjustment to net interest income for 2020 was $1.5 million compared to $1.7 million in 2019. Net interest income comprises a majority of our operating revenue (net interest income before provision expense plus noninterest income) at 74% and 76% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net interest income, on a fully taxable equivalent basis, was $269.7 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020, a $1.9 million, or 1%, decrease compared to $271.6 million for the same period in 2019. The net interest margin, on a fully taxable equivalent basis, decreased 43 basis points to 3.32% in 2020 from 3.75% in 2019. The net interest margin is affected by both changes in the level of interest rates and the amount and composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
The impact of growth in interest-earning assets in 2020 was offset by the effect of the mix of the asset growth and lower interest rates, resulting in a decrease in the net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020. Average earning assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $878.9 million, or 12%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in the volume of interest-earning assets positively increased net interest income by $42.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, while changes in rates negatively impacted net interest income by $44.8 million. Interest-sensitive assets totaling $2.6 billion will either reprice or mature over the next twelve months.
The taxable equivalent yield on interest-earning assets was 3.72% for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 79 basis points from the 4.51% yield for the same period in 2019. This decrease is largely due to a decrease in the loan portfolio yield, which declined by 80 basis points compared to the prior year. Contributing to this decrease was the decline in the yield on our adjustable and variable rate commercial loan portfolios, which decreased by 95 basis points largely due to the Federal Reserve decreasing short-term interest rates. During the first quarter of 2020, the Federal Reserve decreased the federal funds target rate by 150 basis points in addition to the 75 basis point in rate decreases made during 2019.
The loan yield for the year ended December 31, 2020 was also impacted by $589.1 million in Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") loans originated under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") which have a stated loan rate of 1% and a yield of 3.2% for the year ended December 31 2020. The yield on PPP loans includes the recognition of PPP loan deferred processing fees, net of deferred origination costs, of $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These amounts are recognized in interest income as a yield adjustment over the life of the loan with accelerated recognition when a loan is forgiven or paid off. As of December 31, 2020, we expect to recognize additional PPP-related deferred processing fees, net of origination costs, of approximately $10.4 million as an adjustment to yield over the remaining life of the loans. At December 31, 2020, the balance of PPP loans outstanding totaled $478.9 million. PPP loans increased the average balance of loans by $382.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, decreasing the loan portfolio yield by 6 basis points and the net interest margin by 1 basis point.
The investment portfolio yield decreased 53 basis points in comparison to the prior year as a result of the decrease in short-term interest rates. Investment portfolio purchases during the year ended December 31, 2020 have been primarily in obligations of US government agencies, obligations of other government-sponsored enterprises and obligations of states and political subdivisions with durations of approximately 4 to 11 years. Additionally, as a result of excess liquidity caused by significant growth in deposits during 2020, the average balance of interest-bearing deposits with banks has increased from $15.8 million in 2019 to $179.2 million in 2020. The impact of the level and rate paid on interest-bearing deposits with banks decreased the yield on interest-earnings assets by 8 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Decreases in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities partially offset the negative impact of lower yields on interest-earning assets. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.58% for the year-ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.03% for the same period in 2019. Lower market interest rates resulted in the cost of interest-bearing deposits decreasing 36 basis points and short-term borrowings decreasing 163 basis points in comparison to the same period in the prior year. Deposit growth due to the retention of PPP loan proceeds and the deposit of Federal stimulus checks, as well as deposits acquired in the third quarter of 2019 acquisition of Santander branches, combined to contribute to a decline in average short-term borrowings of $248.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Lower market interest rates and management's efforts to reduce deposit costs resulted in the cost of interest-bearing deposits decreasing 42 basis points and in the cost of short-term borrowings decreasing 163 basis points in comparison to the same period last year. The decline in short-term interest rates impacted the cost of long-term debt, decreasing the cost by 41 basis points.
Comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 with the same period in 2019, changes in rates negatively impacted net interest income by $44.8 million. The lower yield on interest-earning assets decreased net interest income by $64.3 million, while the decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities positively impacted net interest income by $19.5 million.
Changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities positively increased net interest income by $42.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Higher levels of interest-earning assets resulted in an increase of $39.9 million in interest income, and changes in the volume of interest-bearing liabilities decreased interest expense by $3.0 million, primarily due to a decreases in short-term borrowings and time deposits.
Positively affecting net interest income was a $586.9 million increase in average net free funds at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019. Average net free funds are the excess of noninterest-bearing demand deposits, other noninterest-bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity over noninterest-earning assets. The largest component of the increase in net free funds was a $551.9 million increase in average noninterest-bearing demand deposits primarily due to deposit growth
related to PPP loan proceeds as well as $86.6 million in deposits attributed to the Santander branch acquisition completed in the third quarter of 2019. Average time deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $137.4 million, or 16%, compared to the comparable period in 2019, while the average rate paid on time deposits decreased 28 basis points. Over the next twelve months, $419.1 million in certificates of deposits are scheduled to mature.
The following table reconciles interest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income to net interest income adjusted to a fully taxable equivalent basis for the periods presented:
The following table provides information regarding the average balances and yields or rates on interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the periods ended December 31:
(a)Income on interest-earning assets has been computed on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the federal income tax statutory rate of 21%.
(b)Income on nonaccrual loans is accounted for on the cash basis, and the loan balances are included in interest-earning assets.
(c)Loan income includes loan fees.
(d)Average balances do not include reallocations from noninterest-bearing demand deposits and interest-bearing demand deposits into savings deposits which were made for regulatory purposes.
(e)Includes held for sale loans.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding changes in net interest income attributable to changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and changes in the rates for the periods indicated:
(a)Changes in interest income or expense not arising solely as a result of volume or rate variances are allocated to rate variances.
(b)Changes in interest income have been computed on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the 21% federal income tax statutory rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is determined based on management’s estimates of the appropriate level of the allowance for credit losses needed to provide for expected losses inherent in the loan portfolio and on off-balance sheet commitments. The provision for credit losses is an amount added to the allowance against which credit losses are charged.
The provision for credit losses for loans for the year 2020 totaled $53.5 million, an increase of $38.9 million, or 267.9%, compared to the year 2019. The level of provision expense for the year-ended December 31, 2020 is primarily a result of $17.2 million in net charge-offs and an increase in the allowance for credit losses resulting from the implementation of CECL. The expected loss methodology under CECL uses an economic forecast which incorporates the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Provision expense for the commercial, financial, agricultural and other category was impacted by net charge-offs of $6.0 million, offset by a decrease in outstanding balances, excluding PPP loans. Because PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the Small Business Administration ("SBA"), there is no allowance for credit losses recognized for these loans. Provision expense for the commercial real estate category is a result of $4.6 million in net charge-offs and a $21.1 million increase in qualitative reserves due to additional risks related to loans that may be impacted by COVID-19, such as hospitality and retail real estate loans. Net charge-offs related to loans to individuals were $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, including $3.2 million for indirect auto loans and $1.3 million related to personal lines of credit. The provision expense for loans to individuals was also impacted by growth in the portfolio of $116.4 million as well as increased qualitative reserves due to additional risks related to COVID-19.
The table below provides a breakout of the provision for credit losses by loan category for the years ended December 31:
Prior to our January 1, 2020 adoption of CECL, the allowance for credit loss calculation, and resulting provision expense, was based on an incurred loss model. The level of provision expense for the year-ended December 31, 2019 is primarily a result of $10.7 million in net charge-offs, growth in the loan portfolio and an increase in the qualitative reserves as a result of increasing economic risks not captured in the quantitative model. Provision expense for the commercial, financial, agricultural, and other category was impacted by net charge-offs of $3.1 million and $103.4 million growth in the portfolio. The provision expense for the commercial real estate category is primarily due to $1.8 million in net charge-offs and a $0.8 million increase in qualitative reserves. Net charge-offs related to loans to individuals were $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, including $2.6 million related to indirect auto loans and $1.9 million related to personal lines of credit. The provision expense for loans to individuals was also impacted by growth in the portfolio of $108.6 million.
The allowance for credit losses was $101.3 million, or 1.50%, of total loans outstanding at December 31, 2020, compared to $51.6 million, or 0.83%, at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans increased to 0.80% at December 31, 2020 from 0.52% at December 31, 2019. The allowance to nonperforming loan ratio was 187.4% as of December 31, 2020 and 160.3% at December 31, 2019. Net charge-offs were $17.2 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020 compared to $10.7 million for the same period in 2019.
The 2020 provision is a result of management's estimate of credit losses over the contractual life of the loan portfolio. The change in the allowance for credit is impacted by estimated expected losses in the portfolio determined by a discounted cash flow analysis considering inputs such as contractual payment schedules, prepayment estimates, historical loss experience, calculated probability of default and loss given default estimates and forecasts for certain macroeconomic variables, such as unemployment, gross domestic product, the housing price index as well as other macroeconomic variables.
Upon adoption of CECL at January 1, 2020, the provision for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures are recorded as part of the provision for credit losses instead of a component of non-interest expense as it previously was recorded. The provision for credit losses recorded for off-balance sheet credit exposures totaled $3.2 million for 2020.
Management believes that the allowance for credit losses is at a level deemed appropriate to absorb expected losses inherent in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
A detailed analysis of our credit loss experience for the previous five years is shown below:
Noninterest Income
The components of noninterest income for each year in the three-year period ended December 31 are as follows:
Noninterest income, excluding net securities gains, gain on sale of loans and other assets and the derivatives mark to market, remained relatively flat, increasing $0.2 million in 2020. Card-related interchange income increased $2.3 million, due to growth in customer accounts and transactions, including $1.4 million attributable to the Santander acquisition in September 2019. Trust income increased $0.8 million, primarily due to customer growth. Service charges on deposit accounts decreased $2.5 million, despite a $0.7 million increase attributable to the Santander acquisition in 2019. The lower level of service charges on deposit accounts is a result of customers maintaining higher deposit balances due to CARES Act stimulus and lower consumer spending during 2020. Swap fee income decreased $1.8 million due to declines in interest rate swaps entered into for our commercial customers.
Total noninterest income increased $9.0 million, or 11%, in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019. The most significant change, other than the changes noted above, include an increase of $11.0 million in gain on sale of mortgage loans as a result of growth in our mortgage lending area. The mark to market adjustment on interest rate swaps entered into for our commercial customers resulted in a decrease of $2.3 million. This adjustment does not reflect a realized loss on the swaps, but rather relates to a change in fair value due to movements in corporate bond spreads and swap rates as well as changes in counterparty credit risk.
If the Company's total assets would equal or exceed $10 billion we would no longer qualify for exemption from the interchange fee cap included in the Dodd-Frank Act. We estimate the application of the interchange fee cap would have decreased interchange income by approximately $10.7 million in 2020.
Noninterest Expense
The components of noninterest expense for each year in the three-year period ended December 31 are as follows:
Noninterest expense, excluding the loss on sale or write-down of assets, litigation and operational losses, merger and acquisition expense, COVID-19, early retirement and branch consolidation expenses, increased $3.7 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Contributing to the 2020 increase is a $6.7 million increase in salaries and employee benefits resulting from annual merit increases and a $3.1 million increase in hospitalization expense. The Santander acquisition, in September 2019, accounted for $1.9 million of the salaries and employee benefit increase. Partially offsetting these increases in salaries and employee benefit expense was the deferral of $0.6 million in salary and benefit costs related to the origination of approximately 4,900 PPP loans during 2020. FDIC insurance increased $1.5 million as a result of growth in our deposits. Other operating expenses decreased $3.2 million, including $1.8 million less in meeting and travel expense and $0.5 million less in meals and entertainment expense due to a decline in these activities as a result of COVID-19. Also reducing the other operating expenses is a decrease in off-balance sheet commitment expense of $0.7 million. In 2020, as a result of the adoption of CECL, off-balance commitment expense is now recorded as part of provision for credit losses instead of non-interest expense, where it was previously recorded. Net occupancy expense decreased $1.3 million as a result of a decrease in building maintenance and repair expenses.
Total noninterest expense increased $5.9 million, or 3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Other than the changes noted above, increasing noninterest expense is $3.4 million related to the voluntary early retirement program and $2.7 million related to the branch consolidation initiative. The early retirement program was offered to all eligible employees who reached age 60 or above as of December 31, 2020. Approximately 72 employees elected to participate in the early retirement program, resulting in recognition of $3.0 million in severance and $0.4 million in hospitalization expense. The branch consolidation initiative included the combination of 28 of the Company's retail locations into nearby offices in December 2020 and the related expenses include write-downs of $1.4 million on owned properties and leasehold improvements and $0.8 million in lease terminations expense. Offsetting these increases is a $3.5 million decrease in merger-related expenses. Merger expenses in 2019 were the result of the Santander branch acquisition. Also decreasing noninterest expense is a $1.0 million decline in loss on sale or write-down of assets due to a $0.5 million write-down of an OREO property during 2019 with no similar activity in the current year. The year ended December 31, 2020 included $0.8 million in expenses incurred as part of dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily related to personal protective items such as masks and sanitizer for our employees and customers, cleaning and other items necessary for a safe work environment as well as professional fees related to dealing with COVID-19.
Income Tax
The provision for income taxes of $16.8 million in 2020 reflects a decrease of $8.8 million compared to the provision for income taxes in 2019, as a result of a $40.6 million decrease in the level of income before taxes.
The effective tax rate was 18.6% and 19.5% for tax expense in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We ordinarily generate an annual effective tax rate that is less than the statutory rate due to benefits resulting from tax-exempt interest and income from bank owned life insurance, which are relatively consistent regardless of the level of pretax income.
Financial Condition
First Commonwealth’s total assets increased $759.3 million in 2020. Loans, including loans held for sale, increased $589.5 million, or 9%, while interest bearing bank deposits increased $237.1 million. Loan growth in 2020 was impacted by the origination $589.1 million of PPP loans originated under the CARES Act. At December 31, 2020, outstanding PPP loans totaled $478.9 million. The increase in interest-bearing bank deposits can be attributed to the elevated customer deposit balances as a result of PPP loan proceeds and the deposit of Federal stimulus checks into customer deposit accounts.
During 2020, approximately $591.2 million in investment securities were sold, called or matured. Most of these securities were higher yielding securities in comparison to the total portfolio yield and, as such, their replacement contributed to the decrease in the yield earned on the portfolio. In total, $250.9 million in agency securities, $225.9 million in mortgage-backed securities, $19.8 million in municipal securities and $0.2 million in other securities were purchased in 2020 to help replace runoff from the portfolio while maintaining a reduced risk profile.
First Commonwealth’s total liabilities increased $746.4 million, or 10%, in 2020. Deposits increased $761.1 million, or 11%. This increase is primarily attributed to customer retention of PPP loan proceeds in deposit accounts and Federal stimulus checks. Short-term borrowings decreased $84.5 million, or 42%, largely due to the additional liquidity provided by the increase in deposits.
Total shareholders' equity increased $13.0 million in 2020. Growth in shareholders' equity was due to net income of $73.4 million and an $11.7 million increase in accumulated other comprehensive income, partially offset by $43.0 million in dividends declared, $20.9 million in stock repurchases and an $11.2 million charge related to the adoption of CECL.
Loan Portfolio
Following is a summary of our loan portfolio as of December 31:
The loan portfolio totaled $6.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, reflecting growth of $572.0 million, or 9%, compared to December 31, 2019. All categories experienced loan growth, except for real estate construction.
Commercial, financial, agricultural and other loans increased $314.1 million, or 25%, as a result of $478.9 million in PPP loans for small businesses who meet the necessary eligibility requirements. These loans carry a fixed rate of 1.00% and yielded 3.2% in 2020 after considering origination fees and costs recognized over the life of the loan or accelerated recognition at payoff or forgiveness. The SBA pays the originating bank a processing fee ranging from 1% to 5%, based on the size of loan. PPP loans are for a term of two or five years, if not forgiven, and payments are deferred for the first six months of the loan. Although the Company believes that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program, there could be risks and liabilities to the Company associated with participation in the program that cannot be determined at this time.
Residential real estate loans increased $69.2 million, or 4%, primarily due to originations of closed-end 1-4 family mortgage loans. Growth in the loans to individuals category of $116.4 million, or 17%, was the result of growth in indirect auto loans. Commercial real estate loans increased $94.1 million, or 4%, partially due to construction real estate loans that converted to permanent loans as well as growth in loans secured by multifamily residential properties.
The majority of our loan portfolio is with borrowers located in Pennsylvania. The Company also has a portion of its loan portfolio in Ohio as a result of four recent acquisitions in that state. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no concentrations of loans relating to any industry in excess of 10% of total loans.
Final loan maturities and rate sensitivities of the loan portfolio excluding consumer installment and mortgage loans at December 31, 2020 were as follows:
(a)The maturity of real estate construction loans include term commitments that follow the construction period. Loans with these term commitments will be moved to the commercial real estate category when the construction phase of the project is completed.
First Commonwealth has a legal lending limit of $146.2 million to any one borrower or closely related group of borrowers, but has established lower thresholds for credit risk management.
Nonperforming Loans
Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans and restructured loans. Nonaccrual loans represent loans on which interest accruals have been discontinued. Restructured loans are those loans whose terms have been renegotiated to provide a reduction or deferral of principal or interest as a result of the deteriorating financial position of the borrower under terms not available in the market.
We discontinue interest accruals on a loan when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to fully collect principal or interest due according to the contractual terms of the loan. Consumer loans are placed in nonaccrual status at 150 days past due. Other types of loans are typically placed in nonaccrual status when there is evidence of a significantly weakened financial condition or principal and interest is 90 days or more delinquent. Interest received on a nonaccrual loan is normally applied as a reduction to loan principal rather than interest income utilizing the cost recovery methodology of revenue recognition.
Nonperforming loans are closely monitored on an ongoing basis as part of our loan review and work-out process. The estimated credit loss on these loans is evaluated by comparing the loan balance to the fair value of any underlying collateral and the present value of projected future cash flows. Losses are recognized when a loss is expected and the amount is reasonably estimable.
The following is a comparison of nonperforming assets and the effects on interest due to nonaccrual loans for the period ended December 31:
(a)End of period loans and nonperforming loans exclude loans held for sale.
Nonperforming loans increased $21.8 million to $54.1 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $32.2 million at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans decreased to 0.8% from 0.5% at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Also included in nonperforming loans are TDRs, which are those loans whose terms have been renegotiated to provide a reduction or deferral of principal or interest as a result of the deteriorating financial position of the borrower under terms not available in the market. TDRs decreased $9.7 million during 2020. For additional information on TDRs please refer to Note 9 “Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses.”
In March 2020, the Company began offering short-term loan modifications to assist borrowers during the COVID-19 national
emergency. These modifications typically provide for the deferral of both principal and interest for 90 days. The CARES Act,
along with a joint agency statement issued by banking regulators, provides that modifications meeting certain criteria made in
response to COVID-19 do not need to be accounted for as a TDR. As of December 31, 2020 the Company has granted
approximately 6,800 deferrals to its customers with aggregate principal balances of $1.4 billion. Payment deferrals granted on
approximately 6,100 accounts or $1.2 billion in balances have expired as of December 31, 2020. It is possible that some of these deferrals will be extended in order to provide support for certain COVID-19 impacted customers.
Net charge-offs were $17.2 million in 2020 compared to $10.7 million for the year 2019. The most significant credit losses recognized during the year include $4.7 million in charge-offs recognized on two commercial real estate relationships and $5.3 million in charge-offs related to three commercial, financial, agricultural and other borrowers. Net charge-offs in the loans to individual category totaled $6.0 million for 2020, primarily due to charge-offs of indirect auto loans. Additional detail on credit risk is included in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under “Provision for Credit Losses,” “Allowance for Credit Losses" and "Credit Risk.”
Provision for credit losses on loans as a percentage of net charge-offs increased to 311.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 136.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Following is a summary of the allocation of the allowance for credit losses at December 31:
(a)Represents the ratio of loans in each category to total loans.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law, providing banking organizations with optional, temporary relief
from complying with CECL. The Company elected to defer its adoption of CECL until the fourth quarter 2020. At the end of the deferral period, CECL was adopted effective January 1, 2020, therefore December 31, 2020 results reflect a full years impact of accounting for the allowance for credit losses under CECL.
The allowance for credit losses increased $49.7 million from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. On January 1, 2020, as a result of the Company's adoption of CECL, the allowance for credit losses was increased by $13.4 million. This represents the difference between the incurred allowance as of December 31, 2019 and the CECL allowance as of January 1, 2020.
The allowance for credit losses as a percentage of end-of-period loans outstanding was 1.50% at December 31, 2020. The increase compared to December 31, 2019 is largely due to the impact of calculating the allowance at December 31, 2020 in accordance with CECL, which provides for expected losses over the life of a loan. Prior years allowance for credit losses was calculated to provide for credit losses as they were incurred. The allowance for credit losses includes both a general reserve for performing loans and specific reserves for nonperforming loans. Comparing December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019, the general reserve for performing loans is 0.80% of total performing loans for both periods. Specific reserves increased from 7.5% of nonperforming loans at December 31, 2019 to 9.1% of nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020. The allowance for credit losses as a percentage of nonperforming loans was 187.4% and 160.3% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The allowance for credit losses represents management’s estimate of expected losses in the loan portfolio at a specific point in time. This estimate includes losses associated with specifically identified loans, as well as estimated credit losses inherent in the remainder of the loan portfolio. Additions are made to the allowance through both periodic provisions charged to income and recoveries of losses previously incurred. Reductions to the allowance occur as loans are charged off. Management evaluates the appropriateness of the allowance at least quarterly, and in doing so relies on various factors including, but not limited to, assessment of historical loss experience, contractual payment schedules, prepayment estimates, calculated probability of default
and loss given default estimates and forecasts of certain macroeconomic variables, such as unemployment, gross domestic product, housing price index as well as other macroeconomic variables. This evaluation is subjective and requires material estimates that may change over time. For a description of the methodology used to calculate the allowance for credit losses, please refer to “Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Accounting Estimates-Allowance for Credit Losses for Loans.”
Investment Portfolio
Marketable securities that we hold in our investment portfolio, which are classified as “securities available for sale,” act as a source of liquidity. However, we do not anticipate liquidating the investments prior to maturity.
Following is a detail schedule of the amortized cost of securities available for sale as of December 31:
As of December 31, 2020, securities available for sale had a fair value of $831.2 million. Gross unrealized gains were $25.7 million and there were no gross unrealized losses.
The following is a schedule of the contractual maturity distribution of securities available for sale at December 31, 2020.
(a)Equities are excluded from this schedule because they have an indefinite maturity.
(b)Yields are calculated on a taxable equivalent basis.
Mortgage-backed securities, which include mortgage-backed obligations of U.S. Government agencies and obligations of U.S. Government-sponsored enterprises, have contractual maturities ranging from less than one year to approximately 30 years and have anticipated average lives to maturity ranging from less than one year to approximately eight years.
The available for sale investment portfolio amortized cost decreased $91.0 million, or 10%, at December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Available for sale investment purchases of $411.2 million were offset by the sale, call or maturity of $472.3 million in investments. Liquidity provided from sales, calls and maturities was utilized to fund growth in the loan portfolio or reinvested into investment securities and interest bearing deposits with banks.
Following is a detail schedule of the amortized cost of securities held to maturity as of December 31:
The following is a schedule of the contractual maturity distribution of securities held to maturity at December 31, 2020.
The held to maturity investment portfolio decreased $24.7 million, or 7%, at December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Held to maturity investment purchases of $85.7 million were offset by the sale, call or maturity of $118.9 million in investments.
See Note 8 “Investment Securities and Note 17 “Fair Values of Assets and Liabilities” for additional information related to the investment portfolio.
Deposits
Total deposits increased $761.1 million, or 11%, in 2020. Interest-bearing demand and savings deposits increased $404.2 million, noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased $629.7 million and time deposits decreased $272.9 million. The deposit increase is a result of elevated customer deposit balances from PPP loan proceeds and the deposit of Federal stimulus checks into our customers' deposit accounts. For additional information concerning our deposits, please refer to Note 13 “Interest-Bearing Deposits.”
Time deposits of $100 thousand or more had remaining maturities as follows as of the end of each year in the three-year period ended December 31:
Short-Term Borrowings and Long-Term Debt
Short-term borrowings decreased $84.5 million, or 42%, from $201.9 million at December 31, 2019 to $117.4 million at December 31, 2020. Long-term debt decreased $0.9 million, from $234.2 million at December 31, 2019 to $233.3 million at December 31, 2020. For additional information concerning our short-term borrowings, subordinated debentures and other long-term debt, please refer to Note 14 “Short-term Borrowings,” Note 15 “Subordinated Debentures” and Note 16 “Other Long-term Debt” of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The table below sets forth our contractual obligations to make future payments as of December 31, 2020. For a more detailed description of each category of obligation, refer to the note in our Consolidated Financial Statements indicated in the table below.
The table above excludes our cash obligations upon maturity of certificates of deposit, which is set forth in Note 13 “Interest-Bearing Deposits” of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In addition, see Note 10 “Commitments and Letters of Credit” for detail related to our off-balance sheet commitments to extend credit, financial standby letters of credit, performance standby letters of credit and commercial letters of credit as of December 31, 2020. Commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit and commercial letters of credit do not necessarily represent future cash requirements since it is unknown if the borrower will draw upon these commitments and often these commitments expire without being drawn upon. As of December 31, 2020, a reserve for expected credit losses of $7.4 million was recorded for unused commitments and letters of credit.
Liquidity
Liquidity refers to our ability to meet the cash flow requirements of depositors and borrowers as well as our operating cash needs with cost-effective funding. Liquidity risk arises from the possibility that we may not be able to meet our financial obligations and operating cash needs or may become overly reliant upon external funding sources. In order to manage this risk,
our Board of Directors has established a Liquidity Policy that identifies primary sources of liquidity, establishes procedures for monitoring and measuring liquidity and quantifies minimum liquidity requirements based on limits approved by our Board of Directors. This policy designates our Asset/Liability Committee (“ALCO”) as the body responsible for meeting these objectives. The ALCO, which includes members of executive management, reviews liquidity on a periodic basis and approves significant changes in strategies that affect balance sheet or cash flow positions. Liquidity is centrally managed on a daily basis by our Treasury Department, which monitors it by using such measures as a 30-day liquidity stress analysis, liquidity gap ratios and noncore funding ratios.
We generate funds to meet our cash flow needs primarily through the core deposit base of FCB and the maturity or repayment of loans and other interest-earning assets, including investments. Core deposits are the most stable source of liquidity a bank can have due to the long-term relationship with a deposit customer. The level of deposits during any period is sometimes influenced by factors outside of management’s control, such as the level of short-term and long-term market interest rates and yields offered on competing investments, such as money market mutual funds. Deposits increased $761.1 million, or 11%, during 2020, and comprised 93% of total liabilities at December 31, 2020, as compared to 92% at December 31, 2019. The increase in deposits in 2020 is a result of elevated customer deposit balances from PPP loan proceeds and the deposit of Federal stimulus checks into our customer's deposit accounts. Proceeds from the sale, maturity and redemption of investment securities totaled $591.2 million during 2020 and provided liquidity to fund loans, pay down short-term borrowings, purchase investment securities and fund depositor withdrawals.
We also have available unused wholesale sources of liquidity, including overnight federal funds and repurchase agreements, advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh, borrowings through the discount window at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and access to certificates of deposit through brokers. We have increased our borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve by establishing a Borrower-in-Custody of Collateral arrangement that enables us to pledge certain loans, not being used as collateral at the Federal Home Loan Bank, as collateral for borrowings at the Federal Reserve. At December 31, 2020 our borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve related to this program was $840.0 million and there were no amounts outstanding. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, our maximum borrowing capacity at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh was $1.5 billion and as of that date amounts used against this capacity included $0.1 billion in outstanding borrowings.
We participate in the Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Services (“CDARS”) program as part of an ALCO strategy to increase and diversify funding sources. As of December 31, 2020, our maximum borrowing capacity under this program was $0.9 billion and as of that date there was $4.5 million outstanding. We also participate in a reciprocal program which allows our depositors to receive expanded FDIC coverage by placing multiple certificates of deposit at other CDARS member banks. As of December 31, 2020, our outstanding certificates of deposits from this program have an average weighted rate of 0.51% and an average original term of 263 days.
We also have available unused federal funds lines with five correspondent banks. These lines have an aggregate commitment of $180.0 million and there were no amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2020. In addition, we have available unused repo lines with three correspondent banks. These lines have an aggregate commitment of $509.4 million with no outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020.
The liquidity needs of First Commonwealth on an unconsolidated basis (the "Parent Company") consist primarily of operating expenses, debt service payments and dividend payments to our stockholders, which totaled $50.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as any cash necessary to repurchase our shares, which totaled $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary source of liquidity for the Parent Company is dividends from subsidiaries. The Parent Company had $72.2 million in junior subordinated debentures and cash and interest-bearing deposits of $34.4 million at December 31, 2020. At the end of 2020, the Parent Company had a $20.0 million short-term, unsecured revolving line of credit with another financial institution. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under this line. The Parent Company has the ability to enhance its liquidity position by raising capital or incurring debt.
Refer to “Financial Condition” above for additional information concerning our deposits, loan portfolio, investment securities and borrowings.
Market Risk
Market risk refers to potential losses arising from changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, equity prices and commodity prices. Our market risk is composed primarily of interest rate risk. Interest rate risk is comprised of repricing risk, basis risk, yield curve risk and options risk. Repricing risk arises from differences in the cash flow or repricing between asset and liability portfolios. Basis risk arises when asset and liability portfolios are related to different market rate indices, which do not always change by the same amount. Yield curve risk arises when asset and liability portfolios are related to different maturities on a given yield curve; when the yield curve changes shape, the risk position is altered. Options risk arises from “embedded options”
within asset and liability products as certain borrowers have the option to prepay their loans when rates fall, while certain depositors can redeem or withdraw their deposits early when rates rise.
The process by which we manage our interest rate risk is called asset/liability management. The goals of our asset/liability management are increasing net interest income without taking undue interest rate risk or material loss of net market value of our equity, while maintaining adequate liquidity. Net interest income is increased by growing earning assets and increasing the difference between the rate earned on earning assets and the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Liquidity is measured by the ability to meet both depositors’ and credit customers’ requirements.
We use an asset/liability model to measure our interest rate risk. Interest rate risk measures include earnings simulation and gap analysis. Gap analysis is a static measure that does not incorporate assumptions regarding future events. Gap analysis, while a helpful diagnostic tool, displays cash flows for only a single rate environment. Net interest income simulations explicitly measure the exposure to earnings from changes in market rates of interest. Under simulation analysis, our current financial position is combined with assumptions regarding future business to calculate net interest income under various hypothetical rate scenarios. Our net interest income simulations assume a level balance sheet whereby new volume equals run-off. The ALCO reviews earnings simulations over multiple years under various interest rate scenarios. Reviewing these various measures provides us with a reasonably comprehensive view of our interest rate profile.
The following gap analysis compares the difference between the amount of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities subject to repricing over a period of time. The ratio of rate sensitive assets to rate sensitive liabilities repricing within a one-year period was 0.51 and 0.80 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A ratio of less than one indicates a higher level of repricing liabilities over repricing assets over the next twelve months. The level of First Commonwealth's ratio is largely driven by the modeling of interest-bearing non-maturity deposits, which are included in the analysis as repricing within one year.
Following is the gap analysis as of December 31:
Gap analysis has limitations due to the static nature of the model that holds volumes and consumer behaviors constant in all economic and interest rate scenarios. A lower level of rate sensitive assets to rate sensitive liabilities repricing in one year could indicate reduced net interest income in a rising interest rate scenario, and conversely, increased net interest income in a declining interest rate scenario. However, the gap analysis incorporates only the level of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and not the sensitivity each has to changes in interest rates. The impact of the sensitivity to changes in interest rates is provided in the table below the gap analysis.
The following table presents an analysis of the potential sensitivity of our annual net interest income to gradual changes in interest rates over a 12-month time frame as compared with net interest income if rates remained unchanged and there are no changes in balance sheet categories.
The following table represents the potential sensitivity of our annual net interest income to immediate changes in interest rates as compared to if rates remained unchanged, assuming there are no changes in balance sheet categories.
The analysis and model used to quantify the sensitivity of our net interest income becomes less meaningful in a decreasing 200 basis point scenario given the current interest rate environment. Results of the 100 and 200 basis point interest rate decline scenario are affected by the fact that many of our interest-bearing liabilities are at rates below 1%, with an assumed floor of zero in the model. For the years 2020 and 2019, the cost of our interest-bearing liabilities averaged 0.58% and 1.03%, respectively, and the yield on our average interest-earning assets, on a fully taxable equivalent basis, averaged 3.72% and 4.51%, respectively.
The ALCO is responsible for the identification and management of interest rate risk exposure. As such, the ALCO continuously evaluates strategies to manage our exposure to interest rate fluctuations.
Asset/liability models require that certain assumptions be made, such as prepayment rates on earning assets and the impact of pricing on non-maturity deposits, which may differ from actual experience. These business assumptions are based upon our experience, business plans and published industry experience. While management believes such assumptions to be reasonable, there can be no assurance that modeled results will approximate actual results.
Credit Risk
First Commonwealth maintains an allowance for credit losses at a level deemed sufficient for losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the date of each statement of financial condition. Management reviews the appropriateness of the allowance on a quarterly basis to ensure that the provision for credit losses has been charged against earnings in an amount necessary to maintain the allowance at a level that is appropriate based on management’s assessment of estimated expected losses.
First Commonwealth’s methodology for assessing the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses consists of several key elements. These elements include an assessment of individual nonperforming loans with a balance greater than $250 thousand, loss experience trends and other relevant factors.
First Commonwealth also maintains a reserve for unfunded loan commitments and letters of credit based upon credit risk and probability of funding. The reserve totaled $7.4 million at December 31, 2020 and is classified in “Other liabilities” on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans and loans classified as troubled debt restructurings. Nonaccrual loans represent loans on which interest accruals have been discontinued. Troubled debt restructured loans are those loans whose terms have been renegotiated to provide a reduction or deferral of principal or interest as a result of the deteriorating financial position of the borrower, who could not obtain comparable terms from alternate financing sources. In 2020, 41 loans totaling $14.9 million were identified as troubled debt restructurings, requiring $0.6 million additional specific reserves.
We discontinue interest accruals on a loan when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to fully collect principal or interest due according to the contractual terms of the loan. A loan is also placed in nonaccrual status when, based on regulatory definitions, the loan is maintained on a “cash basis” due to the weakened financial condition of the borrower. Generally, loans 90 days or more past due are placed on nonaccrual status, except for consumer loans which are placed on nonaccrual status at 150 days past due.
Nonperforming loans are closely monitored on an ongoing basis as part of our loan review and work-out process. The risk of loss on these loans is evaluated by comparing the loan balance to the estimated fair value of any underlying collateral or the present value of projected future cash flows. Losses or specifically assigned allowance for credit losses are recognized where appropriate.
The allowance for credit losses was $101.3 million at December 31, 2020 or 1.50% of loans outstanding, compared to $51.6 million or 0.83% of loans outstanding at December 31, 2019. Credit measures as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 reflect an increase in the level of criticized loans of $202.2 million from $100.6 million at December 31, 2019 to $302.8 million at December 31, 2020. Commercial real estate loans accounted for $183.3 million of this increase, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on hospitality and retail real estate loans. Classified assets increased $24.1 million from $52.0 million at December 31, 2019 to $76.2 million at December 31, 2020. Delinquency on accruing loans decreased $1.3 million, or 10%, and the level of nonperforming loans increased $21.8 million for the same period.
The allowance for credit losses as a percentage of nonperforming loans was 187.4% at December 31, 2020 and 160.3% as of December 31, 2019. The allowance for credit losses includes specific allocations of $4.9 million related to nonperforming loans covering 9% of the total nonperforming balance at December 31, 2020 and specific allocations of $2.4 million covering 8% of the total nonperforming balance at December 31, 2019. The amount of allowance related to nonperforming loans was determined by using estimated fair values obtained from current appraisals and updated discounted cash flow analyses.
Management believes that the allowance for credit losses is at a level that is sufficient to absorb expected losses in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
The following table provides information on net charge-offs and nonperforming loans by loan category:
As the above table illustrates, commercial real estate and residential real estate loans were the most significant portions of the nonperforming loans as of December 31, 2020. See discussions related to the provision for credit losses and loans for more information.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, FASB released Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-04 - Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848), which provides optional guidance to ease the accounting burden in accounting for, or recognizing the effects from, reference rate reform on financial reporting. The new standard is a result of the potential discontinuance of the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") as an available benchmark rate. The standard is elective and provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, or other transactions that reference LIBOR, or another reference rate expected to be discontinued. The amendments in the update are effective for all entities between March 12, 2020 and December 31, 2022. The Company has established a cross-functional working group to manage the Company’s transition from LIBOR. Products that utilize LIBOR have been identified and have incorporated enhanced language to accommodate the transition to alternative reference rates. The Company continues to evaluate the impact of adopting the new standard and at this time does not expect it to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, FASB released ASU 2019-12 - Income Taxes (Topic 740), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing multiple exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740. The standard is effective for public business entities for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.