Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
The Company is a leading operator of retail-based pawn stores with 2,748 store locations in the U.S. and Latin America. The Company’s pawn stores generate retail sales primarily from the merchandise acquired through collateral forfeitures and over-the-counter purchases from customers. In addition, the stores help customers meet small short-term cash needs by providing non-recourse pawn loans and buying merchandise directly from customers. Personal property, such as jewelry, electronics, tools, appliances, sporting goods and musical instruments, is pledged as collateral for the pawn loans and held by the Company over the typical 30-day term of the loan plus a stated grace period.
The Company recognizes pawn loan fee revenue on a constant-yield basis over the life of the pawn loan for all pawn loans of which the Company deems collection to be probable based on historical redemption statistics. If a pawn loan is not repaid prior to the expiration of the loan term, including any extension or grace period, if applicable, the property is forfeited to the Company and transferred to inventory at a value equal to the principal amount of the loan, exclusive of accrued pawn fee revenue. The Company records merchandise sales revenue at the time of the sale and presents merchandise sales net of any sales or value-added taxes collected. The Company does not provide direct financing to customers for the purchase of its merchandise, but does permit its customers to purchase merchandise on an interest-free “layaway” plan. Should the customer fail to make a required payment pursuant to a layaway plan, the item is returned to inventory and all or a portion of previous payments are typically forfeited to the Company. Deposits and interim payments from customers on layaway sales are recorded as deferred revenue and subsequently recorded as retail merchandise sales revenue when the merchandise is delivered to the
customer upon receipt of final payment or when previous payments are forfeited to the Company. Some jewelry inventory is melted and processed at third-party facilities and the precious metal and diamond content is sold at either prevailing market commodity prices or a previously agreed upon price with a commodity buyer. The Company records revenue from these wholesale scrap jewelry transactions when a price has been agreed upon and the Company ships the commodity to the buyer.
Operating expenses consist of all items directly related to the operation of the Company’s stores, including salaries and related payroll costs, rent, utilities, facilities maintenance, advertising, property taxes, licenses, supplies and security. Administrative expenses consist of items relating to the operation of the corporate offices, including the compensation and benefit costs of corporate management, district managers and other operations management personnel, accounting, legal and other administrative costs, information technology costs, liability and casualty insurance, outside legal and accounting fees and stockholder-related expenses. Merger and acquisition expenses primarily include incremental costs directly associated with merger and acquisition activities, including professional fees, outside legal expenses, severance, retention and other employee-related costs, contract breakage costs and costs related to consolidation of technology systems and corporate facilities.
The Company organizes its operations into two reportable segments. The U.S. operations segment consists of all operations in the U.S. and the Latin America operations segment consists of all operations in Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia and El Salvador. Financial information regarding the Company’s revenue and long-lived assets by geographic areas is provided in Note 15 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Stores included in the same-store calculations presented in this report are those stores that were opened or acquired prior to the beginning of the prior-year comparative period and remained open through the end of the reporting period. Also included are stores that were relocated during the applicable period within a specified distance serving the same market where there is not a significant change in store size and where there is not a significant overlap or gap in timing between the opening of the new store and the closing of the existing store.
The Company’s management reviews and analyzes operating results in Latin America on a constant currency basis because the Company believes this better represents the Company’s underlying business trends. Constant currency results are non-GAAP financial measures, which exclude the effects of foreign currency translation and are calculated by translating current-year results at prior-year average exchange rates. The wholesale scrap jewelry sales in Latin America are priced and settled in U.S. dollars, and are not affected by foreign currency translation, as are a small percentage of the operating and administrative expenses in Latin America, which are billed and paid in U.S. dollars. Amounts presented on a constant currency basis are denoted as such. See “Non-GAAP Financial Information” for additional discussion of constant currency operating results.
Business operations in Mexico, Guatemala and Colombia are transacted in Mexican pesos, Guatemalan quetzales and Colombian pesos. The Company also has operations in El Salvador where the reporting and functional currency is the U.S. dollar. The following table provides exchange rates for the Mexican peso, Guatemalan quetzal and Colombian peso for the current and prior-year periods:
The following table details income statement items as a percent of total revenue and other operating metrics:
(1)Effective June 30, 2020, the Company ceased offering unsecured consumer lending and credit services products, which include all payday and installment loans, in the U.S.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related revenue and expenses, and disclosure of gain and loss contingencies at the date of the financial statements. Such estimates, assumptions and judgments are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, which may cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s estimates. The significant accounting policies that the Company believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating its reported financial results include the following:
Pawn loans and revenue recognition - Pawn loans are secured by the customer’s pledge of tangible personal property, which the Company holds during the term of the loan. If a pawn loan defaults, the Company relies on the sale of the pawned property to recover the principal amount of an unpaid pawn loan, plus a yield on the investment, as the Company’s pawn loans are non-recourse against the customer. The customer’s creditworthiness does not affect the Company’s financial position or results of operations. The Company accrues pawn loan fee revenue on a constant-yield basis over the life of the pawn loan for all pawns for which the Company deems collection to be probable based on historical pawn redemption statistics. If the pawn loan is not repaid prior to the expiration of the loan term, including any extension or grace period, if applicable, the principal amount loaned becomes the inventory carrying value of the forfeited collateral, which is typically recovered through sales of the
forfeited items at prices well above the carrying value. The Company has determined no allowance related to credit losses on pawn loans is required, as the fair value of the pledged collateral is significantly in excess of the pawn loan amount.
Inventories and merchandise sales revenue recognition - Inventories represent merchandise acquired from forfeited pawns and merchandise purchased directly from the general public. The Company also retails limited quantities of new or refurbished merchandise obtained directly from wholesalers and manufacturers. Inventories from forfeited pawns are recorded at the amount of the pawn principal on the unredeemed goods, exclusive of accrued interest. Inventories purchased directly from customers, wholesalers and manufacturers are recorded at cost. The cost of inventories is determined on the specific identification method. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value and, accordingly, inventory valuation allowances are established if inventory carrying values are in excess of estimated selling prices, net of direct costs of disposal. Management has evaluated inventories and determined that a valuation allowance is not necessary.
The Company’s pawn merchandise sales are primarily retail sales to the general public in its pawn stores. The Company records sales revenue at the time of the sale. The Company presents merchandise sales net of any sales or value-added taxes collected. Some jewelry inventory is melted and processed at third-party facilities and the precious metal and diamond content is sold at either prevailing market commodity prices or a previously agreed upon price with a commodity buyer. The Company records revenue from these wholesale scrap jewelry transactions when a price has been agreed upon and the Company ships the commodity to the buyer.
Layaway plan and deferred revenue - The Company does not provide direct financing to customers for the purchase of its merchandise, but does permit its customers to purchase merchandise on an interest-free “layaway” plan. Should the customer fail to make a required payment pursuant to a layaway plan, the item is returned to inventory and all or a portion of previous payments are typically forfeited to the Company. Deposits and interim payments from customers on layaway sales are recorded as deferred revenue and subsequently recorded as retail merchandise sales revenue when the merchandise is delivered to the customer upon receipt of final payment or when previous payments are forfeited to the Company. Layaway payments from customers are included in customer deposits in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets - Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired in each business combination. The Company performs its goodwill impairment assessment annually as of December 31, and between annual assessments if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The Company’s reporting units, which are tested for impairment, are U.S. operations and Latin America operations. The Company assesses goodwill for impairment at a reporting unit level by first assessing a range of qualitative factors, including, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for the Company’s products and services, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, and overall financial performance. If, after completing this assessment, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, the Company proceeds to the impairment testing methodology.
The Company’s other material indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trade names and pawn licenses. The Company performs its indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessment annually as of December 31, and between annual assessments if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
Foreign currency transactions - The Company has operations in Mexico, Guatemala and Colombia where the functional currency is the Mexican peso, Guatemalan quetzal and Colombian peso. Accordingly, the assets and liabilities of these subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at the exchange rate in effect at each balance sheet date, and the resulting adjustments are accumulated in other comprehensive income (loss) as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. Revenues and expenses are translated at the average exchange rates occurring during the respective period. Prior to translation, U.S. dollar-denominated transactions of the foreign subsidiaries are remeasured into their functional currency using current rates of exchange for monetary assets and liabilities and historical rates of exchange for non-monetary assets and liabilities. Gains and losses from remeasurement of dollar-denominated monetary assets and liabilities in Mexico, Guatemala and Colombia are accumulated in loss (gain) on foreign exchange in the consolidated statements of income. Deferred taxes are not currently recorded on cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments, as the Company indefinitely reinvests earnings of its foreign subsidiaries. The Company also has operations in El Salvador where the reporting and functional currency is the U.S. dollar.
Results of Operations
2020 Consolidated Operating Results Highlights
The following table sets forth revenue, net income, diluted earnings per share, adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands, except per share amounts):
See “Non-GAAP Financial Information-Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share and -Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) and Adjusted EBITDA” below.
The following charts present net income, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share, adjusted diluted earnings per share, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and store count for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions, except per share and store count amounts):
* Non-GAAP financial measures. See “Non-GAAP Financial Information” for additional discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Operating Results for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) surfaced in China and rapidly spread throughout the world. In March of 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a pandemic. During the end of the first quarter of 2020 and the first part of the second quarter of 2020, many countries, states and other local government officials reacted by instituting quarantines, shelter-in-place and other orders mandating non-essential business closures, travel restrictions and other measures in an effort to reduce the spread of COVID-19, in addition to instituting broad-based stimulus, relief and forbearance programs in an effort to mitigate the economic impact of the pandemic. The impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s results of operations in each segment are more fully described in the discussion below.
The following tables and related discussion set forth key operating and financial data for the Company’s operations by reporting segment as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For similar operating and financial data and discussion of the Company’s 2019 results compared to its 2018 results, refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under Part II of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 3, 2020.
U.S. Operations Segment
The following table details earning assets, which consist of pawn loans, inventories and unsecured consumer loans, net, as well as other earning asset metrics of the U.S. operations segment as of December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands, except as otherwise noted):
(1)Effective June 30, 2020, the Company ceased offering unsecured consumer lending and credit services products, which include all payday and installment loans, in the U.S.
The following table presents segment pre-tax operating income and other operating metrics of the U.S. operations segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands). Store operating expenses include salary and benefit expense of store-level employees, occupancy costs, bank charges, security, insurance, utilities, supplies and other costs incurred by the stores.
(1)Effective June 30, 2020, the Company ceased offering unsecured consumer lending and credit services products, which include all payday and installment loans, in the U.S.
Retail Merchandise Sales Operations
U.S. retail merchandise sales declined less than 1% to $720.3 million during 2020 compared to $722.1 million for 2019. Same-store retail sales also decreased less than 1% during 2020 compared to 2019. Offsetting the small decline in retail sales revenue, the gross profit margin on retail merchandise sales in the U.S. was 42% compared to a margin of 38% during 2019, which resulted in an 11% increase in net revenue (gross profit) from retail sales for 2020 compared to 2019.
U.S. inventories decreased 25% from $181.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $136.1 million at December 31, 2020. Inventories aged greater than one year in the U.S. were 2% at December 31, 2020 compared to 3% at December 31, 2019.
In general, in most jurisdictions where the Company has stores, pawnshops were designated an essential service by federal guidelines and/or local regulations and were allowed to remain open during the broad shutdowns in response to COVID-19. As a result, retail sales during the second quarter, which increased 24% compared to the prior-year quarter, benefited from strong demand for stay-at-home products, such as consumer electronics, tools and sporting goods and were further enhanced by federal stimulus payments made directly to consumers, which drove additional demand across most product categories, including jewelry. As a result of the significant second quarter increase in retail sales and less forfeited inventory from lower pawn receivable balances (as described below), inventory balances were negatively impacted and decreased 30% at June 30, 2020 compared to the prior year-quarter. The lower inventory balances negatively impacted retail sales during the third and fourth quarters but were offset by an increase in retail sales margin, which was primarily a result of continued retail demand for value-priced pre-owned merchandise, increased buying of merchandise directly from customers and lower levels of aged inventory, all of which limited the need for normal discounting.
Pawn Lending Operations
U.S. pawn loan fees decreased 18% to $310.4 million during 2020 compared to $379.4 million for 2019. Same-store pawn fees also decreased 18% during 2020 compared to 2019. Pawn loan receivables as of December 31, 2020 decreased 18% in total and 19% on a same-store basis compared to December 31, 2019.
The broad shutdowns in response to COVID-19 caused significantly reduced levels of personal spending by consumers in the U.S. Further improving U.S. consumer liquidity during the second quarter were federal stimulus payments, forbearance programs and enhanced unemployment benefits. The additional consumer liquidity resulted in a significant decline in pawn lending activities, including increased redemptions of existing loans and decreased originations of new loans. Pawn loans as of June 30, 2020 were 40% lower than the prior year before beginning to recover. The recovery in pawn loans continued throughout the third and fourth quarters, although pawn loan balances as of December 31, 2020 were still lower than prior-year balances. Resulting pawn loan fees were negatively impacted during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the lower pawn loan balances.
Wholesale Scrap Jewelry Operations
U.S. wholesale scrap jewelry revenue, consisting primarily of gold sales, decreased 37% to $45.4 million during 2020 compared to $71.8 million during 2019. The decline in scrap revenue relates primarily to reductions in inventory levels as discussed above. The scrap jewelry gross profit margin in the U.S. was 13% compared to the prior-year margin of 8%, with the increase in scrap margin primarily due to an increase in the average selling price of gold during 2020 compared to 2019.
Consumer Lending Operations
The Company ceased offering unsecured consumer lending and credit services products (collectively, consumer lending operations), which include all payday and installment loans, in the U.S. effective June 30, 2020. As a result, service fees from U.S. consumer lending operations decreased 90% to $2.0 million during 2020 compared to $20.2 million during 2019.
Segment Expenses and Segment Pre-Tax Operating Income
U.S. store operating expenses decreased 4% to $396.6 million during 2020 compared to $412.5 million during 2019 and same-store operating expenses decreased 3% compared with the prior-year period. The decrease in same-store operating expenses was primarily due to payroll savings realized through normal employee attrition, reduced store operating hours and other cost saving initiatives as a result of COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in store-level incentive based compensation, primarily as a result of the significant increase in retail sales during the second quarter and increased margins as described above.
U.S. store depreciation and amortization increased 4% to $21.7 million during 2020 compared to $20.9 million during 2019.
The U.S. segment pre-tax operating income for 2020 was $204.7 million, which generated a pre-tax segment operating margin of 19% compared to $242.1 million and 20% in the prior year, respectively. The decrease in the segment pre-tax operating income and margin reflected decreases in pawn fee revenue as a result of the decline in pawn loan receivables and net revenue from consumer loan and credit services products as a result of discontinuing consumer lending operations, partially offset by an increase in gross profit from retail sales and a decrease in operating expenses.
Latin America Operations Segment
The Company’s management reviews and analyzes operating results in Latin America on a constant currency basis because the Company believes this better represents the Company’s underlying business trends. Constant currency results are non-GAAP financial measures, which exclude the effects of foreign currency translation and are calculated by translating current-year results at prior-year average exchange rates. The wholesale scrap jewelry sales in Latin America are priced and settled in U.S. dollars and are not affected by foreign currency translation, as are a small percentage of the operating and administrative expenses in Latin America, which are billed and paid in U.S. dollars.
Latin American results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 were impacted by an 11% unfavorable change in the average value of the Mexican peso compared to the U.S. dollar. The translated value of Latin American earning assets as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was also impacted by a 6% unfavorable change in the end-of-period value of the Mexican peso compared to the U.S. dollar.
The following table details earning assets, which consist of pawn loans and inventories as well as other earning asset metrics of the Latin America operations segment as of December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands, except as otherwise noted):
The following table presents segment pre-tax operating income and other operating metrics of the Latin America operations segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands). Store operating expenses include salary and benefit expense of store-level employees, occupancy costs, bank charges, security, insurance, utilities, supplies and other costs incurred by the stores.
Retail Merchandise Sales Operations
Latin America retail merchandise sales decreased 22% (13% on a constant currency basis) to $355.2 million during 2020 compared to $453.4 million for 2019. Same-store retail sales decreased 25% (17% on a constant currency basis). The gross profit margin on retail merchandise sales was 37% during 2020 compared to 34% during 2019.
Inventories in Latin America decreased 35% (32% on a constant currency basis) from $83.9 million at December 31, 2019 to $54.2 million at December 31, 2020. Inventories aged greater than one year in Latin America were 2% at December 31, 2020 and 1% at December 31, 2019.
In general, in most Latin American jurisdictions where the Company has stores, pawnshops were designated an essential service by federal guidelines and/or local regulations and were allowed to remain open during the broad shutdowns in response to COVID-19. However, a regulatory prohibition of retail transactions was enacted in Mexico during the last three weeks of May and all stores were closed in Colombia and El Salvador during much of the second quarter due to broad government shutdowns. Although the Company experienced strong demand for stay-at-home products, such as consumer electronics, tools and sporting goods, retail sales were negatively impacted by government operating restrictions and closures. In addition, inventory balances decreased 36% (24% on a constant currency basis) as of June 30, 2020 compared to the prior-year quarter as a result of less forfeited inventory being generated from lower pawn receivable balances and an increase in scrapping activities, primarily in markets impacted by retail restrictions, which limited retail sales during the third and fourth quarters. The lower retail sales volume was partially offset by an increase in retail sales margin, which was primarily a result of continued retail demand for value-priced pre-owned merchandise and increased buying of merchandise directly from customers, which limited the need for normal discounting.
Pawn Lending Operations
Pawn loan fees in Latin America decreased 21% (12% on a constant currency basis) totaling $147.1 million during 2020 compared to $185.4 million for 2019. Same-store pawn fees decreased 24% (16% on a constant currency basis) during 2020 compared to 2019. Pawn loan receivables decreased 13% (8% on a constant currency basis) as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, while same-store pawn receivables decreased by 15% (10% on a constant currency basis).
The broad shutdowns in response to COVID-19 caused significantly reduced levels of personal spending by consumers in Latin America. While there were limited government stimulus programs in the region in response to the pandemic, increased cross-border remittance payments from the U.S. to many Latin American countries further improved consumer liquidity during the second quarter. The additional consumer liquidity resulted in a significant decline in pawn lending activities, including increased redemptions of existing loans and decreased originations of new loans. Pawn loans as of June 30, 2020 were 36% lower (24% on a constant currency basis) than the prior year before beginning to recover. The recovery in pawn loans continued throughout the third and fourth quarters, although pawn loan balances as of December 31, 2020 were still lower than prior-year balances. Resulting pawn loan fees were negatively impacted during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the lower pawn loan balances.
Wholesale Scrap Jewelry Operations
Latin America wholesale scrap jewelry revenue, consisting primarily of gold sales, increased 59% (also 59% on a constant currency basis) to $50.8 million during 2020 compared to $32.1 million during 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in scrapping activities mostly in markets impacted by retail restrictions and government shutdowns and increased volume contributions from recently acquired stores which carried a greater percentage of jewelry inventories. The scrap jewelry gross profit margin in Latin America was 21% (13% on a constant currency basis) compared to the prior-year margin of 6%, with the increase in scrap margin primarily due to an increase in the average selling price of gold during 2020 compared to 2019.
Segment Expenses and Segment Pre-Tax Operating Income
Store operating expenses decreased 10% (flat on a constant currency basis) to $165.5 million during 2020 compared to $183.0 million during 2019. Total store operating expenses decreased primarily due to cost saving initiatives as a result of COVID-19, partially offset by the 8% increase in the Latin America weighted-average store count. Same-store operating expenses decreased 15% (6% on a constant currency basis) compared to the prior-year period.
Latin America store depreciation and amortization increased 8% (19% on a constant currency basis) to $15.8 million during 2020 compared to $14.6 million during 2019 primarily due to the increase in the store count.
The segment pre-tax operating income for 2020 was $106.7 million, which generated a pre-tax segment operating margin of 19% compared to $145.2 million and 22% in the prior year, respectively. The decline in the segment pre-tax operating income and margin was primarily due to declines in retail sales and pawn loan fees and an 11% unfavorable change in the average value of the Mexican peso, partially offset by an increase in gross profit from scrapping activities and declines in store operating expenses.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table reconciles pre-tax operating income of the Company’s U.S. operations segment and Latin America operations segment discussed above to consolidated net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Corporate Expenses and Taxes
Administrative expenses decreased 9% to $110.9 million during 2020 compared to $122.3 million during 2019, primarily due to a reduction in executive incentive-based compensation expense, reduced travel costs, other cost saving initiatives as a result of COVID-19 and an 11% unfavorable change in the average value of the Mexican peso resulting in lower U.S. dollar translated expenses, partially offset by a 4% increase in the consolidated weighted-average store count. Administrative expenses were 7% of revenue during both 2020 and 2019.
Corporate depreciation and amortization decreased to $4.5 million during 2020 compared to $6.4 million during 2019, primarily due to the realization of depreciation and amortization synergies from the Company’s merger with Cash America and a reduction in corporate capital spending compared to levels prior to the Cash America merger.
Interest expense decreased 14% to $29.3 million during 2020 compared to $34.0 million for 2019, primarily due to lower average balances outstanding on the Company’s unsecured credit facilities and lower average interest rates during 2020 compared to 2019. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Interest income increased to $1.5 million during 2020 compared to $1.1 million for 2019, primarily due to increased levels of invested cash balances in Mexico due to a decreased level of acquisition activity during 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by lower average interest rates during 2020 compared to 2019.
Merger and acquisition expenses decreased to $1.3 million during 2020 compared to $1.8 million during 2019, reflecting a decreased level of acquisition activity in 2020 compared to 2019.
During 2020, the Company redeemed its outstanding $300.0 million, 5.375% senior notes due 2024, incurring a loss on extinguishment of debt of $11.7 million, which includes an early redemption premium and other redemption costs of $8.8 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $2.9 million.
During 2020, the Company recorded a $7.1 million write-off of certain merger related lease intangibles, a $1.9 million impairment of other assets and a $1.5 million impairment of property and equipment. The lease intangibles, which are included in the operating lease right of use asset on the consolidated balance sheets, were recorded in conjunction with the Cash America merger and were written-off primarily as a result of the Company purchasing the store real estate from the landlords of certain existing legacy Cash America stores. The $1.9 million impairment related to a non-operating asset in which the Company determined that an other than temporary impairment existed as of March 31, 2020. The $1.5 million impairment related to certain property and equipment for which the Company determined the carrying value exceeded its fair value as of December 31, 2020.
Consolidated effective income tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were 25.8% and 26.7%, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the Internal Revenue Service finalizing regulations in July 2020 for the global intangible low-taxed income tax (“GILTI”) provisions for foreign operations in the U.S. federal tax code as well as a reduction in certain non-deductible executive incentive-based compensation in 2020 compared to 2019. The GILTI tax became effective in 2018, and based on preliminary IRS guidance, the impact to the Company had been included in its tax provisions since 2018. The finalized regulations effectively eliminated the impact of the incremental GILTI tax to the Company and permitted retroactive application. See Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s primary sources of liquidity were $65.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, $403.7 million of available and unused funds under the Company's revolving unsecured credit facilities, subject to certain financial covenants, $349.3 million in customer loans and fees and service charges receivable and $190.4 million in inventories. The Company had working capital of $418.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 included $28.3 million held by its foreign subsidiaries. These cash balances, which are primarily held in Mexican pesos, are associated with foreign earnings the Company has asserted are indefinitely reinvested and which the Company primarily plans to use to support its continued growth plans outside the U.S. through funding of capital expenditures, acquisitions, operating expenses or other similar cash needs of the Company’s foreign operations. Primarily as a result of increased cash flows in Latin America from a net reduction in pawn loans outstanding and reduced store opening and acquisition activity, both due primarily to the impacts of COVID-19, the Company elected to repatriate $43.0 million from certain foreign subsidiaries during 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company maintained an unsecured line of credit with a group of U.S. based commercial lenders (the “Credit Facility”) in the amount of $500.0 million. The Credit Facility matures on December 19, 2024. On November 9, 2020, the Credit Facility was amended (the “2020 Amendment”). Under the 2020 Amendment, the annual commitment fee on the average daily unused portion of the Credit Facility was reduced from 50 basis points to 32.5 basis points. In addition, certain financial covenants were amended temporarily, as described below, due to the expected short-term impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s earnings.
The permitted domestic leverage ratio and consolidated leverage ratio were temporarily increased under the 2020 Amendment. The domestic leverage ratio will remain at the current level of 4.5 times domestic EBITDA, adjusted for certain customary items as more fully set forth in the Credit Facility (“Adjusted Domestic EBITDA”), through December 31, 2020, then increases to 4.75 times Adjusted Domestic EBITDA through June 30, 2021 and then decreases to 4.5 times Adjusted Domestic EBITDA through December 31, 2021. The consolidated leverage ratio was increased from 2.75 to 3.25 times consolidated EBITDA, adjusted for certain customary items as more fully set forth in the Credit Facility (“Adjusted EBITDA”), through December 31, 2020 and then increases to 3.5 times Adjusted EBITDA through June 30, 2021 and then it decreases to 3.25 times Adjusted EBITDA through December 31, 2021. The temporary changes to the leverage ratios as provided in the 2020 Amendment will revert to the previously scheduled ratios of 4.0 times Adjusted Domestic EBITDA and 3.0 times Adjusted EBITDA effective January 1, 2022. The 2020 Amendment also includes additional limits to certain restricted payments when the domestic leverage ratio is equal to or greater than 4.0 times Adjusted Domestic EBITDA or when the consolidated leverage ratio is equal to or greater than 3.25 times Adjusted EBITDA, which are more fully described in the 2020 Amendment.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $123.0 million in outstanding borrowings and $3.4 million in outstanding letters of credit under the Credit Facility, leaving $373.6 million available for future borrowings, subject to certain financial covenants. The Credit Facility is unsecured and bears interest, at the Company’s option, of either (1) the prevailing LIBOR (with interest
periods of 1 week or 1, 2, 3 or 6 months at the Company’s option) plus a fixed spread of 2.5% or (2) the prevailing prime or base rate plus a fixed spread of 1.5%. The agreement has a LIBOR floor of 0%. Additionally, the Company is required to pay an annual commitment fee of 0.325% on the average daily unused portion of the Credit Facility commitment. The weighted-average interest rate on amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility at December 31, 2020 was 2.63% based on 1 week LIBOR. Under the terms of the Credit Facility, the Company is required to maintain certain financial ratios and comply with certain financial covenants. The Credit Facility also contains customary restrictions on the Company’s ability to incur additional debt, grant liens, make investments, consummate acquisitions and similar negative covenants with customary carve-outs and baskets. The Company was in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020, and currently has the capacity to borrow a significant amount of the availability under the Credit Facility under the most restrictive covenant. During 2020, the Company made net payments of $212.0 million pursuant to the Credit Facility.
During March 2020, the Company’s primary subsidiary in Mexico, First Cash S.A. de C.V., entered into an unsecured and uncommitted line of credit guaranteed by FirstCash, Inc. with a bank in Mexico (the “Mexico Credit Facility”) in the amount of $600.0 million Mexican pesos. The Mexico Credit Facility bears interest at the Mexican Central Bank’s interbank equilibrium rate (“TIIE”) plus a fixed spread of 2.5% and matures on March 9, 2023. Under the terms of the Mexico Credit Facility, the Company is required to maintain certain financial ratios and comply with certain financial covenants. The Company was in compliance with the covenants of the Mexico Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no amount outstanding under the Mexico Credit Facility and $600.0 million Mexican pesos available for borrowings.
On August 26, 2020, the Company completed an offering of $500.0 million of 4.625% senior unsecured notes due on September 1, 2028 (the “Notes”), all of which are currently outstanding. Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1, commencing on March 1, 2021. The Notes were sold in a private placement in reliance on Rule 144A and Regulation S under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The Company used the proceeds from the offering to redeem its outstanding $300.0 million, 5.375% senior notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”), to repay a portion of the Credit Facility and to pay for related fees and expenses associated with the offering and the redemption of the 2024 Notes. The Company capitalized approximately $7.3 million in debt issuance costs, which consisted primarily of the initial purchaser’s discount and fees and legal and other professional expenses. The debt issuance costs are being amortized over the life of the Notes as a component of interest expense and are carried as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of the Notes in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
The Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis jointly and severally by all of the Company's existing and future domestic subsidiaries that guarantee its Credit Facility. The Notes will permit the Company to make restricted payments, such as purchasing shares of its stock and paying cash dividends, in an unlimited amount if, after giving pro forma effect to the incurrence of any indebtedness to make such payment, the Company's consolidated total debt ratio (“Net Debt Ratio”) is less than 2.75 to 1. The Net Debt Ratio is defined generally in the indenture governing the Notes (the “Indenture”) as the ratio of (1) the total consolidated debt of the Company minus cash and cash equivalents of the Company to (2) the Company’s consolidated trailing twelve months EBITDA, as adjusted to exclude certain non-recurring expenses and giving pro forma effect to operations acquired during the measurement period. As of December 31, 2020, the Net Debt Ratio was 2.4 to 1. See “Non-GAAP Financial Information” for additional information on the calculation of the Net Debt Ratio.
The Company may redeem some or all of the Notes at any time on or after September 1, 2023, at the redemption prices set forth in the Indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any. In addition, prior to September 1, 2023, the Company may redeem some or all of the Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, plus a “make-whole” premium set forth in the Indenture. The Company may redeem up to 40% of the Notes on or prior to September 1, 2023 with the proceeds of certain equity offerings at the redemption prices set forth in the Indenture. If the Company sells certain assets or consummates certain change in control transactions, the Company will be required to make an offer to repurchase the Notes.
During 2020, the Company redeemed all outstanding 2024 Notes. As a result, the Company recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $11.7 million, which includes the redemption premium paid over the outstanding $300.0 million principal amount of the 2024 Notes and other redemption costs of $8.8 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $2.9 million.
The Company regularly evaluates opportunities to optimize its capital structure, including through consideration of the issuance of debt or equity, to refinance existing debt and to enter into interest rate hedge transactions, such as interest rate swap agreements, to fund ongoing cash needs, such as general corporate purposes, growth initiatives and its dividend and stock repurchase program.
The continued developments and fluidity of the COVID-19 situation make it difficult to predict the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s liquidity and presents a material uncertainty which could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows in the future. The Company’s cash flows depend heavily on the uninterrupted operation of its stores with sufficient customer activity as the Company does not currently offer an online pawn lending or payment platform. If the Company became subject to closure or customer demand for the Company’s retail and lending products materially declines, the Company’s cash flows would be materially impaired and the Company could seek to raise additional funds from a variety of sources, including but not limited to, repatriation of excess cash held in Latin America, the sale of assets, reductions in operating expenses, capital expenditures and dividends, the forbearance or deferral of operating expenses, the issuance of debt or equity securities, leveraging currently unencumbered real estate owned by the Company and/or changes to its management of current assets. The characteristics of the Company’s current assets, specifically the ability to rapidly liquidate gold jewelry inventory, which accounts for approximately 51% of total inventory, gives the Company flexibility to quickly increase cash flow, if necessary.
Other factors, such as changes in general customer traffic and demand, loan balances, loan-to-value ratios, collection of pawn fees, merchandise sales, inventory levels, seasonality, operating expenses, administrative expenses, expenses related to merger and acquisition activities, tax rates, gold prices, foreign currency exchange rates and the pace of new store expansion and acquisitions, affect the Company’s liquidity. Regulatory developments affecting the Company’s operations may also impact profitability and liquidity. See “Item 1. Business-Governmental Regulation.” A prolonged reduction in earnings and EBITDA could limit the Company’s future ability to fully borrow under its lines of credit under its current leverage covenants. Additionally, potential disruptions to the Company’s business resulting from COVID-19 could adversely impact the Company’s liquidity in the future.
The Company intends to continue expansion through new store openings in Latin America and through acquisitions both in the U.S. and Latin America. Additionally, as opportunities arise at reasonable valuations, the Company may continue to purchase real estate from its landlords at existing stores or in conjunction with pawn store acquisitions.
The impacts of COVID-19 limited the number of 2020 new store openings to 75. For 2021, the Company expects to add approximately 50 to 60 de novo full-service pawn locations in Latin America. Future store openings remain subject to uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to, the ability to continue construction projects and obtain necessary licenses and permits, utility services, store equipment, supplies and staffing.
The Company continually looks for, and is presented with, potential acquisition opportunities and will evaluate potential acquisitions based upon growth potential, purchase price, available liquidity, debt covenant restrictions, strategic fit and quality of management personnel, among other factors. The Company acquired 40 pawn stores in Latin America and 22 pawn stores in the U.S. during 2020 for a cumulative purchase price of $43.6 million, net of cash acquired and subject to future post-closing adjustments. In addition, the Company purchased the real estate at 43 store locations, primarily from landlords at existing stores, for a cumulative purchase price of $45.5 million during 2020.
The following tables set forth certain historical information with respect to the Company’s sources and uses of cash and other key indicators of liquidity (dollars in thousands):
(1)Current liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 include an $88.6 million and $86.5 million, respectively, current lease liability as a result of the adoption of ASC 842 that is not included in current liabilities as of December 31, 2018, thereby impacting comparability of this metric.
(2)Total liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 include a total of $283.5 million and $280.0 million, respectively, in lease liabilities as a result of the adoption of ASC 842 that is not included in total liabilities as of December 31, 2018, thereby impacting comparability of this metric.
(3)Adjusted EBITDA, a component of the Net Debt Ratio, is a non-GAAP financial measure. See “Non-GAAP Financial Information” for a calculation of the Net Debt Ratio.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $9.3 million, or 4%, from $231.6 million for 2019 to $222.3 million for 2020, due to net changes in certain non-cash adjustments to reconcile net income to operating cash flow and net changes in other operating assets and liabilities (as detailed in the consolidated statements of cash flows), including a decrease in net income of $58.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $116.7 million, or 85%, from $137.1 million during 2019 to $20.4 million during 2020. Cash flows from investing activities are utilized primarily to fund pawn store acquisitions, purchases of furniture, fixtures, equipment and improvements, which includes capital expenditures for improvements to existing stores and for new store openings and other corporate assets, and discretionary purchases of store real property. In addition, cash flows related to net fundings/repayments of pawn and consumer loans are included in investing activities. The Company paid $44.3 million in cash related to current and prior-year store acquisitions, $37.5 million for furniture, fixtures, equipment and improvements and $45.5 million for discretionary store real property purchases during 2020 compared to $52.5 million, $44.3 million and $74.7 million in 2019, respectively. The Company received funds from a net decrease in pawn and consumer loans of $107.0 million during 2020 compared to $34.4 million during 2019.
Net cash used in financing activities increased $65.7 million, or 54%, from $120.8 million during 2019 to $186.5 million during 2020. Net payments on the credit facilities were $215.5 million during 2020 compared to net borrowings of $40.0 million during 2019. During 2020, the Company received $500.0 million in proceeds from the private offering of the Notes and paid $8.0 million in debt issuance costs. Using part of the proceeds from the Notes, the Company redeemed the $300.0 million 2024 Notes and paid redemption premiums over the face value of the 2024 Notes and other redemption costs of $8.8 million during 2020. The Company funded $107.0 million worth of share repurchases and paid dividends of $44.8 million during 2020, compared to funding $116.1 million worth of share repurchases and dividends paid of $44.0 million during 2019. In addition, the Company paid $3.7 million in withholding taxes on net share settlements of restricted stock unit awards and stock options exercised and received $1.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options during 2020, compared to receiving $0.4 million proceeds from the exercise of stock options during 2019.
In January 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a $0.27 per share first quarter cash dividend on common shares outstanding, or an aggregate of $11.1 million based on the December 31, 2020 share count, to be paid on February 26, 2021 to stockholders of record as of February 12, 2021. While the Company currently expects to continue the payment of quarterly cash dividends, the declaration and payment of cash dividends in the future (quarterly or otherwise) will be made by the Board of Directors, from time to time, subject to the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, business requirements, compliance with legal requirements, debt covenant restrictions and other relevant factors including the impact of COVID-19.
During 2020, the Company repurchased a total of 1,427,000 shares of common stock at an aggregate cost of $107.0 million and an average cost per share of $74.96, and during 2019, repurchased 1,305,000 shares of common stock at an aggregate cost of $114.0 million and an average cost per share of $87.37. The Company intends to continue repurchases under its active share repurchase programs, including through open market transactions under trading plans in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b-18 under the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, subject to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, the level of cash balances, credit availability, debt covenant restrictions, general business conditions, regulatory requirements, the market price of the Company’s stock, dividend policy, the availability of alternative investment opportunities, including acquisitions, and the impact of COVID-19.
The following table provides purchases made by the Company of shares of its common stock under each share repurchase program in effect during 2020 (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had contractual commitments to deliver a total of 24,500 gold ounces between the months of January and December 2021 at a weighted-average price of $1,840 per ounce. The ounces required to be delivered over this time period are within historical scrap gold volumes and the Company expects to have the required gold ounces to meet the commitments as they come due.
Non-GAAP Financial Information
The Company uses certain financial calculations such as adjusted net income, adjusted diluted earnings per share, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, free cash flow, adjusted free cash flow and constant currency results as factors in the measurement and evaluation of the Company’s operating performance and period-over-period growth. The Company derives these financial calculations on the basis of methodologies other than GAAP, primarily by excluding from a comparable GAAP measure certain items the Company does not consider to be representative of its actual operating performance. These financial calculations are “non-GAAP financial measures” as defined under the SEC rules. The Company uses these non-GAAP financial measures in operating its business because management believes they are less susceptible to variances in actual operating performance that can result from the excluded items, other infrequent charges and currency fluctuations. The Company presents these financial measures to investors because management believes they are useful to investors in evaluating the primary factors that drive the Company’s core operating performance and provide greater transparency into the Company’s results of operations. However, items that are excluded and other adjustments and assumptions that are made in calculating these non-GAAP financial measures are significant components in understanding and assessing the Company’s financial performance. These non-GAAP financial measures should be evaluated in conjunction with, and are not a substitute for, the Company’s GAAP financial measures. Further, because these non-GAAP financial measures are not determined in accordance with GAAP and are thus susceptible to varying calculations, the non-GAAP financial measures, as presented, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
While acquisitions are an important part of the Company’s overall strategy, the Company has adjusted the applicable financial calculations to exclude merger and acquisition expenses to allow more accurate comparisons of the financial results to prior periods. In addition, the Company does not consider these merger and acquisition expenses to be related to the organic operations of the acquired businesses or its continuing operations and such expenses are generally not relevant to assessing or estimating the long-term performance of the acquired businesses. Merger and acquisition expenses include incremental costs directly associated with merger and acquisition activities, including professional fees, legal expenses, severance, retention and other employee-related costs, contract breakage costs and costs related to the consolidation of technology systems and corporate facilities, among others.
The Company has certain leases in Mexico which are denominated in U.S. dollars. The lease liability of these U.S. dollar denominated leases, which is considered a monetary liability, is remeasured into Mexican pesos using current period exchange rates resulting in the recognition of foreign currency exchange gains or losses. The Company has adjusted the applicable financial measures to exclude these remeasurement gains or losses because they are non-cash, non-operating items that could create volatility in the Company’s consolidated results of operations due to the magnitude of the end of period lease liability being remeasured and to improve comparability of current periods presented with prior periods due to the adoption of ASC 842 on January 1, 2019.
In conjunction with the Cash America merger in 2016, the Company recorded certain lease intangibles related to above or below market lease liabilities of Cash America which are included in the operating lease right of use asset on the consolidated balance sheets. As the Company continues to opportunistically purchase real estate from landlords at certain Cash America stores, the associated lease intangible, if any, is written-off and gain or loss is recognized. The Company has adjusted the applicable financial measures to exclude these gains or losses given the variability in size and timing of these transactions and
because they are non-cash, non-operating gains or losses. The Company believes this improves comparability of operating results for current periods presented with prior periods.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share
Management believes the presentation of adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share provides investors with greater transparency and provides a more complete understanding of the Company’s financial performance and prospects for the future by excluding items that management believes are non-operating in nature and not representative of the Company’s core operating performance of its continuing operations. In addition, management believes the adjustments shown below are useful to investors in order to allow them to compare the Company’s financial results for the current periods presented with the prior periods presented.
The following table provides a reconciliation between net income and diluted earnings per share calculated in accordance with GAAP to adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share, which are shown net of tax (unaudited, in thousands, except per share amounts):
(1)Impairment related to a non-operating asset in which the Company determined that an other than temporary impairment existed as of March 31, 2020.
The following table provides a reconciliation of the gross amounts, the impact of income taxes and the net amounts for the adjustments included in the table above (unaudited, in thousands):
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) and Adjusted EBITDA
The Company defines EBITDA as net income before income taxes, depreciation and amortization, interest expense and interest income and adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for certain items as listed below that management considers to be non-operating in nature and not representative of its actual operating performance. The Company believes EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA are commonly used by investors to assess a company’s financial performance, and adjusted EBITDA is used in the calculation of the Net Debt Ratio as defined in the Company’s senior unsecured notes covenants. The following table provides a reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA (unaudited, dollars in thousands):
Free Cash Flow and Adjusted Free Cash Flow
For purposes of its internal liquidity assessments, the Company considers free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow. The Company defines free cash flow as cash flow from operating activities less purchases of furniture, fixtures, equipment and improvements and net fundings/repayments of pawn and consumer loans, which are considered to be operating in nature by the Company but are included in cash flow from investing activities. Adjusted free cash flow is defined as free cash flow adjusted for merger and acquisition expenses paid that management considers to be non-operating in nature.
Free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow are commonly used by investors as an additional measure of cash generated by business operations that may be used to repay scheduled debt maturities and debt service or, following payment of such debt obligations and other non-discretionary items, may be available to invest in future growth through new business development activities or acquisitions, repurchase stock, pay cash dividends or repay debt obligations prior to their maturities. These metrics can also be used to evaluate the Company’s ability to generate cash flow from business operations and the impact that this cash flow has on the Company’s liquidity. However, free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for cash flow from operating activities or other income statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. The following table reconciles cash flow from operating activities to free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow (unaudited, in thousands):
(1)Includes the funding of new loans net of cash repayments and recovery of principal through the sale of inventories acquired from forfeiture of pawn collateral.
Constant Currency Results
The Company’s reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. However, certain performance metrics discussed in this report are presented on a “constant currency” basis, which is considered a non-GAAP financial measure. The Company’s management uses constant currency results to evaluate operating results of business operations in Latin America, which are primarily transacted in local currencies.
The Company believes constant currency results provide valuable supplemental information regarding the underlying performance of its business operations in Latin America, consistent with how the Company’s management evaluates such performance and operating results. Constant currency results reported herein are calculated by translating certain balance sheet and income statement items denominated in local currencies using the exchange rate from the prior-year comparable period, as opposed to the current comparable period, in order to exclude the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations for purposes of evaluating period-over-period comparisons. Business operations in Mexico, Guatemala and Colombia are transacted in Mexican pesos, Guatemalan quetzales and Colombian pesos. The Company also has operations in El Salvador where the reporting and functional currency is the U.S. dollar. See the Latin America operations segment tables in “Results of Operations” above for additional reconciliation of certain constant currency amounts to as reported GAAP amounts.
Contractual Commitments
A tabular disclosure of contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 is as follows (in thousands):
(1)Excludes interest obligations under the Company's revolving unsecured credit facilities. See Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)The employment contracts provide for certain severance payments and other benefits in the event of the executive’s termination of employment or a change in control of the Company. Further information regarding the executive employment contracts is provided under the heading “Executive Compensation - Employment Agreements and Change in Control Provisions” of the 2021 Proxy Statement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
The Company does not believe inflation has had a material effect on the volume of customer loans originated, merchandise sales, or results of operations.
Seasonality
The Company’s business is subject to seasonal variations, and operating results for each quarter and year-to-date periods are not necessarily indicative of the results of operations for the full year. Typically, the Company experiences seasonal growth of service fees in the third and fourth quarter of each year due to loan balance growth. Service fees generally decline in the first and second quarter of each year after the typical repayment period of pawn and consumer loans associated with statutory bonuses received by customers in the fourth quarter in Mexico and with tax refund proceeds received by customers in the first quarter in the U.S. Retail sales are seasonally higher in the fourth quarter associated with holiday shopping, and to a lesser extent, in the first quarter associated with tax refunds in the U.S.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See discussion in Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.