Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the selected historical consolidated financial data and consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information.”
General
The Company has limited operations and is actively seeking merger, reverse merger, acquisition or business combination opportunities with an operating business or other financial transaction opportunities. Until a transaction is effectuated, the Company does not expect to have significant operations. Accordingly, during such period, the Company does not expect to achieve sufficient income to offset its operating expenses, resulting in operating losses that may require the Company to use and thereby reduce its cash balance. For further information on the Company’s plan of operation and business, see Item I, Current Business. Until the Company completes a merger, reverse merger or other financial transaction, and unless interest rates increase dramatically, the Company expects to continue to incur a loss of between $15,000 to $18,000 for the first quarter and thereafter of between $12,000 to $15,000 per quarter. The increase in first quarter expenses relates to a Company audit and tax return.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
During the year ended March 31, 2021, the Company had a loss from operations of $62,000. The loss is attributable to the operating, administrative and legal expenses incurred during the year. During the year ended March 31, 2020, the loss from operations was $54,000. The increase in the loss for the year ended March 31, 2021 is attributable to increases in legal, operating and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Stockholders’ equity (deficit) as of March 31, 2021 was ($1,000), as compared to 61,000 at March 31, 2020. The decrease is attributable to the operating loss incurred in 2021.
The Company had cash on hand at March 31, 2021 of $66,000, as compared to $63,000 at March 31, 2020. The increase in cash on hand is attributable to proceeds from the sale and issuance of a convertible note.
The Company does not have any arrangements with banks or financial institutions with respect to the availability of financing in the future.
The payment of any cash distribution or dividend is subject to the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors. At this time the Company has no plans to pay any cash distributions or dividends in the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not believe that there are any new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.