ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Critical accounting policiesThe presentation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect many of the reported amounts and disclosures. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
A material estimate that is particularly susceptible to significant change relates to the determination of the allowance for loan losses. Management believes that the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 is adequate and reasonable. Given the subjective nature of identifying and valuing loan losses, it is likely that well-informed individuals could make different assumptions and could, therefore, calculate a materially different allowance value. While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, changes in economic conditions may necessitate revisions in the future. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the Company’s allowance for loan losses. Such agencies may require the Company to recognize adjustments to the allowance based on their judgment of information available to them at the time of their examination.
Another material estimate is the calculation of fair values of the Company’s investment securities. Fair values of investment securities are determined by pricing provided by a third-party vendor, who is a provider of financial market data, analytics and related services to financial institutions. Based on experience, management is aware that estimated fair values of investment securities tend to vary among valuation services. Accordingly, when selling investment securities, price quotes may be obtained from more than one source. As described in Notes 1 and 4 of the consolidated financial statements, incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 8, all of the Company’s investment securities are classified as available-for-sale (AFS). AFS securities are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets, with unrealized gains and losses, net of income tax, reported separately within shareholders’ equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (AOCI).
The fair value of residential mortgage loans, classified as held-for-sale (HFS), is obtained from the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) or the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB). Generally, the market to which the Company sells residential mortgages it originates for sale is restricted and price quotes from other sources are not typically obtained. On occasion, the Company may transfer loans from the loan portfolio to loans HFS. Under these circumstances, pricing may be obtained from other entities and the loans are transferred at the lower of cost or market value and simultaneously sold. For a further discussion on the accounting treatment of HFS loans, see the section entitled “Loans held-for-sale,” contained within this management’s discussion and analysis.
We account for business combinations under the purchase method of accounting. The application of this method of accounting requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions in the determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in order to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are amortized, accreted or depreciated from those that are recorded as goodwill. Estimates of the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based upon assumptions that management believes to be reasonable.
Goodwill is tested at least annually at November 30 for impairment, or more often if events or circumstances indicate there may be impairment. Impairment write-downs are charged to the consolidated statement of income in the period in which the impairment is determined. In testing goodwill for impairment, the Company performed a qualitative assessment, resulting in the determination that the fair value of its reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount. Accordingly, there is no goodwill impairment at December 31, 2020. Other acquired intangible assets that have finite lives, such as core deposit intangibles, are amortized over their estimated useful lives and subject to periodic impairment testing.
All significant accounting policies are contained in Note 1, “Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, within the notes to consolidated financial statements and incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 8.
The following discussion and analysis presents the significant changes in the financial condition and in the results of operations of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for each of the years then ended. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following are non-GAAP financial measures which provide useful insight to the reader of the consolidated financial statements but should be supplemental to GAAP used to prepare the Company’s financial statements and should not be read in isolation or relied upon as a substitute for GAAP measures. In addition, the Company’s non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to non-GAAP measures of other companies. The Company’s tax rate used to calculate the fully-taxable equivalent (FTE) adjustment was 21% at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 compared to 34% at December 31, 2017 and 2016.
‎
The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of FTE net interest income:
The efficiency ratio is non-interest expenses as a percentage of FTE net interest income plus non-interest income. The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of the efficiency ratio to GAAP:
The following table provides a reconciliation of the tangible common equity (non-GAAP) and the calculation of tangible book value per share:
The following table provides a reconciliation of the Company’s earnings results under GAAP to comparative non-GAAP results excluding merger-related expenses and an FHLB prepayment penalty:
‎
Comparison of Financial Condition as of December 31, 2020
and 2019 and Results of Operations for each of the Years then Ended
Executive Summary
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a coronavirus, identified as COVID-19, a global pandemic. The Company began proactive initiatives in March 2020 to assist clients, Fidelity Bankers and communities impacted by the effects of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Management activated its established pandemic contingency plan response in March 2020 to ensure business continuity while assuring the health, safety and well-being of bankers, clients and the community. Special measures included:
Installing proper social distancing signs and markers, to include safety barriers for both bankers and clients that encourage proper separation as recommended by the CDC.
Encouraging use of online, mobile, telephone banking, night drop and ATMs to meet clients’ banking needs.
Adding resources to the Customer Care Center to manage increased call and chat volume.
Activating telecommunications capabilities to enable Fidelity Bankers to work-from-home, as appropriate.
Providing Fidelity Bankers personal protective equipment and disinfectant supplies when working on-site.
Scheduling in-person meetings by appointment only, observing the guidelines of social distancing and personal safety as recommended by health and safety officials.
Enhancing EPA approved cleaning and disinfecting protocols implemented at all locations, including utilizing ionization machines when required.
Increasing the fresh air intake and using anti-viral filters in all HVAC units, above OSHA regulations.
Conducting meetings virtually.
The Company incurred approximately $0.3 million in non-interest expenses during 2020 to implement programs and provide supplies and services in order to respond to the pandemic.
Nationally, the unemployment rate grew from 3.6% at December 31, 2019 to 6.7% at December 31, 2020. The unemployment rates in the Scranton - Wilkes-Barre - Hazleton and the Allentown - Bethlehem - Easton Metropolitan Statistical Areas (local) increased and the Scranton - Wilkes-Barre - Hazleton rate remained at a higher level than the national unemployment rate. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the local unemployment rates at December 31, 2020 were 7.6% and 6.2%, respectively, an increase of 2.0 and 1.7 percentage points from the 5.6% and 4.5%, respectively, at December 31, 2019. The national and local unemployment rates have risen as a result of the effects of the pandemic. The increase in unemployment and business restrictions has had an effect on spending in our market area and unemployment is expected to remain above the December 2019 levels for the next few months. Stimulus payments and enhanced unemployment benefits have supported the economy throughout 2020 and the government could continue to provide this support in 2021. The median home values in the Scranton-Wilkes-Barre-Hazleton metro and Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton metro each increased 12.2% from a year ago, according to Zillow, an online database advertising firm providing access to its real estate search engines to various media outlets, and values are expected to grow 15.4% and 13.9% in the next year. In light of these expectations, we will continue to monitor the economic climate in our region and scrutinize growth prospects with credit quality as a principal consideration.
On May 1, 2020, the Company completed its previously announced acquisition of MNB Corporation (“MNB”). The merger expanded the Company’s full-service footprint into Northampton County, PA and the Lehigh Valley. Non-recurring costs to facilitate the merger and integrate systems of $2.5 million were incurred during 2020.
On February 26, 2021, the Company announced an agreement to acquire Landmark Bancorp, Inc. (“Landmark”). The Company expects to complete the merger with Landmark during the third quarter of 2021. The Company expects non-recurring costs to facilitate the anticipated merger and integrate systems in 2021 incurred by the Company to be $3.7 million. The Company remains committed to selectively expanding branch banking and wealth management locations in Northeastern and Eastern Pennsylvania as opportunities arrive going forward.
Non-recurring merger-related costs and a FHLB prepayment penalty incurred during 2020 are not a part of the Company’s normal operations. If these expenses had not occurred, adjusted net income (non-GAAP) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 would have been $15.4 million and $12.0 million, respectively. Adjusted diluted EPS (non-GAAP) would have been $3.34 and $3.14 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For the same time periods, adjusted ROA (non-GAAP) would have been 1.03% and 1.22%, respectively, and adjusted ROE (non-GAAP) would have been 10.73% and 11.90%, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, tangible common book value per share (non-GAAP) was $31.72 and $28.20, respectively. These non-GAAP measures should be reviewed in connection with the reconciliation of these non-GAAP ratios. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” located above within this management’s discussion and analysis.
During 2020, the Company’s assets grew by 68% primarily from assets acquired from the merger with MNB and additional growth in deposits and retained net earnings, which were used to fund growth in the loan portfolio. In 2021, we expect total loans (excluding loans acquired from Landmark) to decline as loans issued under the U.S. Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) are forgiven. Net of PPP loans, the loan portfolio is expected to increase with funding
provided primarily by deposit growth. We expect funds generated from operations, deposit growth along with calls and maturities will be used to replace, reinvest and grow the investment portfolio weighted heavier in municipal securities with net growth in mortgage-backed securities and agency securities as well. The cash flow from these securities will provide liquidity to reinvest. No short-term borrowings are expected in 2021 and FHLB advances will be paid off.
Non-performing assets represented 0.39% of total assets as of December 31, 2020, down from 0.50% at the prior year end. Non-performing assets to total assets was lower during 2020 mostly due to non-performing assets increasing slower than the growth in total assets. For 2021, management expects an increase in non-performing assets to total assets as a result of the stress from economic uncertainty resulting from the pandemic.
Branch managers, relationship bankers, mortgage originators and our business service partners are all focused on developing a mutually profitable full banking relationship. We understand our markets, offer products and services along with financial advice that is appropriate for our community, clients and prospects. The Company continues to focus on the trusted financial advisor model by utilizing the team approach of experienced bankers that are fully engaged and dedicated towards maintaining and growing profitable relationships.
The Company generated $13.0 million in net income in 2020, up $1.4 million, or 13%, from $11.6 million in 2019. In 2020, our larger and well diversified balance sheet from organic and inorganic growth contributed to the success of our earnings performance. The 2021 focus is to manage net interest income through a relatively flat forecasted rate cycle by controlling loan and deposit pricing to maintain a reasonable spread. Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) officials began increasing interest rates at the end of 2015 in an attempt to return to a “normal” stance. Rate cuts of 50 and 100 basis points during the first quarter of 2020 at the start of the pandemic completely reversed the increases initiated by the FOMC at the end of 2015. From a financial condition and performance perspective, our mission for 2021 will be to continue to strengthen our capital position from strategic growth oriented objectives, implement creative marketing and revenue enhancing strategies, grow and cultivate more of our wealth management and business services and to manage credit risk at tolerable levels thereby maintaining overall asset quality.
For the near-term, we expect to continue to operate in a relatively low flat interest rate environment. The Company’s balance sheet is positioned to improve its net interest income performance, but reducing cost of funds may not keep pace with low yields that may compress net interest spread and margin. The Company expects net interest margin to decline for 2021. In March 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 was approved by Congress and signed into law by President Biden. This legislation will provide many customers with the third round of economic impact payments since the pandemic began. This could cause a temporary surge in personal deposit balances which would increase our excess cash position and further compress net interest margin. Expectations are for short-term rates to remain flat throughout 2021, which could cause deposit rate pricing to decrease further.
Financial Condition
Consolidated assets increased $689.6 million, or 68%, to $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $1.0 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in assets occurred primarily from assets acquired in the merger with MNB. Of the growth in net loans and leases, $132.1 million was from PPP loans that are mostly expected to be paid off during 2021. The asset growth was funded by utilizing growth in deposits of $673.8 million and $7.7 million in retained earnings, net of dividends declared.
The following table is a comparison of condensed balance sheet data as of December 31:
A comparison of net changes in selected balance sheet categories as of December 31, are as follows:
* Earning assets include interest-bearing deposits with financial institutions, gross loans and leases, loans held-for-sale, available-for-sale securities and restricted investments in bank stock excluding loans placed on non-accrual status.
Funds Provided:
Deposits
The Company is a community based commercial depository financial institution, member FDIC, which offers a variety of deposit products with varying ranges of interest rates and terms. Generally, deposits are obtained from consumers, businesses and public entities within the communities that surround the Company’s 20 branch offices and all deposits are insured by the FDIC up to the full extent permitted by law. Deposit products consist of transaction accounts including: savings; clubs; interest-bearing checking; money market and non-interest bearing checking (DDA). The Company also offers short- and long-term time deposits or certificates of deposit (CDs). CDs are deposits with stated maturities which can range from seven days to ten years. Cash flow from deposits is influenced by economic conditions, changes in the interest rate environment, pricing and competition. To determine interest rates on its deposit products, the Company considers local competition, spreads to earning-asset yields, liquidity position and rates charged for alternative sources of funding such as short-term borrowings and FHLB advances.
The following table represents the components of total deposits as of December 31:
Total deposits increased $673.8 million, or 81%, from $835.7 million at December 31, 2019 to $1.5 billion at December 31, 2020. Non-interest bearing and interest-bearing checking accounts contributed the most to the deposit growth with increases of $215.5 million and $211.7 million, respectively. The Company acquired checking accounts from the merger with MNB and also added accounts in the Lehigh Valley after the merger. Expectations are that customers preferred to keep money in their checking accounts during this uncertain economic climate and did not spend as much as normal due to business and travel restrictions. Of the growth in non-interest bearing checking accounts, $116.8 million was new accounts in the Lehigh Valley. The remaining growth of over $98 million was primarily due to an increase in existing business and personal deposit account balances. The increase in interest-bearing checking accounts included $121.1 million in new deposits from the Lehigh Valley. The remaining increase of over $90 million was primarily due to seasonal tax cycles, business activity and relief from the CARES Act. Money market accounts increased $160.2 million, $97.7 million of which was added from the Lehigh Valley, and the remainder was mostly due to higher balances of personal and business accounts and shifts from other types of deposit accounts. The Company focuses on obtaining a full-banking relationship with existing customers as well as forming new customer relationships. Savings accounts increased $74.8 million due to $53.4 million in accounts added in the Lehigh Valley and also an increase in personal account balances. The Company will continue to execute on its relationship development strategy, explore the demographics within its marketplace and develop creative programs for its customers. For 2021, the Company expects deposit growth to fund asset growth with expansion in the new Lehigh Valley market and the pending acquisition of Landmark. During the first half of 2021, management expects an increase in personal deposit balances from the third round of economic impact payments being distributed to customers. When pandemic-related restrictions are lifted, the Company anticipates personal spending to increase and therefore average deposit balances to decline. Seasonal public deposit fluctuations are expected to remain volatile and at times may partially offset this deposit growth.
Additionally, CDs also increased $11.6 million with $42.3 million from accounts in the Lehigh Valley partially offset by runoff as rates dropped during 2020 and promos reached maturity. The Company will continue to pursue strategies to grow and retain retail and business customers with an emphasis on deepening and broadening existing and creating new relationships.
The Company uses the Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service (CDARS) reciprocal program and Insured Cash Sweep (ICS) reciprocal program to obtain FDIC insurance protection for customers who have large deposits that at times may exceed the FDIC maximum insured amount of $250,000. In the CDARS program, deposits with varying terms and interest rates, originated in the Company’s own markets, are exchanged for deposits of other financial institutions that are members in the CDARS network. By placing the deposits in other participating institutions, the deposits of our customers are fully insured by the FDIC. In return for deposits placed with network institutions, the Company receives from network institutions deposits that are approximately equal in amount and are comprised of terms similar to those placed for our customers. Deposits the Company receives from other institutions are considered reciprocal deposits by regulatory definitions. The Company did not have any CDARs as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, ICS reciprocal deposits represented $46.2 million and $19.7 million, or 3% and 2%, of total deposits which are included in interest-bearing checking accounts in the table above. The $26.5 million increase in ICS deposits is primarily due to public funds deposit transfers from other interest-bearing checking accounts to ICS accounts.
The maturity distribution of certificates of deposit at December 31, 2020 is as follows:
There is a remaining time deposit premium of $42 thousand that will be amortized into income on a level yield amortization method over the contractual life of the deposits that is not included in the table above.
Approximately 70% of the CDs, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.90%, are scheduled to mature in 2021 and an additional 21%, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.75%, are scheduled to mature in 2022. Renewing CDs are currently expected to re-price to lower market rates depending on the rate on the maturing CD, the pace and direction of interest rate movements, the shape of the yield curve, competition, the rate profile of the maturing accounts and depositor preference for alternative, non-term products. The Company plans to address repricing CDs in the ordinary course of business on a relationship basis and is prepared to match rates when prudent to maintain relationships. Growth in CD accounts is challenged by the current and expected rate environment and clients’ preference for short-term rates, as well as aggressive competitor rates. The Company is not currently offering any CD promotions but may resume promotions in the future. The Company will consider the needs of the customers and simultaneously be mindful of the liquidity levels, borrowing rates and the interest rate sensitivity exposure of the Company.
Short-term borrowings
Borrowings are used as a complement to deposit generation as an alternative funding source whereby the Company will borrow under advances from the FHLB of Pittsburgh and other correspondent banks for asset growth and liquidity needs.
The components of short-term borrowings are as follows:
Short-term borrowings may include overnight balances with FHLB line of credit and/or correspondent bank’s federal funds lines which the Company may require to fund daily liquidity needs such as deposit outflow, loan demand and operations. Short-term borrowings decreased $37.8 million during 2020 as a result of deposit growth. The Company does not expect to have short-term borrowings in 2021.
Information with respect to the Company’s short-term borrowing’s maximum and average outstanding balances and interest rates are contained in Note 8, “Short-term Borrowings,” of the notes to consolidated financial statements incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 8.
FHLB advances
During 2020, the Company paid off $10.0 million in FHLB advances with a weighted average interest rate of 2.97%. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company acquired $7.6 million of FHLB advances from the merger that was subsequently
paid off. At December 31, 2019, the Company had $15.0 million in FHLB advances with a weighted average interest rate of 3.01%. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had the ability to borrow an additional $428.7 million from the FHLB.
Funds Deployed:
Investment Securities
The Company’s investment policy is designed to complement its lending activities, provide monthly cash flow, manage interest rate sensitivity and generate a favorable return without incurring excessive interest rate and credit risk while managing liquidity at acceptable levels. In establishing investment strategies, the Company considers its business, growth strategies or restructuring plans, the economic environment, the interest rate sensitivity position, the types of securities in its portfolio, permissible purchases, credit quality, maturity and re-pricing terms, call or average-life intervals and investment concentrations. The Company’s policy prescribes permissible investment categories that meet the policy standards and management is responsible for structuring and executing the specific investment purchases within these policy parameters. Management buys and sells investment securities from time-to-time depending on market conditions, business trends, liquidity needs, capital levels and structuring strategies. Investment security purchases provide a way to quickly invest excess liquidity in order to generate additional earnings. The Company generally earns a positive interest spread by assuming interest rate risk using deposits or borrowings to purchase securities with longer maturities.
At the time of purchase, management classifies investment securities into one of three categories: trading, available-for-sale (AFS) or held-to-maturity (HTM). To date, management has not purchased any securities for trading purposes. All of the securities the Company purchases are classified as AFS even though there is no immediate intent to sell them. The AFS designation affords management the flexibility to sell securities and position the balance sheet in response to capital levels, liquidity needs or changes in market conditions. Debt securities AFS are carried at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets with unrealized gains and losses, net of deferred income taxes, reported separately within shareholders’ equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). Securities designated as HTM are carried at amortized cost and represent debt securities that the Company has the ability and intent to hold until maturity.
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of investment securities amounted to $392.4 million, or 23% of total assets, compared to $185.1 million, or 18% of total assets, at December 31, 2019. On December 31, 2020, 38% of the carrying value of the investment portfolio was comprised of U.S. Government Sponsored Enterprise residential mortgage-backed securities (MBS - GSE residential or mortgage-backed securities) that amortize and provide monthly cash flow that the Company can use for reinvestment, loan demand, unexpected deposit outflow, facility expansion or operations.
Investment securities were comprised of AFS securities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The AFS securities were recorded with a net unrealized gain of $11.3 million and a net unrealized gain of $4.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of the net improvement in the unrealized gain position of $6.8 million, $4.5 million was net unrealized gains on municipal securities, $2.2 million was net unrealized gains on mortgages-backed securities and $0.1 million was net unrealized gains on agency securities. The direction and magnitude of the change in value of the Company’s investment portfolio is attributable to the direction and magnitude of the change in interest rates along the treasury yield curve. Generally, the values of debt securities move in the opposite direction of the changes in interest rates. As interest rates along the treasury yield curve decline, especially at the intermediate and long end, the values of debt securities tend to rise. Whether or not the value of the Company’s investment portfolio will continue to rise above its amortized cost will be largely dependent on the direction and magnitude of interest rate movements and the duration of the debt securities within the Company’s investment portfolio. When interest rates rise, the market values of the Company’s debt securities portfolio could be subject to market value declines.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $278.4 million in public deposits, or 18% of total deposits. Pennsylvania state law requires the Company to maintain pledged securities on these public deposits or otherwise obtain a FHLB letter of credit or FDIC insurance for these customers. As of December 31, 2020, the balance of pledged securities required for deposit accounts was $270.4 million, or 69% of total securities.
Quarterly, management performs a review of the investment portfolio to determine the causes of declines in the fair value of each security. The Company uses inputs provided by independent third parties to determine the fair value of its investment securities portfolio. Inputs provided by the third parties are reviewed and corroborated by management. Evaluations of the causes of the unrealized losses are performed to determine whether impairment exists and whether the impairment is temporary or other-than-temporary. Considerations such as the Company’s intent and ability to hold the securities until or sell prior to maturity, recoverability of the invested amounts over the intended holding period, the length of time and the severity in pricing decline below cost, the interest rate environment, the receipt of amounts contractually due and whether or not there is an active market for the securities, for example, are applied, along with an analysis of the financial condition of the issuer for management to make a realistic judgment of the probability that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts (principal and interest) due in determining whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired. If a decline in value is deemed to be other-than-temporary, the amortized cost of the security is reduced by the credit impairment amount and a corresponding charge to current earnings is recognized. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not incur other-than-temporary impairment charges from its investment securities portfolio.
During 2020, the carrying value of total investments increased $207.3 million, or 112%. The Company acquired securities with a fair value of $123.4 million as a result of the merger with MNB on May 1, 2020. The Company immediately sold $107.4 million of these securities. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company implemented an investment strategy to redeploy the acquired portfolio that was liquidated on May 1, 2020. The re-investment strategy was completed in the third quarter of 2020. The Company attempts to maintain a well-diversified and proportionate investment portfolio that is structured to complement the strategic direction of the Company. Its growth typically supplements the lending activities but also considers the current and forecasted economic conditions, the Company’s liquidity needs and interest rate risk profile.
A comparison of total investment securities as of December 31 follows:
As of December 31, 2020, there were no investments from any one issuer with an aggregate book value that exceeded 10% of the Company’s shareholders’ equity.
The distribution of debt securities by stated maturity and tax-equivalent yield at December 31, 2020 are as follows:
In the above table, the book yields on nontaxable state & municipal subdivisions were adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis using the corporate federal tax rate of 21%. In addition, average yields on securities AFS are based on amortized cost and do not reflect unrealized gains or losses.
Restricted investments in bank stock
Investment in Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) stock is required for membership in the organization and is carried at cost since there is no market value available. The amount the Company is required to invest is dependent upon the relative size of outstanding borrowings the Company has with the FHLB of Pittsburgh. Excess stock is repurchased from the Company at par if the amount of borrowings decline to a predetermined level. In addition, the Company earns a return or dividend based on the amount invested. Atlantic Community Bankers Bank (ACBB) stock totaling $45 thousand was acquired from the merger with MNB. The dividends received from the FHLB totaled $203 thousand and $343 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The balance in FHLB and ACBB stock was $2.8 million and $4.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loans and leases
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had gross loans and leases totaling $1.1 billion compared to $754 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $366 million, or 49%.
The increase resulted primarily from $210 million in loans acquired from the merger with MNB and $130 million in loans, net of deferred fees, originated under the PPP primarily during the second quarter 2020 that were still outstanding at year-end.
As of December 31, 2020, Company-originated loans, excluding the PPP loans, totaled $781 million compared with $754 million as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $27 million, or 4%, primarily in the residential real estate loan held-for-investment portfolio, resulting from loan modifications to refinance existing loans at market rates to qualified customers.
‎
A comparison of loan originations, net of participations is as follows for the periods indicated:
Commercial and industrial and commercial real estate
As of December 31, 2020, the commercial loan portfolio totaled $663 million and consisted of commercial and industrial (C&I) and commercial real estate (CRE) loans. Company-originated loans totaled $502 million and acquired loans from MNB totaled $161 million. As of December 31, 2019, the commercial loan portfolio totaled $358 million. and therefore, loans originated by the Company experienced a $144 million, or 40%, year-over-year increase.
Company-originated loans, net of fees, excluding $130 million in PPP loans, which were recorded as C&I loans, increased $14 million, or 4%, from $358 million as of December 31, 2019 to $372 million as of December 31, 2020.
This increase resulted primarily from the origination of a $7.2 million C&I loan and $6.5 million CRE loan during the fourth quarter.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, was signed into law on March 27, 2020, and provided over $2.0 trillion in emergency economic relief to individuals and businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act authorized the Small Business Administration (SBA) to temporarily guarantee loans under a new 7(a) loan program called the PPP.
As a qualified SBA lender, the Company was automatically authorized to originate PPP loans. An eligible business can apply for a PPP loan up to the greater of: (1) 2.5 times its average monthly payroll costs, or (2) $10.0 million. PPP loans have: (a) an interest rate of 1.0%; (b) a two-year loan term to maturity for loans originated before June 5th and a five-year maturity for loans originated beginning on June 5th; and (c) principal and interest payments deferred for six months from the date of disbursement. The SBA guaranteed 100% of the PPP loans made to eligible borrowers. The entire principal amount of the borrowers’ PPP loan, including any accrued interest, is eligible to be reduced by the loan forgiveness amount under the PPP, so long as the employer maintains or quickly rehires employees and maintains salary levels and 60% of the loan proceeds are used for payroll expenses, with the remaining 40% of the loan proceeds used for other qualifying expenses.
During the second and third quarter, the Company originated 1,551 loans totaling $159 million under the Paycheck Protection Program, and during the fourth quarter, the Company began the process of submitting PPP forgiveness applications to the SBA. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining principal balance of these loans was $132 million as the Company received full and partial forgiveness totaling $27 million, or 17% of the balance originated.
As a PPP lender, the Company received fee income of approximately $5.6 million. The Company recognized $3.3 million of PPP fee income during the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020 with the remaining amount to be recognized in future quarters. Unearned fees attributed to PPP loans net of fees paid to referral sources, as prescribed by the SBA under the PPP program, was $2.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
The PPP loans originated by size were as follows as of December 31, 2020:
As part of the Economic Relief Act, which became law on December 27, 2020, an additional $284 billion was allocated to a reauthorized and revised PPP. On January 19, 2021, the Company began processing and originating PPP loans, and through February 28, 2021, the Company has originated 699 loans totaling $65.9 million with expected fee income of $3.4 million.
Consumer
As of December 31, 2020, the consumer loan portfolio totaled $216 million and consisted of home equity installment, home equity line of credit, auto, direct finance leases and other consumer loans. Company-originated loans totaled $205 million and acquired loans from MNB totaled $11 million. As of December 31, 2019, the consumer loan portfolio totaled $212 million. The $4 million, or 2%, increase in the consumer loan portfolio was due to the MNB acquisition.
Net of MNB-acquired loans, company-originated loans decreased by $7 million, or 3%. This reduction in company-originated consumer loans was primarily the result of net runoff in the auto loan portfolio, the result of COVID-19’s impact on car sales during the second and third quarters of 2020.
Residential
As of December 31, 2020, the residential loan portfolio totaled $242 million and consisted primarily of held-for-investment residential loans for primary residences. Company-originated loans totaled $204 million and acquired loans from MNB totaled $38 million. As of December 31, 2019, the residential loan portfolio totaled $185 million. The $57 million, or 31%, increase in the residential loan portfolio was primarily due to the MNB acquisition.
Net of MNB-acquired loans, Company-originated loans increased by $19 million, or 10%, mainly due to $29 million in 145 mortgage modifications to refinance existing loans at market rates to qualified customers.
The Company’s service team is experienced, knowledgeable, and dedicated to servicing the community and its clients. The Company will continue to provide products and services that benefit our clients as well as the community which is very important to our success. There is much uncertainty regarding the effects COVID-19 may have on demand for loans and leases. The Company has been proactively trying to reach out to customers to understand their needs during this crisis.
A comparison of loans and related percentage of gross loans, at December 31, for the five previous periods is as follows:
‎
*Management reclassified $2.5 million which had been included in non-owner occupied commercial real estate during the second and third quarter of 2020 to owner occupied commercial real estate during the fourth quarter of 2020.
The following table sets forth the maturity distribution of select components of the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020. Excluded from the table are residential real estate and consumer loans:
*In the table above, both residential and CRE construction loans are included in the one year or less category since, by their nature, these loans are converted into residential and CRE loans within one year from the date the real estate construction loan was consummated. Upon conversion, the residential and CRE loans would normally mature after five years.
The following table sets forth the total amount of C&I and CRE loans due after one year which have predetermined interest rates (fixed) and floating or adjustable interest rates (variable) as of December 31, 2020:
Non-refundable fees and costs associated with all loan originations are deferred. Using either the interest method or straight-line amortization, the deferral is released as credits or charges to loan interest income over the life of the loan.
There are no concentrations of loans or customers to several borrowers engaged in similar industries exceeding 10% of total loans that are not otherwise disclosed as a category in the tables above. There are no concentrations of loans that, if resulted in a loss, would have a material adverse effect on the business of the Company. The Company’s loan portfolio does not have a material concentration within a single industry or group of related industries or customers that is vulnerable to the risk of a near-term severe negative business impact. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 66% of the gross loan portfolio was secured by real estate compared to 67% at December 31, 2019 and 66% at December 31, 2018.
The Company considers its portfolio segmentation, including the real estate secured portfolio, to be normal and reasonably diversified. The banking industry is affected by general economic conditions including, among other things, the effects of real estate values. The Company ensures that its mortgage lending adheres to standards of secondary market compliance. Furthermore, the Company’s credit function strives to mitigate the negative impact of economic conditions by maintaining strict underwriting principles for all loan types.
Loans held-for-sale
Upon origination, most residential mortgages and certain Small Business Administration (SBA) guaranteed loans may be classified as held-for-sale (HFS). In the event of market rate increases, fixed-rate loans and loans not immediately scheduled to re-price would no longer produce yields consistent with the current market. In declining interest rate environments, the Company would be exposed to prepayment risk as rates on fixed-rate loans decrease, and customers look to refinance loans. Consideration is given to the Company’s current liquidity position and projected future liquidity needs. To better manage prepayment and interest rate risk, loans that meet these conditions may be classified as HFS. Occasionally, residential mortgage and/or other nonmortgage loans may be transferred from the loan portfolio to HFS. The carrying value of loans HFS is based on the lower of cost or estimated fair value. If the fair values of these loans decline below their original cost, the difference is written down and charged to current earnings. Subsequent appreciation in the portfolio is credited to current earnings but only to the extent of previous write-downs.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, loans HFS consisted of residential mortgages with carrying amounts of $29.8 million and $1.6 million, respectively, which approximated their fair values. During the year ended December 31, 2020, residential mortgage loans with principal balances of $155.1 million were sold into the secondary market and the Company recognized net gains of $3.5 million, compared to $52.4 million and $0.8 million, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also sold one SBA guaranteed loan with a principal balance of $0.6 million and recognized a net gain of $93 thousand compared to two SBA guaranteed loans with principal balances of $0.3 million and recognized a net gain on the sale of $34 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company retains mortgage servicing rights (MSRs) on loans sold into the secondary market. MSRs are retained so that the Company can foster personal relationships. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the servicing portfolio balance of sold residential mortgage loans was $366.5 million and $302.3 million, respectively, with mortgage servicing rights of $1.3 million and $1.0 million for the same periods, respectively.
Allowance for loan losses
Management evaluates the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio and performs a formal review of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses (allowance) on a quarterly basis. The allowance reflects management’s best estimate of the amount of credit losses in the loan portfolio. Management’s judgment is based on the evaluation of individual loans, experience, the assessment of current economic conditions and other relevant factors including the amounts and timing of cash flows expected to be received on impaired loans. Those estimates may be susceptible to significant change. The provision for loan losses represents the amount necessary to maintain an appropriate allowance. Loan losses are charged directly against the allowance when loans are deemed to be uncollectible. Recoveries from previously charged-off loans are added to the allowance when received.
Management applies two primary components during the loan review process to determine proper allowance levels. The two components are a specific loan loss allocation for loans that are deemed impaired and a general loan loss allocation for those loans not specifically allocated. The methodology to analyze the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is as follows:
identification of specific impaired loans by loan category;
calculation of specific allowances where required for the impaired loans based on collateral and other objective and quantifiable evidence;
determination of loans with similar credit characteristics within each class of the loan portfolio segment and eliminating the impaired loans;
application of historical loss percentages (trailing twelve-quarter average) to pools to determine the allowance allocation;
application of qualitative factor adjustment percentages to historical losses for trends or changes in the loan portfolio, regulations, and/or current economic conditions.
A key element of the methodology to determine the allowance is the Company’s credit risk evaluation process, which includes credit risk grading of individual commercial loans. Commercial loans are assigned credit risk grades based on the Company’s assessment of conditions that affect the borrower’s ability to meet its contractual obligations under the loan agreement. That process includes reviewing borrowers’ current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information and other information specific to each individual borrower. Upon review, the commercial loan credit risk grade is revised or reaffirmed. The credit risk grades may be changed at any time management determines an upgrade or downgrade may be warranted. The credit risk grades for the commercial loan portfolio are considered in the reserve methodology and loss factors are applied based upon the credit risk grades. The loss factors applied are based upon the Company’s historical experience as well as what management believes to be best practices and within common industry
standards. Historical experience reveals there is a direct correlation between the credit risk grades and loan charge-offs. The changes in allocations in the commercial loan portfolio from period-to-period are based upon the credit risk grading system and from periodic reviews of the loan portfolio.
Acquired loans are initially recorded at their acquisition date fair values with no carryover of the existing related allowance for loan losses. Fair values are based on a discounted cash flow methodology that involves assumptions and judgements as to credit risk, expected lifetime losses, environmental factors, collateral values, discount rates, expected payments and expected prepayments. Upon acquisition, in accordance with GAAP, the Company has individually determined whether each acquired loan is within the scope of ASC 310-30. These loans are deemed purchased credit impaired loans and the excess of cash flows expected at acquisition over the estimated fair value is referred to as the accretable discount and is recognized into interest income over the remaining life of the loan. The difference between contractually required payments at acquisition and the cash flows expected to be collected at acquisition is referred to as the non accretable discount.
Acquired ASC 310-20 loans, which are loans that did not meet the criteria of ASC 310-30, were pooled into groups of similar loans based on various factors including borrower type, loan purpose, and collateral type. These loans are initially recorded at fair value and include credit and interest rate marks associated with purchase accounting adjustments. Purchase premiums or discounts are subsequently amortized as an adjustment to yield over the estimated contractual lives of the loans. There is no allowance for loan losses established at the acquisition date for acquired performing loans. An allowance for loan losses is recorded for any credit deterioration in these loans after acquisition. As of December 31, 2020, no allowance was recorded for credit deterioration in acquired loans.
Each quarter, management performs an assessment of the allowance for loan losses. The Company’s Special Assets Committee meets quarterly, and the applicable lenders discuss each relationship under review and reach a consensus on the appropriate estimated loss amount, if applicable, based on current accounting guidance. The Special Assets Committee’s focus is on ensuring the pertinent facts are considered regarding not only loans considered for specific reserves, but also the collectability of loans that may be past due. The assessment process also includes the review of all loans on non-accrual status as well as a review of certain loans to which the lenders or the Credit Administration function have assigned a criticized or classified risk rating.
The following table sets forth the activity in the allowance for loan losses and certain key ratios for the periods indicated:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the allowance increased $4.5 million, or 46%, to $14.2 million from $9.7 million at December 31, 2019 due to provisioning of $5.3 million partially offset by $0.8 million in net charge-offs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total loans, which represent gross loans less unearned lease revenue, increased $366 million, or 49%, to $1.1 billion compared to $753 million at December 31, 2019.
The increase in the loan portfolio resulted primarily from $210 million in loans, net of deferred costs, acquired in the merger with MNB and $130 million in loans originated under the PPP, net of deferred fees, primarily during the second quarter 2020.
Loans acquired from the MNB merger (performing and non-performing) were initially recorded at their acquisition-date fair values. Because there is no initial credit valuation allowance recorded under this method, the Company establishes a post-acquisition allowance of loan losses to record losses which may subsequently arise on the acquired loans. Since no deterioration was noted for any such loans following acquisition, no allowance for loan and lease losses was provided at this time.
PPP loans made to eligible borrowers have a 100% SBA guarantee. Given this guarantee, no allowance for loan and lease losses was recorded for these loans.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the loan portfolio increased by 49% while the allowance for loan losses increased by 46% during the same period. This caused the allowance for loan and lease losses to decrease slightly as a percentage of total loans to 1.27% from 1.29% at December 31, 2019. Loan growth exceeded allowance for loan and lease losses growth because $340 million in loans, or 30% of the loan portfolio, included loans acquired from the MNB merger and PPP loans.
As of December 31, 2020, the loan portfolio, net of PPP loans and MNB acquired loans, totaled $780 million, an increase of $27 million, or 4%, from $754 million as of December 31, 2019.
Management believes that the current balance in the allowance for loan losses is sufficient to meet the identified potential credit quality issues that may arise and other issues unidentified but inherent to the portfolio. Potential problem loans are those where there is known information that leads management to believe repayment of principal and/or interest is in jeopardy and the loans are currently neither on non-accrual status nor past due 90 days or more.
During the first quarter of 2020, management increased the qualitative factors associated with its commercial, consumer, and residential portfolios related to potential adverse changes in both the volume and severity of past due and non-accrual loans along with national and local economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. A statewide shutdown of non-essential business activity was ordered on March 16th in Pennsylvania. General economic reports and data indicate a recession with elevated unemployment and sustained low inflation. The duration and severity of the recession or the ultimate path of the recovery was not known at that point.
During the second quarter of 2020, management increased the qualitative factors associated with its loan portfolio, despite the decrease in the Company-originated loan portfolio, to recognize higher inherent risk characteristics for loans that were deemed to have greater exposure to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These characteristics included loans that received forbearance of any kind (see COVID-19 Accommodations in this section below), loans that were in high risk industries, and loans that had prior delinquency of over 60 days. High risk industries include hotel accommodations, food service, energy, recreation, certain parts of the transportation segment, and other service industries. The duration and severity of the recession or the ultimate path of the recovery remained uncertain.
During the third quarter of 2020, management increased the qualitative factors associated with its loan portfolio by estimating higher inherent risk characteristics for loans that received second, COVID-related deferrals. Management further modeled the potential impact on the existing loan portfolio given the potential negative impact to the local economy given a lack of further COVID-related fiscal stimulus.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, management increased the qualitative factors associated with its loan portfolio by estimating higher inherent risk characteristics for loans that received COVID-related deferrals during the fourth quarter (both first time and additional deferrals). Management further modeled the potential impact on the existing loan portfolio given the prolonged duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions, with a greater relative increase in qualitative factors to the commercial portfolio compared to the residential and consumer portfolios.
Management will continue to monitor the potential for increased risk exposure due to the adverse economic impact of a prolonged COVID-19 pandemic. Should the duration and/or severity of the pandemic’s economic impact increase, management will take measures commensurate with the then observed risk to increase the provision for loan losses and, by extension, the allowance for loan and lease losses as appropriate.
‎
The allocation of net charge-offs among major categories of loans are as follows for the periods indicated:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge-offs against the allowance totaled $0.8 million compared with $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a $0.3 million, or 27%, decrease. The decrease was attributed to a $0.2 million recovery during the first quarter of 2020 in the form of a reimbursement from the Federal National Mortgage Association (“FNMA”) for previously sold mortgages charged-off during the third quarter of 2019. Excluding this recovery, net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have shown an improvement, decreasing by $0.1 million, or 9%, over the prior year.
For a discussion on the provision for loan losses, see the “Provision for loan losses,” located in the results of operations section of management’s discussion and analysis contained herein.
The allowance for loan losses can generally absorb losses throughout the loan portfolio. However, in some instances an allocation is made for specific loans or groups of loans. Allocation of the allowance for loan losses for different categories of loans is based on the methodology used by the Company, as previously explained. The changes in the allocations from period-to-period are based upon quarter-end reviews of the loan portfolio.
Allocation of the allowance among major categories of loans for the periods indicated, as well as the percentage of loans in each category to total loans, is summarized in the following table. This table should not be interpreted as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will occur in these amounts or proportions, or that the allocation indicates future charge-off trends. When present, the portion of the allowance designated as unallocated is within the Company’s guidelines:
The allocation of the allowance for the commercial loan portfolio, which is comprised of CRE and C&I loans, accounted for approximately 62% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020, which represents a six percentage point increase from 56% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019 and a seven percentage point increase from the 55% of the total allowance for loan and lease losses at December 31, 2018.
The increase in the allowance allocated to the commercial portfolio was attributed to the recognition of increased inherent risk due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The allocation of the allowance for the consumer loan portfolio, accounted for approximately 18% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020, which represents a three percentage point decrease from 21% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019 and a eight percentage point decrease from 26% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2018.
The decrease in the allowance allocated to the consumer loan portfolio was attributed to the relative decrease in the percentage of consumer loans in the portfolio.
The allocation of the allowance for the residential real estate portfolio, accounted for approximately 20% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020, which represents a three percentage point decrease from 23% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019 and a one percentage point increase from 19% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2018.
The year-over-year decrease in the allowance allocated to the residential real estate portfolio was attributed to the relative decrease in the percentage of residential loans in the portfolio.
The unallocated amount represents the portion of the allowance not specifically identified with a loan or groups of loans. The unallocated reserve was less than 1% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020, unchanged from less than 1% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Non-performing assets
The Company defines non-performing assets as accruing loans past due 90 days or more, non-accrual loans, troubled debt restructurings (TDRs), other real estate owned (ORE) and repossessed assets.
The following table sets forth non-performing assets at December 31:
* In the table above, the amount includes non-accrual TDRs of $0.7 million, $0.6 million, $1.7 million, $1.6 million and $1.5 million as of 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
In the review of loans for both delinquency and collateral sufficiency, management concluded that there were several loans that lacked the ability to repay in accordance with contractual terms. The decision to place loans on non-accrual status is made on an individual basis after considering factors pertaining to each specific loan. Generally, commercial loans are placed on non-accrual status when management has determined that payment of all contractual principal and interest is in doubt or the loan is past due 90 days or more as to principal and interest, unless well-secured and in the process of collection. Consumer loans secured by residential real estate and residential mortgage loans are placed on non-accrual status at 90 days past due as to principal and interest, and unsecured consumer loans are charged-off when the loan is 90 days or more past due as to principal and interest. Uncollected interest income accrued on all loans placed on non-accrual is reversed and charged to interest income.
Non-performing assets represented 0.39% of total assets at December 31, 2020 compared with 0.50% at December 31, 2019. The year-over-year improvement in the non-performing assets ratio was the result of the $690 million, or 68%, increase in total assets to $1.7 billion at December 31, 2020 outpacing the $1.7 million, or 32%, increase in non-performing assets.
As of December 31, 2020, non-performing assets increased to $6.7 million from $5.0 million at December 31, 2019. The $1.7 million year-over-year increase resulted from a $1.6 million increase in accruing TDRs and a $0.1 million increase in non-accrual loans.
From December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, non-accrual loans increased $0.1 million, or 3%, from $3.7 million to $3.8 million. At December 31, 2020, there were a total of 46 loans to 38 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from less than $1 thousand to $0.5 million. At December 31, 2019, there were a total of 44 loans to 34 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from less than $1 thousand to $0.5 million. The $0.1 million increase in non-accrual loans was the result of $2.9 million in new non-accruals, $0.2 million in expenses added to balances, $1.7 million in payments, $0.8 million in charge-offs and $0.5 million in transfers to ORE.
There were two direct finance leases totaling $61 thousand that were over 90 days past due as of December 31, 2020 compared to no loans over 90 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Company seeks payments from all past due customers through an aggressive customer communication process. A past due loan will be placed on non-accrual at the 90-day point when it is deemed that a customer is non-responsive and uncooperative to collection efforts.
‎
The composition of non-performing loans as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
*Net of unearned lease revenue of $1.2 million.
Payments received from non-accrual loans are recognized on a cost recovery method. Payments are first applied to the outstanding principal balance, then to the recovery of any charged-off loan amounts. Any excess is treated as a recovery of interest income. If the non-accrual loans that were outstanding as of December 31, 2020 had been performing in accordance with their original terms, the Company would have recognized interest income with respect to such loans of $186 thousand.
The following tables set forth the activity in accruing and non-accruing TDRs as of the period indicated:
The Company, on a regular basis, reviews changes to loans to determine if they meet the definition of a TDR. TDRs arise when a borrower experiences financial difficulty and the Company grants a concession that it would not otherwise grant based on current underwriting standards in order to maximize the Company’s recovery.
Consistent with Section 4013 and the Revised Statement of Section 4013 of the CARES Act, specifically “Temporary Relief From Troubled Debt Restructurings”, the Company approved requests by borrowers to modify loan terms and defer principal and/or interest payment for loans. U.S. GAAP permits the temporary suspension of TDR determination defined under ASC 310-40 provided that such modifications are made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief. This includes short-term (i.e. six months) modifications such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms, or delays in payment that are insignificant. Borrowers considered current for purposes of Section 4013 are those that are less than 30 days past due on their contractual payments at the time the modification program is implemented.
From December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, TDRs increased $1.7 million, or 108%, due to two loans totaling $1.6 million to a single commercial borrower modified during the third quarter being designated as TDRs and two loans totaling $0.2 million to a single commercial borrower modified during the fourth quarter being designated as TDRs. At December 31, 2019, there were a total of 8 TDRs by 7 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from $80 thousand to $0.5 million. At December 31, 2020, there were a total of 12 TDRs by 9 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from $5 thousand to $1.3 million.
Loans modified in a TDR may or may not be placed on non-accrual status. At December 31, 2020, there were four TDRs totaling $0.7 million that were on non-accrual status compared to two TDRs totaling $0.6 million at December 31, 2019.
Beginning the week of March 16, 2020, the Company began receiving requests for temporary modifications to the repayment structure for borrower loans. Modification terms included interest only or full payment deferral for up to 6 months. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 10 temporary modifications with principal balances totaling $2.2 million outstanding, which included 5 additional deferral requests for temporary forbearance modifications totaling $0.7 million and 7 first requests for temporary forbearance modifications totaling $1.5 million.
Details with respect to the actual loan modifications are as follows:
The following table provides information with respect to the Company’s commercial COVID-19 accommodations by sector at December 31, 2020.
The global pandemic referred to as COVID-19 has created many impediments to loan production relative to the measures taken to slow the spread. These measures have put a large strain on a wide variety of industries within the global economy generally, and the Company’s market specifically. The overall economic impact and effect of the measures is yet to be fully understood as its effects will most likely lag while businesses and governments inject resources to help lessen the impact. Despite efforts to lessen the impact, it is the Company’s current belief that the pandemic will temporarily, or in some cases permanently, damage our borrower’s ability to repay loans and comply with terms.
Foreclosed assets held-for-sale
From December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, foreclosed assets held-for-sale (ORE) declined from $349 thousand to $256 thousand, a $93 thousand, or 27%, decrease. Two properties to two unrelated borrowers for $338 thousand were added during the second quarter and eight properties to four unrelated borrowers for $432 thousand were added during the third quarter. Two properties were sold for $250 thousand during the first quarter, two properties were sold for $281 thousand during the second quarter, one property securing one loan was sold for $14 thousand during the third quarter, and two properties were sold for $37 thousand in the fourth quarter. The Company also sold one of two properties securing one loan for $142
thousand and two of four properties securing another loan relationship for $82 thousand in the third quarter, and one of four properties securing one loan relationship for $20 thousand in fourth quarter. Further, one foreclosed asset was written down by $14 thousand to fair market value in the third quarter and one foreclosed asset was written down by $22 thousand to fair market value in the fourth quarter.
The following table sets forth the activity in the ORE component of foreclosed assets held-for-sale:
As of December 31, 2020, ORE consisted of six properties securing loans to six unrelated borrowers totaling $256 thousand. Four properties ($223 thousand) to four unrelated borrowers were added in 2020; one property ($32 thousand) was added in 2019; one property ($1 thousand) was added in 2017. Of the six properties, one property is under agreement of sale, three properties are listed for sale, and two properties are in the process of being sold.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no other repossessed assets held-for-sale compared to two other repossessed assets held-for-sale, with a balance of $20 thousand as of December 31, 2019.
Cash surrender value of bank owned life insurance
The Company maintains bank owned life insurance (BOLI) for a chosen group of employees at the time of purchase, namely its officers, where the Company is the owner and sole beneficiary of the policies. BOLI is classified as a non-interest earning asset. Increases in the cash surrender value are recorded as components of non-interest income. The BOLI is profitable from the appreciation of the cash surrender values of the pool of insurance and its tax-free advantage to the Company. This profitability is used to offset a portion of current and future employee benefit costs. In March 2019, the Company invested $2.0 million in additional BOLI as a source of funding for additional life insurance benefits that provides for payments upon death for officers and employee benefit expenses related to the Company’s non-qualified SERP implemented for certain executive officers. In December 2020, the Company invested in $6 million in BOLI and $5 million in BOLI with annuity rider investments. The BOLI can be liquidated if necessary, with associated tax costs. However, the Company intends to hold this pool of insurance, because it provides income that enhances the Company’s capital position. Therefore, the Company has not provided for deferred income taxes on the earnings from the increase in cash surrender value.
Premises and equipment
Net of depreciation, premises and equipment increased $6.1 million during 2020. Additions of $1.6 million and assets acquired from the merger of $6.9 million were partially offset by $1.9 million of depreciation expense in 2020. The Company is expects to begin branch remodeling and corporate center planning which may increase construction in process by approximately $2.5 million in 2021. On December 23, 2020, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorized the release of $2.0 million in Redevelopment Assistance Capital Program (RACP) funding for the Company’s headquarters project in Lackawanna County. Although the Company accepted the grant, funds will not be available until a final project is selected and certain requirements are met.
Other assets
During 2020, the $1.2 million, or 26%, increase in other assets was due mostly to $0.6 million higher prepaid expenses, $0.4 million in additional miscellaneous receivable and $0.3 million increase in mortgage servicing rights partially offset by $0.4 million lower prepaid dealer reserve.
Results of Operation
Earnings Summary
The Company’s earnings depend primarily on net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest income and interest expense. Interest income is generated from yields earned on interest-earning assets, which consist principally of loans and investment securities. Interest expense is incurred from rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities, which consist of deposits and borrowings. Net interest income is determined by the Company’s interest rate spread (the difference between the yields earned on its interest-earning assets and the rates paid on its interest-bearing liabilities) and the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Interest rate spread is significantly impacted
by: changes in interest rates and market yield curves and their related impact on cash flows; the composition and characteristics of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities; differences in the maturity and re-pricing characteristics of assets compared to the maturity and re-pricing characteristics of the liabilities that fund them and by the competition in the marketplace.
The Company’s earnings are also affected by the level of its non-interest income and expenses and by the provisions for loan losses and income taxes. Non-interest income mainly consists of: service charges on the Company’s loan and deposit products; interchange fees; trust and asset management service fees; increases in the cash surrender value of the bank owned life insurance and from net gains or losses from sales of loans and securities. Non-interest expense consists of: compensation and related employee benefit costs; occupancy; equipment; data processing; advertising and marketing; FDIC insurance premiums; professional fees; loan collection; net other real estate owned (ORE) expenses; supplies and other operating overhead.
Net interest income, net interest rate margin, net interest rate spread and the efficiency ratio are presented in the MD&A on a fully-taxable equivalent (FTE) basis. The Company believes this presentation to be the preferred industry measurement of net interest income as it provides a relevant comparison between taxable and non-taxable amounts.
Overview
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated net income of $13.0 million, or $2.82 per diluted share, compared to $11.6 million, or $3.03 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $1.4 million, or 13%, increase in net income stemmed from $12.5 million more net interest income and $4.5 million in additional non-interest income which more than offset a $11.4 million rise in non-interest expenses and $4.2 million higher provision for loan losses. The increase in non-interest expenses was driven by merger-related expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition of MNB along with the impact of adding the operations of MNB.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, return on average assets (ROA) and return on average shareholders’ equity (ROE) were 0.87% and 9.06%, respectively, compared to 1.18% and 11.49% for the same period in 2019. The decrease in ROA and ROE was the result of net income growing at a slower pace than average assets and equity during 2020.
Net interest income and interest sensitive assets / liabilities
Net interest income (FTE) increased $12.8 million, or 39%, from $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $45.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to interest income increasing more rapidly than interest expense. Total average interest-earning assets increased $449.2 million while the FTE yields earned on these assets declined 65 basis points resulting in $10.6 million of growth in FTE interest income. The loan portfolio drove this growth due to average balance growth of $287.2 million which had the effect of producing $9.8 million of FTE interest income. In the investment portfolio, an increase in the average balances of municipal securities was the biggest driver of interest income growth. The average balance of total securities grew $89.0 million producing $0.9 million in additional FTE interest income despite a decrease of 70 basis points in yields earned on investments. On the liability side, total interest-bearing liabilities grew $318.8 million on average with a 58 basis point decrease in rates paid on these interest-bearing liabilities. Growth in average interest-bearing deposits of $312.4 million was offset by the effect of a 48 basis point reduction in rates paid on these deposits lowering interest expense by $1.4 million. In addition, lower rates paid on average borrowings in 2020 compared to 2019 resulted in $0.8 million less interest expense.
The FTE net interest rate spread and margin decreased by 7 and 22 basis points, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The yields earned on interest-earning assets declined faster than the rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities causing the decline in net interest rate spread. The overall cost of funds, which includes the impact of non-interest bearing deposits, decreased 47 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The primary reason for the decline was the reduction in rates paid on deposits and borrowings.
For 2021, the Company expects to operate in a relatively low interest rate environment. A rate environment with falling interest rates positions the Company to reduce its interest income performance from new and maturing earning assets. Until there is a sustained period of yield curve steepening, with rates rising more sharply at the long end, the interest rate margin may experience compression. The FOMC began easing the federal funds rate during the second half of 2019 and continued through the first quarter of 2020 which reduced rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities. On the asset side, the prime interest rate, the benchmark rate that banks use as a base rate for adjustable rate loans was cut 75 basis points in the second half of 2019 and another 150 basis points in the first quarter of 2020. The Blue-Chip Financial Forecasts’ consensus forecasts are predicting a steepening yield curve, with basically flat short-term rates and rising long-term rates. The 2021 focus is to manage net interest income through a relatively flat forecasted rate cycle by controlling loan and deposit pricing to maintain a reasonable spread. Interest income is projected to increase for 2021. Management expects to actively reduce the cost of funds to partially mitigate spread compression throughout this flat rate cycle. Continued growth in the loan portfolios complemented with investment security growth is expected to boost interest income, and when coupled with a proactive relationship approach to deposit cost setting strategies should help mitigate spread compression and contain the interest rate margin at acceptable levels.
The Company’s cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.53% for the year ended December 31, 2020, or 59 basis points lower than the cost for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest paid on both deposits and borrowings contributed to the lower cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The FOMC is not expected to cut the federal funds rate further, but the Company has the opportunity to reduce rates paid on deposits as higher-priced promotional rates and negotiated rates reprice into products with lower rates. To help mitigate the impact of the imminent change to the economic landscape, the Company has successfully developed and will continue to strengthen its association with existing customers, develop new business relationships, generate new loan volumes, and retain and generate higher levels of average non-interest bearing deposit balances. Strategically deploying no- and low-cost deposits into interest earning-assets is an effective margin-preserving strategy that the Company expects to continue to pursue and expand to help stabilize net interest margin.
The Company’s Asset Liability Management (ALM) team meets regularly to discuss among other things, interest rate risk and when deemed necessary adjusts interest rates. ALM is actively addressing the Company's sensitivity to a declining rate environment to ensure interest rate risks are contained within acceptable levels. ALM also discusses revenue enhancing strategies to help combat the potential for a decline in net interest income. The Company’s marketing department, together with ALM, lenders and deposit gatherers, continue to develop prudent strategies that will grow the loan portfolio and accumulate low-cost deposits to improve net interest income performance.
The table that follows sets forth a comparison of average balances of assets and liabilities and their related net tax equivalent yields and rates for the years indicated. Within the table, interest income was FTE adjusted, using the corporate federal tax rate of 21% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, to recognize the income from tax-exempt interest-earning assets as if the interest was taxable. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” within this management’s discussion and analysis for the FTE adjustments. This treatment allows a uniform comparison among yields on interest-earning assets. Loans include loans held-for-sale (HFS) and non-accrual loans but exclude the allowance for loan losses. HELOC are included in the residential real estate category since they are secured by real estate. Net deferred loan fee/ (cost) amortization of $2.1 million in 2020, ($0.7 million) in 2019 and ($0.7 million) in 2018, respectively, are included in interest income from loans. MNB loan fair value purchase accounting adjustments of $605 thousand are included in interest income from loans and $213 thousand reduced interest expense on deposits for 2020. Fair value purchase accounting adjustments are preliminary and subject to refinement. Average balances are based on amortized cost and do not reflect net unrealized gains or losses. Net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest income-FTE by total average interest-earning assets. Cost of funds includes the effect of average non-interest bearing deposits as a funding source:
‎
Changes in net interest income are a function of both changes in interest rates and changes in volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The following table presents the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in volumes of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities have affected the Company’s interest income and interest expense during the periods indicated. Information is provided in each category with respect to (1) the changes attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior period rate), (2) the changes attributable to changes in interest rates (changes in rates multiplied by prior period volume) and (3) the net change. The combined effect of changes in both volume and rate has been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate. Tax-exempt income was not converted to a tax-equivalent basis on the rate/volume analysis:
‎
Provision for loan losses
The provision for loan losses represents the necessary amount to charge against current earnings, the purpose of which is to increase the allowance for loan losses (the allowance) to a level that represents management’s best estimate of known and inherent losses in the Company’s loan portfolio. Loans determined to be uncollectible are charged off against the allowance. The required amount of the provision for loan losses, based upon the adequate level of the allowance, is subject to the ongoing analysis of the loan portfolio. The Company’s Special Assets Committee meets periodically to review problem loans. The committee is comprised of management, including credit administration officers, loan officers, loan workout officers and collection personnel. The committee reports quarterly to the Credit Administration Committee of the board of directors.
Management continuously reviews the risks inherent in the loan portfolio. Specific factors used to evaluate the adequacy of the loan loss provision during the formal process include:
•specific loans that could have loss potential;
•levels of and trends in delinquencies and non-accrual loans;
•levels of and trends in charge-offs and recoveries;
•trends in volume and terms of loans;
•changes in risk selection and underwriting standards;
•changes in lending policies and legal and regulatory requirements;
•experience, ability and depth of lending management;
•national and local economic trends and conditions; and
•changes in credit concentrations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $5.3 million and $1.1 million, respectively, a $4.2 million, or 384%, increase. Management increased the provision by $1.7 million, $1.2 million, and $1.3 million during the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively, compared to the prior year periods.
The increase in the provision for loan losses from the year earlier period was primarily attributed to higher credit losses inherent within the loan portfolio because of the COVID-19 crisis. See the discussion of the qualitative factors within the “Allowance for loan losses” section of this management’s discussion and analysis. Although uncertainty over COVID’s duration and severity complicates management’s ability to render a more precise estimate of credit losses, management currently believes the level of provisioning through the end of the year was adequate based on the information that was available as of the reporting date and subsequent period up to the filing date.
The provision for loan losses derives from the reserve required from the allowance for loan losses calculation. The Company continued provisioning for the year ended December 31, 2020 to maintain an allowance level that management deemed adequate.
For a discussion on the allowance for loan losses, see “Allowance for loan losses,” located in the comparison of financial condition section of management’s discussion and analysis contained herein.
Other income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-interest income amounted to $14.7 million, a $4.5 million, or 44%, increase compared to $10.2 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gains on loan sales contributed the most to the increase with $2.7 million more recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 than the year earlier period due to heightened mortgage activity. Interchange fees grew $0.9 million due to a higher volume of debit card transactions. Service charges on loans were $0.6 million higher in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily driven by more service charges on mortgage loans. Fees from trust fiduciary activities increased $0.4 million year-over-year. While non-sufficient fund charges primarily led the $0.2 million reduction of deposit service charges throughout 2020 compared to 2019 activities.
Other operating expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total other operating expenses totaled $38.3 million, an increase of $11.4 million, or 42%, compared to $26.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Merger related expenses were $2.0 million of this increase. Salaries and employee benefits contributed the most to the increase rising $5.1 million, or 34%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The basis of the increase includes $3.3 million more salaries with more full-time equivalent employees, $1.0 million more in commissions, $0.9 million more in employee bonuses, $0.4 million more in social security taxes, $0.4 million more in group insurance, $0.3 million more in stock-based compensation and $0.2 million more in 401k expenses. These increases in salaries and employee benefits were partially offset by $1.4 million more in loan origination costs deferred. Premises and equipment expenses were $1.5 million higher due to an increase in depreciation, equipment maintenance and rental expenses and expenses for pandemic response. Professional services were $1.5 million higher due to pandemic-related expenses and higher legal and audit expenses. Advertising and marketing increased $0.7 million due to more donations in 2020. Data processing and communications expense increased $0.5 million during 2020 compared to 2019 because of additional costs for data center services from more accounts and additional branches. The Company incurred a $0.5 million FHLB prepayment penalty during 2020. Automated transaction processing expenses increased $0.3 million. Partially offsetting these increases in expenses was a decrease of $0.7 million in other expenses due to higher loan origination cost deferrals from PPP lending and mortgage activity.
The ratios of non-interest expense less non-interest income to average assets, known as the expense ratio, at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 1.58% and 1.70%, respectively. The expense ratio decreased because of increased levels of average assets. The efficiency ratio increased from 63.11 % at December 31, 2019 to 63.92% at December 31, 2020 due to the increase in non-interest expenses in 2020. For more information on the calculation of the efficiency ratio, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” located within this management’s discussion and analysis.
Merger related expenses expected to be incurred by the Company of $3.7 million are anticipated during 2021 for legal, investment banking, audit, data processing, regulatory filings, shareholder conversion and severance costs for the pending merger with Landmark Bancorp, Inc.
Provision for income taxes
The Company’s effective income tax rate approximated 14.7% in 2020 and 16.7% in 2019. The difference between the effective rate and the enacted statutory corporate rate of 21% is due mostly to the effect of tax-exempt income in relation to the level of pre-tax income. The provision for income taxes decreased $0.1 million, or 3%, from $2.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $2.2 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to higher tax-exempt interest income in 2020 which offset the effect of higher pre-tax income. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act may have an effect on the Company’s effective tax rate in future periods. If the federal corporate tax rate is increased, the Company’s net deferred tax liabilities will be re-valued upon adoption of the new tax rate. A federal tax rate increase will increase net deferred tax liabilities with a corresponding increase to provision for income taxes.
‎
Comparison of Financial Condition as of December 31, 2019
and 2018 and Results of Operations for each of the Years then Ended
Executive Summary
Nationally, the unemployment rate declined from 3.9% at December 31, 2018 to 3.5% at December 31, 2019. However, the unemployment rate in the Scranton-Wilkes-Barre Metropolitan Statistical Area (local) remained at a higher level than the national unemployment rate and increased year-over-year. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the local unemployment rate at December 31, 2019 was 5.6%, an increase of 0.9 percentage points from 4.7% at December 31, 2018. During 2019, the labor force increased while the number of jobs decreased which caused the unemployment rate to grow.
During 2019, the Company’s assets grew by 3% from deposit growth and retained net earnings, which were used to fund growth in the loan portfolio. Non-performing assets represented 0.50% of total assets as of December 31, 2019, down from 0.64% at the prior year end. Non-performing assets to total assets was lower during 2019 mostly due to non-performing assets declining while total assets grew.
We generated $11.6 million in net income in 2019, up $0.6 million, or 5%, from $11.0 million in 2018. In 2019, our larger and well diversified balance sheet contributed to the success of our earnings performance. Excluding the $0.4 million in merger-related acquisition expenses incurred in conjunction with the acquisition of MNB Corporation and Merchants Bank of Bangor as well as the corresponding tax impact at the marginal tax rate, adjusted net income (non-GAAP) for the year ended December 31, 2019, would have been $12.0 million, or $3.14 diluted earnings per share, respectively, which represents an increase of 9% compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Financial Condition
Consolidated assets increased $28.8 million, or 3%, to $1,009.9 million as of December 31, 2019 from $981.1 million at December 31, 2018. The increase in assets occurred predominantly in the loan portfolio. The asset growth was funded by utilizing growth in deposits of $65.5 million and $7.4 million in retained earnings, net of dividends declared.
Funds Provided:
Deposits
Total deposits increased $65.5 million, or 9%, from $770.2 million at December 31, 2018 to $835.7 million at December 31, 2019. Money market accounts contributed the most to the deposit growth increasing $64.5 million, primarily due to higher balances of existing accounts and shifts from other types of deposit accounts resulting from the relationship pricing strategy. Additionally, the Company added new money market accounts as a result of several money market promotions throughout 2019. Interest-bearing checking accounts also increased $18.0 million due to an increase in balances from existing business customers. During 2019, non-interest bearing checking and savings accounts declined due to customers’ preference for products with higher earnings potential. Savings and club accounts declined $14.1 million as personal savings accounts earning low interest rates became less desirable. Non-interest bearing checking was down $2.7 million as money shifted to interest-bearing checking and money market accounts.
Additionally, CDs decreased $0.1 million mostly due to short-term alternatives with similar rates.
The Company did not have any CDARs as of December 31, 2019 and 2018. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, ICS reciprocal deposits represented $19.7 million and $4.7 million, or 2% and 1%, of total deposits which are included in interest-bearing checking accounts. The $15.0 million increase in ICS deposits was primarily due to public funds deposit transfers from other interest-bearing checking accounts to ICS accounts.
Short-term borrowings
Short-term borrowings decreased $38.5 million during 2019 as a result of deposit growth.
FHLB advances
At December 31, 2019, the Company had $15.0 million in FHLB advances with a weighted average interest rate of 3.01%. During September 2018, the Company borrowed $15 million with maturity dates laddered out from 3 to 5 years in order to purchase securities. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had the ability to borrow an additional $202.8 million from the FHLB.
Funds Deployed:
Investment Securities
As of December 31, 2019, the carrying value of investment securities amounted to $185.1 million, or 18% of total assets, compared to $182.8 million, or 19% of total assets, at December 31, 2018.
Investment securities were comprised of AFS securities as of December 31, 2019 and 2018. The AFS securities were recorded with a net unrealized gain of $4.5 million and a net unrealized loss of $1.4 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Of the net improvement in the unrealized gain position of $5.9 million, $3.8 million was net unrealized
gains on mortgages-backed securities, $1.9 million was net unrealized gains on municipal securities and $0.2 million was net unrealized gains on agency securities.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had $125.9 million in public deposits, or 15% of total deposits. As of December 31, 2019, the balance of pledged securities required for deposit accounts was $67.4 million, or 36% of total securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company did not incur other-than-temporary impairment charges from its investment securities portfolio.
During 2019, the carrying value of total investments increased $2.3 million, or 1%.
As of December 31, 2019, there were no investments from any one issuer with an aggregate book value that exceeded 10% of the Company’s shareholders’ equity.
The distribution of debt securities by stated maturity and tax-equivalent yield at December 31, 2019 were as follows:
In the above table, the book yields on state & municipal subdivisions were adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis using the corporate federal tax rate of 21%. In addition, average yields on securities AFS are based on amortized cost and do not reflect unrealized gains or losses.
Federal Home Loan Bank Stock
The dividends received from the FHLB totaled $343 thousand and $194 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The balance in FHLB stock was $4.4 million and $6.3 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Loans and leases
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had gross loans and leases totaling $754.3 million compared to $729.1 million at December 31, 2018 which represented an increase of $25.2 million, or 3%. The loan growth was primarily driven by residential real estate activity.
Commercial and industrial and commercial real estate
As of December 31, 2019, the commercial loan portfolio, which consisted of commercial and industrial (C&I) and commercial real estate (CRE) loans, increased $4.4 million, or 1%, compared to December 31, 2018. This increase was attributed to growth of $6.5 million in owner occupied CRE loans and $4.3 million in non-owner occupied CRE loans, partially offset by reductions of $4.3 million in C&I loans and $2.1 million in commercial construction loans. CRE loan growth activity can be attributed to new client acquisition and expansion of existing relationships.
Consumer
The consumer loan portfolio experienced a reduction, decreasing $2.4 million, or 1%, compared to December 31, 2018. This reduction in the consumer loan portfolio was attributed to a decline of $5.2 million in home equity lines of credit (HELOC), $0.7 million in direct finance leases and $0.7 million in consumer other loans, partially offset by growth of $3.9 million in home equity installment loans and $0.3 million in auto loans.
Demand for HELOCs decreased during 2019 because of homeowners’ preference for conventional mortgage loan products, which had longer terms and lower fixed rates. This trend drove the $5.2 million, or 10%, year-to-date reduction for the Company’s HELOC portfolio. The reduction in the HELOC portfolio was partially offset by a 12%, or $3.9 million, increase in the home equity installment portfolio which also offers long-term low fixed rates.
Residential
The residential loan portfolio grew $23.2 million, or 14%, during 2019. This growth was driven by a $21.2 million increase in residential real estate loans and a $2.0 million increase in residential construction loans. The Company’s mortgage loan modification program which offered refinancing to qualified customers predominantly caused the lift in residential real estate loans. Homeowners’ aforementioned preference for residential mortgage products supplemented the growth from the mortgage modification program.
As of December 31, 2019, approximately 67% of the gross loan portfolio was secured by real estate compared to 66% at December 31, 2018 and 68% at December 31, 2017.
Loans held-for-sale
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, loans HFS consisted of residential mortgages with carrying amounts of $1.6 million and $5.7 million, respectively, which approximated their fair values. During the year ended December 31, 2019, residential mortgage loans with principal balances of $52.4 million were sold into the secondary market and the Company recognized net gains of $0.8 million, compared to $32.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company also sold two SBA guaranteed loans with principal balances of $0.3 million and recognized a net gain on the sale of $34 thousand, compared to one SBA loan of $0.4 million and a net gain of $47 thousand, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2018.
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the servicing portfolio balance of sold residential mortgage loans was $302.3 million and $304.9 million, respectively. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the servicing portfolio balance of sold SBA loans was $5.3 million and $6.0 million, respectively.
Allowance for loan losses
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the allowance remained unchanged from $9.7 million at December 31, 2018 as net charge-offs of $1.1 million were offset by provisioning of $1.1 million. Total loans, which represent gross loans less unearned lease revenue, increased by $25.3 million, or 3%, to $753.4 million at December 31, 2019 from $728.1 million at December 31, 2018. The allowance for loan losses decreased as a percentage of total loans to 1.29% at December 31, 2019 from 1.34% at December 31, 2018 due to loan growth and improved asset quality.
During the first quarter of 2019, management increased the qualitative factors associated with its consumer and residential portfolios related to changes in national and local economic and business conditions and developments that will ultimately affect the collectability of these portfolios. The justification for the increase in these qualitative factors was an economic summary report indicating a weakening consumer financial wherewithal. Based upon management’s judgement, this consumer weakness will cause estimated credit losses associated with the Company’s existing portfolio to differ from historical loss experience, which necessitated increasing the qualitative factors for the loan portfolios deemed most sensitive to this development, which are its consumer and residential portfolios.
During the second quarter of 2019, management decreased the qualitative factor for its home equity installment loans and residential construction loans. The reduction was due to a decreasing trend in delinquency for the home equity installment portfolio. Further, zero delinquency in the residential construction portfolio over the past several quarters with no expectation for future delinquency in this portfolio for the foreseeable future justified the decrease in this qualitative factor.
During the third quarter of 2019, management decreased the qualitative factor for its C&I loans because of an improving delinquency trend along with a history of low delinquency levels, attributed mainly to high quality municipal loans within the C&I portfolio. Management also reduced qualitative factors to reflect the positive impact the Federal Reserve’s decision to cut the federal funds rate 0.25% twice during the third quarter of 2019 will have on estimated credit losses for the following portfolios: commercial & industrial, owner occupied commercial real estate, non-owner occupied commercial real estate, commercial construction, residential real estate, HELOC, consumer auto, and consumer other. Estimated credit losses were anticipated to decline for commercial and residential real estate secured loans as lower interest rates improve real estate valuations due to the inverse relationship between capitalization rates and the market values of real estate. Lower rates also reduce debt service requirements for variable rate loans in all portfolios, which is particularly impactful for the commercial construction, HELOC, and consumer other portfolios due to the high concentration of variable rate loans within these portfolios. Portfolios with a high concentration of fixed rate loans, such as residential real estate and consumer auto, were also likely to observe a positive change in estimated credit losses as new customers lock in lower rates than existing customers.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, management reduced the qualitive factors, based on recognition of historically low delinquency levels for the following portfolios: commercial real estate owner-occupied, commercial real estate non owner-occupied, C&I, residential real estate, HELOC, consumer auto, and consumer other. The qualitative factors for the C&I, residential construction, and home equity installment loans were not reduced as the improved delinquency for these portfolios was already accounted for in previous quarters’ adjustments. This low level of delinquency is viewed as a leading indicator for potential future losses, and, consequently, management believes this improved delinquency will cause the estimated credit losses associated with the Company’s existing portfolio to have a smaller divergence from historical loss experience than previously estimated in prior periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net charge-offs against the allowance totaled $1.1 million compared with $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, representing a $0.2 million, or 21%, increase. This increase was primarily attributed to a $0.4 million charge-off to a single commercial borrower occurring in the first quarter of 2019. During the third quarter of 2019, the Company also charged-off an aggregate of $0.3 million in collection expenses incurred since 2016 on 14 residential loans sold to Fannie Mae but serviced by the Company. The Company was pursuing recovery of these costs. During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company completed the resolution of one commercial borrower on non-accrual status, which lead to a recovery of $0.3 million as well as collection of $0.1 million in lost interest.
The allocation of the allowance for the commercial loan portfolio, which is comprised of CRE and C&I loans, accounted for approximately 56% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019, which represents a one percentage point increase from 55% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2018. The increase allocated to the commercial portfolio was attributed to loans risk rated as Special Mention and Substandard from the year earlier period.
The allocation of the allowance for the consumer loan portfolio, accounted for approximately 21% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019, which represents a five-percentage point decrease from 26% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2018. This reduction in the allowance allocated to the consumer loan portfolio was mostly related to the payoff of a consumer installment troubled debt restructured (TDR) loan with a large specific impairment that occurred during the first quarter of 2019.
The allocation of the allowance for the residential real estate portfolio, accounted for approximately 23% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019, which represents a four percentage point increase from 19% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2018. The increase in the allowance allocated to residential real estate portfolio was attributed to a higher growth in this portfolio relative to the overall loan portfolio as the residential real estate portfolio grew by $23.2 million, or 14%, to $184.9 million at December 31, 2019 from $161.7 million at December 31, 2018 compared to total loan growth of 3%.
The unallocated amount represents the portion of the allowance not specifically identified with a loan or groups of loans. The unallocated reserve was less than 1% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019, unchanged from less than 1% of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2018.
Non-performing assets
Non-performing assets represented 0.50% of total assets at December 31, 2019 compared with 0.64% at December 31, 2018. The non-performing assets ratio improved due to the net reduction in non-performing assets by $1.3 million, or 20%, to $5.0 million along with a $28.8 million , or 3%, increase in total assets to $1.0 billion. The improvement in non-performing assets resulted primarily from the payoff of two non-accruing TDRs to a single borrower totaling $0.7 million, a $0.4 million net reduction in a commercial non-accrual loans due to the sale of associated collateral, and $0.3 million in charge-offs for two commercial non-accruing TDRs to a single borrower.
From December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019, non-accrual loans decreased by $0.6 million, or 15%, from $4.3 million to $3.7 million. At December 31, 2018, there were a total of 40 loans to 34 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from less than $1 thousand to $0.6 million. At December 31, 2019, there were a total of 44 loans to 34 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from less than $1 thousand to $0.5 million. The $0.6 million decline in non-accrual loans was attributed to payments received of $2.2 million, charge-offs of $0.8 million, transfers back to accrual of $0.1 million and transfers to ORE of $1.2 million. These decreases were partially offset by the addition of $3.5 million of loans to non-accrual status along with expenses added to balances of $0.2 million.
From December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019, accruing loans that were over 90 days past due decreased from three loans totaling $1 thousand to no loans.
If the non-accrual loans that were outstanding as of December 31, 2019 had been performing in accordance with their original terms, the Company would have recognized interest income with respect to such loans of $167 thousand.
From December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019, TDRs decreased by $1.9 million, or 56%, from $3.5 million to $1.6 million. At December 31, 2018, there were a total of 15 TDRs by 11 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from $24 thousand to $0.5 million. At December 31, 2019, there were a total of 8 TDRs by 7 unrelated borrowers with balances that ranged from $80 thousand to $0.5 million. The $1.9 million decrease was driven by the payoff of two TDRs by a single borrower totaling $0.7 million, $0.3 million in additional paydowns/payoffs, charge-offs to a single borrower totaling $0.4 million, a $0.4 million transfer to ORE of a residential real estate TDR, and a $0.2 million transfer to ORE of commercial real estate TDR in 2019. These decreases were partially offset by expenses added to balances of TDRs of $0.1 million.
Loans modified in a TDR may or may not be placed on non-accrual status. At December 31, 2018, four TDRs totaling $1.7 million were on non-accrual. At December 31, 2019, two TDRs totaling $0.6 million were on non-accrual. During the first quarter of 2019, a non-accrual residential real estate TDR and a non-accrual consumer installment TDR, both to the same borrower totaling $0.7 million, were paid off. During the second quarter of 2019, a $0.4 million residential real estate TDR was moved to ORE.
Foreclosed assets held-for-sale
From December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019, foreclosed assets held-for-sale (ORE) increased from $190 thousand to $349 thousand, a $159 thousand increase. As of December 31, 2019, ORE consisted of seven properties from seven unrelated borrowers totaling $349 thousand. Two of these properties ($256 thousand) were added in 2019; two of these properties ($42 thousand) were added in 2018; two of these properties ($10 thousand) were added in 2017; and one was added in 2014 ($42 thousand). Of the seven properties, one property, totaling $224 thousand, had a signed sales agreement and the other six properties are currently listed for sale.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had two other repossessed assets held-for-sale, with a balance of $20 thousand. There was no other repossessed asset held-for-sale at December 31, 2018..
Cash surrender value of bank owned life insurance
In March 2019, the Company invested $2.0 million in additional BOLI as a source of funding for additional life insurance benefits that provides for payments upon death for officers and employee benefit expenses related to the Company’s non-qualified SERP implemented for certain executive officers.
Premises and equipment
Net of depreciation, premises and equipment increased $2.7 million during 2019. Additions of $4.2 million were partially offset by $1.5 million of depreciation expense in 2019. The additions were primarily due to the construction of the Mountain Top branch.
Other assets
During 2019, the $2.4 million, or 35%, decrease in other assets was due mostly to a $1.6 million higher net deferred tax liability, $0.4 million less in escrow receivable, a $0.3 million lower prepaid dealer reserve and the sale of a $0.2 million asset held-for-sale. These decreases were partially offset by $0.4 million higher prepaid expenses.
Results of Operations
Overview
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company generated net income of $11.6 million, or $3.03 per diluted share, compared to $11.0 million, or $2.90 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2018. The $0.6 million, or 5%, increase in net income stemmed from $1.3 million more net interest income and $1.0 million in additional non-interest income which more than offset a $1.8 million rise in non-interest expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, return on average assets (ROA) and return on average shareholders’ equity (ROE) were 1.18% and 11.49%, respectively, compared to 1.20% and 12.36% for the same period in 2018. The decrease in ROA and ROE was the result of net income growing at a slower pace than average assets and equity during 2019.
Net interest income and interest sensitive assets / liabilities
Net interest income (FTE) increased $1.3 million, or 4%, from $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to interest income increasing more rapidly than interest expense. Total average interest-earning assets increased $54.3 million and the yields earned on these assets rose 19 basis points resulting in $4.0 million of growth in FTE interest income. In the loan portfolio, the Company experienced average balance growth of $44.3 million combined with higher yields earned in all portfolios, which had the effect of producing $3.4 million of FTE interest income. In the investment portfolio, an increase in the average balances and yields of mortgage-backed securities was the biggest driver of interest income growth. The average balance of total securities grew $13.5 million producing $0.4 million in additional FTE interest income. On the liability side, total interest-bearing liabilities grew $50.5 million on average with a 34 basis point increase in rates paid on these interest-bearing liabilities. Growth in average interest-bearing deposits of $56.9 million, mostly money market accounts, and the 32 basis point higher rates paid on these deposits caused an increase of $2.4 million in interest expense. In addition, higher rates paid on average borrowings in 2019 compared to 2018 resulted in $0.3 million more interest expense.
The FTE net interest rate spread and margin decreased by 15 and 7 basis points, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The rates paid on deposits and borrowings increased faster than the yields earned on loans and investments causing the decline in FTE net interest rate spread. The overall cost of funds, which includes the impact of non-interest bearing deposits, increased 28 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018. The primary reason for the increase was higher rates paid on larger average deposits which were used to fund asset growth.
The Company’s cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 1.12% for the year ended December 31, 2019, or 34 basis points higher than the cost for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in average interest-bearing deposits combined with higher rates paid on both deposits and borrowings contributed to the higher cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
Provision for loan losses
For the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $1.1 million and $1.5 million, respectively, a $0.4 million, or 25%, decrease. This decrease in the provision for loan losses from the year earlier period was due primarily to an easing in the Company’s loan growth along with continuing strong asset quality. The provision for loan losses derives from the reserve required from the allowance for loan losses calculation. The Company continued provisioning for the year ended December 31, 2019 in order to maintain an allowance level that management deemed adequate.
Other income
For the year ended December 31, 2019, non-interest income amounted to $10.2 million, a $1.0 million, or 11%, increase compared to $9.2 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2018. Service charges on loans were $0.5 million higher in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily driven by more service charges on mortgage and commercial loans. Fees from financial services increased $0.2 million year-over-year. Interchange fees grew $0.2 million due to a higher volume of debit card transactions. Gains on the sale of loans were up $0.2 million partially offset by an increase in mortgage servicing right amortization of $0.1 million.
Other operating expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2019, total other operating expenses totaled $26.9 million, an increase of $1.8 million, or 7%, compared to $25.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Merger related expenses totaled $0.5 million of this increase. Salaries and employee benefits contributed the most to the increase rising $1.1 million, or 8%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The basis of the increase includes $1.1 million increased salaries with eight more full-time equivalent employees, $0.1 million in commissions, $0.1 million in social security taxes, $0.1 million in 401k expenses, $0.1 million in stock-based compensation and $0.1 million in expenses from the post-retirement benefit plan. These increases in salaries and employee benefits were partially offset by $0.2 million less in employee bonuses and $0.2 million lower group insurance costs. Premises and equipment expenses were $0.3 million higher due to an increase in depreciation and equipment maintenance and rental expenses. Data processing and communications expense increased $0.3 million during 2019 compared to 2018 because of additional costs for data center services. Merger-related expenses were $0.4 million in from professional fees related to the proposed merger. Loan collection expenses increased $0.1 million. Automated transaction processing expenses increased $0.1 million. Partially offsetting these increases in expenses was a decrease of $0.1 million in the FDIC assessment due to a credit received in 2019 and $0.2 million less in other professional fees.
The ratios of non-interest expense less non-interest income to average assets, known as the expense ratio, at December 31, 2019 and 2018 were 1.70% and 1.73%, respectively. The expense ratio decreased because of increased levels of average assets. The efficiency ratio increased from 62.10% at December 31, 2018 to 63.11% at December 31, 2019 due to the increase in non-interest expenses in 2019.
Provision for income taxes
The Company’s effective income tax rate approximated 16.7% in 2019 and 16.2% in 2018. The difference between the effective rate and the enacted statutory corporate rate of 21% is due mostly to the effect of tax-exempt income in relation to the level of pre-tax income. The provision for income taxes increased $0.2 million, or 9%, from $2.1 million at December 31, 2018 to $2.3 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher income before taxes in 2019 supplemented by higher taxable income from merger facilitating non-deductible expenses of $0.3 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
The Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business in order to meet the financing needs of its customers and in connection with the overall interest rate management strategy. These instruments involve, to a varying degree, elements of credit, interest rate and liquidity risk. In accordance with GAAP, these instruments are either not recorded in the consolidated financial statements or are recorded in amounts that differ from the notional amounts. Such instruments primarily include lending commitments and lease obligations.
Lending commitments include commitments to originate loans and commitments to fund unused lines of credit. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since some of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
In addition to lending commitments, the Company has contractual obligations related to operating lease and capital lease commitments. Operating lease commitments are obligations under various non-cancelable operating leases on buildings and land used for office space and banking purposes. Capital lease commitments are obligations on equipment.
‎
The following table presents, as of December 31, 2020, the Company’s significant determinable contractual obligations and significant commitments by payment date. The payment amounts represent those amounts contractually due to the recipient, excluding interest:
(1)Available credit to borrowers in the amount of $187.6 million is excluded from the above table since, by its nature, the borrowers may not have the need for additional funding, and, therefore, the credit may or may not be disbursed by the Company.
Related Party Transactions
Information with respect to related parties is contained in Note 16, “Related Party Transactions”, within the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 8.
Impact of Accounting Standards and Interpretations
Information with respect to the impact of accounting standards is contained in Note 19, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements”, within the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 8.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and notes thereto presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires the measurement of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial businesses, most all of the Company’s assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a greater impact on our performance than do the effects of general levels of inflation as interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or, to the same extent, as the price of goods and services.
Capital Resources
The Company (on a consolidated basis) and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the Company’s and the Bank’s financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of their assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk-weightings and other factors. Prompt corrective action provisions are not applicable to bank holding companies.
Under these guidelines, assets and certain off-balance sheet items are assigned to broad risk categories, each with appropriate weights. The resulting ratios represent capital as a percentage of total risk-weighted assets and certain off-balance sheet items. The guidelines require all banks and bank holding companies to maintain minimum ratios for capital adequacy purposes. Refer to the information with respect to capital requirements contained in Note 15, “Regulatory Matters”, within the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 8.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total shareholders' equity increased $59.8 million, or 56%, due principally from the $45.4 million in common stock issued as a result of the merger with MNB. Capital was further enhanced by $13.0 million in net income added into retained earnings, $0.2 million from investments in the Company’s common stock via the Employee Stock Purchase (ESPP), $1.2 million from stock-based compensation expense from the ESPP and restricted stock and SSARs and $5.4 million after tax improvement in the net unrealized gain position in the Company’s investment portfolio. These items were partially offset by $5.4 million of cash dividends declared on the Company’s common stock. The Company’s dividend payout ratio, defined as the rate at which current earnings are paid to shareholders, was 41.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The balance of earnings is retained to further strengthen the Company’s capital position. The Company’s sources (uses) of capital during the previous five years are indicated below:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company reported a net unrealized gain position of $9.0 million, net of tax, from the securities AFS portfolio compared to a net unrealized gain of $3.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The improvement during 2020 was from $5.4 million in net unrealized gains on AFS securities, net of tax. Higher net unrealized gains on all types of securities contributed to the net unrealized gains in investment portfolio. Management believes that changes in fair value of the Company’s securities are due to changes in interest rates and not in the creditworthiness of the issuers. Generally, when U.S. Treasury rates rise, investment securities’ pricing declines and fair values of investment securities also decline. While volatility has existed in the yield curve within the past twelve months, a declining rate environment is expected and during the period of declining rates, the Company expects pricing in the bond portfolio to improve. There is no assurance that future realized and unrealized losses will not be recognized from the Company’s portfolio of investment securities. To help maintain a healthy capital position, the Company can issue stock to participants in the DRP and ESPP plans. The DRP affords the Company the option to acquire shares in open market purchases and/or issue shares directly from the Company to plan participants. During 2020, the Company acquired shares in the open market to fulfill the needs of the DRP. Both the DRP and the ESPP plans have been a consistent source of capital from the Company’s loyal employees and shareholders and their participation in these plans will continue to help strengthen the Company’s balance sheet.
See the section entitled “Supervision and Regulation”, below for a discussion on regulatory capital changes and other recent enactments, including a summary of the federal banking agencies final rules to implement the Basel III regulatory capital reforms and changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act.
Liquidity
Liquidity management ensures that adequate funds will be available to meet customers’ needs for borrowings, deposit withdrawals and maturities, facility expansion and normal operating expenses. Sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, asset maturities and pay-downs within one year, loans HFS, investments AFS, growth of core deposits, utilization of borrowing capacities from the FHLB, correspondent banks, ICS and CDARs, the Discount Window of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (FRB), Atlantic Community Bankers Bank (ACBB) and proceeds from the issuance of capital stock. Though regularly scheduled investment and loan payments are dependable sources of daily liquidity, sales of both loans HFS and investments AFS, deposit activity and investment and loan prepayments are significantly influenced by general economic conditions including the interest rate environment. During low and declining interest rate environments, prepayments from interest-sensitive assets tend to accelerate and provide significant liquidity that can be used to invest in other interest-earning assets but at lower market rates. Conversely, in periods of high or rising interest rates, prepayments from interest-sensitive assets tend to decelerate causing prepayment cash flows from mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities to decrease. Rising interest rates may also cause deposit inflow but priced at higher market interest rates or could also cause deposit outflow due to higher rates offered by the Company’s competition for similar products. The Company closely monitors activity in the capital markets and takes appropriate action to ensure that the liquidity levels are adequate for funding, investing and operating activities.
The Company’s contingency funding plan (CFP) sets a framework for handling liquidity issues in the event circumstances arise which the Company deems to be less than normal. The Company established guidelines for identifying, measuring, monitoring and managing the resolution of potentially serious liquidity crises. The CFP outlines required monitoring tools, acceptable alternative funding sources and required actions during various liquidity scenarios. Thus, the Company has implemented a proactive means for the measurement and resolution for handling potentially significant adverse liquidity conditions. At least quarterly, the CFP monitoring tools, current liquidity position and monthly projected liquidity sources and uses are presented and reviewed by the Company’s Asset/Liability Committee. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had not experienced any adverse issues that would give rise to its inability to raise liquidity in an emergency situation.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated $53.7 million of cash. During the period, the Company’s operations provided approximately $0.3 million mostly from $44.4 million of net cash inflow from the components of net interest income offset by $18.6 million in originations of loans HFS over proceeds; net non-interest expense/income related payments of $22.2 million and $3.3 million in estimated tax payments. Cash inflow from interest-earning assets, deposits, loan payments and the sale of securities were used to purchase investment securities and replace maturing and cash runoff of securities, fund the loan portfolio, pay down FHLB advances and overnight borrowings, purchase bank-owned life insurance, invest in bank premises and equipment and make net dividend payments. The Company received a large amount of public deposits over the past four years. The seasonal nature of deposits from municipalities and other public funding sources requires the Company to be prepared for the inherent volatility and the unpredictable timing of cash outflow from this
customer base, including maintaining the requirements to pledge investment securities. Starting in 2019, the Company made an effort to open new public accounts as ICS accounts and transfer some existing public accounts to ICS accounts in order to provide the customer with FDIC insurance and to free up the Company’s unencumbered securities to improve liquidity. Accordingly, the use of short-term overnight borrowings could be used to fulfill funding gap needs. The CFP is a tool to help the Company ensure that alternative funding sources are available to meet its liquidity needs.
During 2020, the Company also experienced deposit inflow resulting from businesses and municipalities that received relief from the CARES Act and less consumer spending. During the first half of 2021, the Company expects additional personal deposit balance growth from the third round of economic impact payments. There is uncertainty about the length of time that these deposits will remain which could increase our excess cash balances. The Company will continue to monitor deposit fluctuation for significant changes.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company maintained $69.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and $422.2 million of investments AFS and loans HFS. Also as of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $428.7 million available to borrow from the FHLB, $31.0 million from correspondent banks, $91.0 million from the FRB and $255.9 million from the Promontory One-Way Buy program. The combined total of $1,298.1 million represented 76% of total assets at December 31, 2020. Management believes this level of liquidity to be strong and adequate to support current operations.
For a discussion on the Company’s significant determinable contractual obligations and significant commitments, see “Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations,” above.
Management of interest rate risk and market risk analysis
The adequacy and effectiveness of an institution’s interest rate risk management process and the level of its exposures are critical factors in the regulatory evaluation of an institution’s sensitivity to changes in interest rates and capital adequacy. Management believes the Company’s interest rate risk measurement framework is sound and provides an effective means to measure, monitor, analyze, identify and control interest rate risk in the balance sheet.
The Company is subject to the interest rate risks inherent in its lending, investing and financing activities. Fluctuations of interest rates will impact interest income and interest expense along with affecting market values of all interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, except for those assets or liabilities with a short term remaining to maturity. Interest rate risk management is an integral part of the asset/liability management process. The Company has instituted certain procedures and policy guidelines to manage the interest rate risk position. Those internal policies enable the Company to react to changes in market rates to protect net interest income from significant fluctuations. The primary objective in managing interest rate risk is to minimize the adverse impact of changes in interest rates on net interest income along with creating an asset/liability structure that maximizes earnings.
Asset/Liability Management. One major objective of the Company when managing the rate sensitivity of its assets and liabilities is to stabilize net interest income. The management of and authority to assume interest rate risk is the responsibility of the Company’s Asset/Liability Committee (ALCO), which is comprised of senior management and members of the board of directors. ALCO meets quarterly to monitor the relationship of interest sensitive assets to interest sensitive liabilities. The process to review interest rate risk is a regular part of managing the Company. Consistent policies and practices of measuring and reporting interest rate risk exposure, particularly regarding the treatment of non-contractual assets and liabilities, are in effect. In addition, there is an annual process to review the interest rate risk policy with the board of directors which includes limits on the impact to earnings from shifts in interest rates.
Interest Rate Risk Measurement. Interest rate risk is monitored through the use of three complementary measures: static gap analysis, earnings at risk simulation and economic value at risk simulation. While each of the interest rate risk measurements has limitations, collectively, they represent a reasonably comprehensive view of the magnitude of interest rate risk in the Company and the distribution of risk along the yield curve, the level of risk through time and the amount of exposure to changes in certain interest rate relationships.
Static Gap. The ratio between assets and liabilities re-pricing in specific time intervals is referred to as an interest rate sensitivity gap. Interest rate sensitivity gaps can be managed to take advantage of the slope of the yield curve as well as forecasted changes in the level of interest rate changes.
To manage this interest rate sensitivity gap position, an asset/liability model commonly known as cumulative gap analysis is used to monitor the difference in the volume of the Company’s interest sensitive assets and liabilities that mature or re-price within given time intervals. A positive gap (asset sensitive) indicates that more assets will re-price during a given period compared to liabilities, while a negative gap (liability sensitive) indicates the opposite effect. The Company employs computerized net interest income simulation modeling to assist in quantifying interest rate risk exposure. This process measures and quantifies the impact on net interest income through varying interest rate changes and balance sheet compositions. The use of this model assists the ALCO to gauge the effects of the interest rate changes on interest-sensitive assets and liabilities in order to determine what impact these rate changes will have upon the net interest spread. At December 31, 2020, the Company maintained a one-year cumulative gap of positive (asset sensitive) $243.6 million, or 14%, of total assets. The effect of this positive gap position provided a mismatch of assets and liabilities which may expose the Company to interest rate risk during periods of falling interest rates. Conversely, in an increasing interest rate environment,
net interest income could be positively impacted because more assets than liabilities will re-price upward during the one-year period.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the method of analysis discussed above and presented in the next table. Although certain assets and liabilities may have similar maturities or periods of re-pricing, they may react in different degrees to changes in market interest rates. The interest rates on certain types of assets and liabilities may fluctuate in advance of changes in market interest rates, while interest rates on other types of assets and liabilities may lag behind changes in market interest rates. Certain assets, such as adjustable-rate mortgages, have features which restrict changes in interest rates on a short-term basis and over the life of the asset. In the event of a change in interest rates, prepayment and early withdrawal levels may deviate significantly from those assumed in calculating the table amounts. The ability of many borrowers to service their adjustable-rate debt may decrease in the event of an interest rate increase.
The following table reflects the re-pricing of the balance sheet or “gap” position at December 31, 2020:
(1)Includes restricted investments in bank stock and the net unrealized gains/losses on available-for-sale securities.
(2)Investments and loans are included in the earlier of the period in which interest rates were next scheduled to adjust or the period in which they are due. In addition, loans were included in the periods in which they are scheduled to be repaid based on scheduled amortization. For amortizing loans and MBS - GSE residential, annual prepayment rates are assumed reflecting historical experience as well as management’s knowledge and experience of its loan products.
(3)The Company’s demand and savings accounts were generally subject to immediate withdrawal. However, management considers a certain amount of such accounts to be core accounts having significantly longer effective maturities based on the retention experiences of such deposits in changing interest rate environments. The effective maturities presented are the recommended maturity distribution limits for non-maturing deposits based on historical deposit studies.
Earnings at Risk and Economic Value at Risk Simulations. The Company recognizes that more sophisticated tools exist for measuring the interest rate risk in the balance sheet that extend beyond static re-pricing gap analysis. Although it will continue to measure its re-pricing gap position, the Company utilizes additional modeling for identifying and measuring the interest rate risk in the overall balance sheet. The ALCO is responsible for focusing on “earnings at risk” and “economic value at risk”, and how both relate to the risk-based capital position when analyzing the interest rate risk.
Earnings at Risk. An earnings at risk simulation measures the change in net interest income and net income should interest rates rise and fall. The simulation recognizes that not all assets and liabilities re-price one-for-one with market rates (e.g., savings rate). The ALCO looks at “earnings at risk” to determine income changes from a base case scenario under an increase and decrease of 200 basis points in interest rate simulation models.
Economic Value at Risk. An earnings at risk simulation measures the short-term risk in the balance sheet. Economic value (or portfolio equity) at risk measures the long-term risk by finding the net present value of the future cash flows from the Company’s existing assets and liabilities. The ALCO examines this ratio quarterly utilizing an increase and decrease of 200 basis points in interest rate simulation models. The ALCO recognizes that, in some instances, this ratio may contradict the “earnings at risk” ratio.
The following table illustrates the simulated impact of an immediate 200 basis points upward or downward movement in interest rates on net interest income, net income and the change in the economic value (portfolio equity). This analysis assumed that the adjusted interest-earning asset and interest-bearing liability levels at December 31, 2020 remained constant. The impact of the rate movements was developed by simulating the effect of the rate change over a twelve-month period from the December 31, 2020 levels:
Economic value has the most meaning when viewed within the context of risk-based capital. Therefore, the economic value may normally change beyond the Company’s policy guideline for a short period of time as long as the risk-based capital ratio (after adjusting for the excess equity exposure) is greater than 10%. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s risk-based capital ratio was 16.46%.
The table below summarizes estimated changes in net interest income over a twelve-month period beginning January 1, 2021, under alternate interest rate scenarios using the income simulation model described above:
Simulation models require assumptions about certain categories of assets and liabilities. The models schedule existing assets and liabilities by their contractual maturity, estimated likely call date or earliest re-pricing opportunity. MBS - GSE residential securities and amortizing loans are scheduled based on their anticipated cash flow including estimated prepayments. For investment securities, the Company uses a third-party service to provide cash flow estimates in the various rate environments. Savings, money market and interest-bearing checking accounts do not have stated maturities or re-pricing terms and can be withdrawn or re-price at any time. This may impact the margin if more expensive alternative sources of deposits are required to fund loans or deposit runoff. Management projects the re-pricing characteristics of these accounts based on historical performance and assumptions that it believes reflect their rate sensitivity. The model reinvests all maturities, repayments and prepayments for each type of asset or liability into the same product for a new like term at current product interest rates. As a result, the mix of interest-earning assets and interest bearing-liabilities is held constant.
Supervision and Regulation
The following is a brief summary of the regulatory environment in which the Company and the Bank operate and is not designed to be a complete discussion of all statutes and regulations affecting such operations, including those statutes and regulations specifically mentioned herein. Changes in the laws and regulations applicable to the Company and the Bank can affect the operating environment in substantial and unpredictable ways. We cannot accurately predict whether legislation will ultimately be enacted, and if enacted, the ultimate effect that legislation or implementing regulations would have on our financial condition or results of operations. While banking regulations are material to the operations of the Company and the Bank, it should be noted that supervision, regulation and examination of the Company and the Bank are intended primarily for the protection of depositors, not shareholders.
‎
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) was signed into law. Among other changes, the Tax Act reduces the Company’s federal corporate income tax rate from 34% to 21% effective January 1, 2018. The Company anticipates that this tax rate change should reduce its federal income tax liability in future years beginning with 2018. However, the Company did recognize certain effects of the tax law changes in 2017. U.S. generally accepted accounting principles require companies to re-value their deferred tax assets and liabilities as of the date of enactment, with resulting tax effects accounted for in the reporting period of enactment. Since the enactment took place in December 2017, the Company revalued its net deferred tax liabilities in the fourth quarter of 2017 resulting in a $1.1 million addition to earnings in 2017.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), also known as the “Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act,” was established in 2002 and introduced major changes to the regulation of financial practice. SOX represents a comprehensive revision of laws affecting corporate governance, accounting obligations, and corporate reporting. SOX is applicable to all companies with equity or debt securities that are either registered, or file reports under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In particular, SOX establishes: (i) requirements for audit committees, including independence, expertise, and responsibilities; (ii) additional responsibilities regarding financial statements for the Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer of the reporting company; (iii) standards for auditors and regulation of audits; (iv) increased disclosure and reporting obligations for the reporting company and its directors and executive officers; and (v) increased civil and criminal penalties for violations of the securities laws.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA)
The FDICIA established five different levels of capitalization of financial institutions, with “prompt corrective actions” and significant operational restrictions imposed on institutions that are capital deficient under the categories. The five categories are:
well capitalized;
adequately capitalized;
undercapitalized;
significantly undercapitalized, and
critically undercapitalized.
To be considered well capitalized, an institution must have a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10%, a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 8%, a leverage capital ratio of at least 5%, and must not be subject to any order or directive requiring the institution to improve its capital level. An institution falls within the adequately capitalized category if it has a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 8%, a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 6%, and a leverage capital ratio of at least 4%. Institutions with lower capital levels are deemed to be undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized or critically undercapitalized, depending on their actual capital levels. In addition, the appropriate federal regulatory agency may downgrade an institution to the next lower capital category upon a determination that the institution is in an unsafe or unsound condition, or is engaged in an unsafe or unsound practice. Institutions are required under the FDICIA to closely monitor their capital levels and to notify their appropriate regulatory agency of any basis for a change in capital category.
Regulatory oversight of an institution becomes more stringent with each lower capital category, with certain “prompt corrective actions” imposed depending on the level of capital deficiency.
Recent Legislation and Rulemaking
Regulatory Capital Changes
In July 2013, the federal banking agencies issued final rules to implement the Basel III regulatory capital reforms and changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The phase-in period for community banking organizations began on January 1, 2015, while larger institutions (generally those with assets of $250 billion or more) began compliance on January 1, 2014. The final rules call for the following capital requirements:
A minimum ratio of common tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of 4.5%.
A minimum ratio of tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of 6%.
A minimum ratio of total capital to risk-weighted assets of 8% (no change from current rule).
A minimum leverage ratio of 4%.
In addition, the final rules established a common equity tier 1 capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of risk-weighted assets applicable to all banking organizations. If a banking organization fails to hold capital above the minimum capital ratios and the capital conservation buffer, it will be subject to certain restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments. The phase-in period for the capital conservation and countercyclical capital buffers for all banking organizations began on January 1, 2016.
Under the proposed rules, accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) would have been included in a banking organization’s common equity tier 1 capital. The final rules allow community banks to make a one-time election not to
include these additional components of AOCI in regulatory capital and instead use the existing treatment under the general risk-based capital rules that excludes most AOCI components from regulatory capital. The Company made the opt-out election in the first call report or FR Y-9 series report that was filed after the financial institution became subject to the final rule.
The final rules permanently grandfather non-qualifying capital instruments (such as trust preferred securities and cumulative perpetual preferred stock) issued before May 19, 2010 for inclusion in the tier 1 capital of banking organizations with total consolidated assets less than $15 billion as of December 31, 2009 and banking organizations that were mutual holding companies as of May 19, 2010.
The proposed rules would have modified the risk-weight framework applicable to residential mortgage exposures to require banking organizations to divide residential mortgage exposures into two categories in order to determine the applicable risk weight. In response to commenter concerns about the burden of calculating the risk weights and the potential negative effect on credit availability, the final rules do not adopt the proposed risk weights but retain the current risk weights for mortgage exposures under the general risk-based capital rules.
Consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act, the new rules replace the ratings-based approach to securitization exposures, which is based on external credit ratings, with the simplified supervisory formula approach in order to determine the appropriate risk weights for these exposures. Alternatively, banking organizations may use the existing gross-up approach to assign securitization exposures to a risk weight category or choose to assign such exposures a 1,250 percent risk weight.
Under the new rules, mortgage servicing assets (MSAs) and certain deferred tax assets (DTAs) are subject to stricter limitations than those applicable under the current general risk-based capital rule. The new rules also increase the risk weights for past-due loans, certain commercial real estate loans, and some equity exposures, and makes selected other changes in risk weights and credit conversion factors.
As noted above the phase-in period for the Company began on January 1, 2015. The new rules will not have a material impact on the Company’s capital, operations, liquidity and earnings.
JOBS Act
In 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the “JOBS Act”) became law. The JOBS Act is aimed at facilitating capital raising by smaller companies and banks and bank holding companies by implementing the following changes:
raising the threshold requiring registration under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act") for banks and bank holdings companies from 500 to 2,000 holders of record;
raising the threshold for triggering deregistration under the Exchange Act for banks and bank holding companies from 300 to 1,200 holders of record;
raising the limit for Regulation A offerings from $5 million to $50 million per year and exempting some Regulation A offerings from state blue sky laws;
permitting advertising and general solicitation in Rule 506 and Rule 144A offerings;
allowing private companies to use "crowdfunding" to raise up to $1 million in any 12-month period, subject to certain conditions; and
creating a new category of issuer, called an "Emerging Growth Company," for companies with less than $1 billion in annual gross revenue, which will benefit from certain changes that reduce the cost and burden of carrying out an equity IPO and complying with public company reporting obligations for up to five years.
While the JOBS Act is not expected to have any immediate application to the Company, management will continue to monitor the implementation rules for potential effects which might benefit the Company.
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
In 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank) became law. Dodd-Frank is intended to effect a fundamental restructuring of federal banking regulation. Among other things, Dodd-Frank creates a new Financial Stability Oversight Council to identify systemic risks in the financial system and gives federal regulators new authority to take control of and liquidate financial firms. Dodd-Frank additionally creates a new independent federal regulator to administer federal consumer protection laws. Dodd-Frank is expected to have a significant impact on our business operations as its provisions take effect. Overtime, it is expected that at a minimum they will increase our operating and compliance costs and could increase our interest expense. Among the provisions that are likely to affect us and the community banking industry are the following:
Holding Company Capital Requirements. Dodd-Frank requires the Federal Reserve to apply consolidated capital requirements to bank holding companies that are no less stringent than those currently applied to depository institutions. Under these standards, pooled trust preferred securities will be excluded from Tier 1 capital unless such securities were issued prior to May 19, 2010 by a bank holding company with less than $15 billion in assets. Dodd-Frank additionally requires that bank regulators issue countercyclical capital requirements so that the required amount of capital increases in times of economic expansion and decreases in times of economic contraction, consistent with safety and soundness.
Deposit Insurance. Dodd-Frank permanently increases the maximum deposit insurance amount for banks, savings institutions and credit unions to $250,000 per depositor, and extended unlimited deposit insurance to non-interest bearing transaction accounts through December 31, 2012. Dodd-Frank also broadens the base for FDIC insurance assessments. Assessments will now be based on the average consolidated total assets less tangible equity capital of a financial institution. Dodd-Frank requires the FDIC to increase the reserve ratio of the Deposit Insurance Fund from 1.15% to 1.35% of insured deposits by 2020 and eliminates the requirement that the FDIC pay dividends to insured depository institutions when the reserve ratio exceeds certain thresholds. Dodd-Frank also eliminated the federal statutory prohibition against the payment of interest on business checking accounts.
Corporate Governance. Dodd-Frank requires publicly traded companies to give shareholders a non-binding vote on executive compensation at least every three years, a non-binding vote regarding the frequency of the vote on executive compensation at least every six years, and a non-binding vote on “golden parachute” payments in connection with approvals of mergers and acquisitions unless previously voted on by shareholders. The SEC has finalized the rules implementing these requirements. Additionally, Dodd-Frank directs the federal banking regulators to promulgate rules prohibiting excessive compensation paid to executives of depository institutions and their holding companies with assets in excess of $1.0 billion, regardless of whether the company is publicly traded. Dodd-Frank also gives the SEC authority to prohibit broker discretionary voting on elections of directors and executive compensation matters.
Prohibition Against Charter Conversions of Troubled Institutions. Dodd-Frank prohibits a depository institution from converting from a state to federal charter or vice versa while it is the subject of a cease and desist order or other formal enforcement action or a memorandum of understanding with respect to a significant supervisory matter unless the appropriate federal banking agency gives notice of the conversion to the federal or state authority that issued the enforcement action and that agency does not object within 30 days. The notice must include a plan to address the significant supervisory matter. The converting institution must also file a copy of the conversion application with its current federal regulator which must notify the resulting federal regulator of any ongoing supervisory or investigative proceedings that are likely to result in an enforcement action and provide access to all supervisory and investigative information relating thereto.
Interstate Branching. Dodd-Frank authorizes national and state banks to establish branches in other states to the same extent as a bank chartered by that state would be permitted. Previously, banks could only establish branches in other states if the host state expressly permitted out-of-state banks to establish branches in that state. Accordingly, banks will be able to enter new markets more freely.
Limits on Interstate Acquisitions and Mergers. Dodd-Frank precludes a bank holding company from engaging in an interstate acquisition - the acquisition of a bank outside its home state - unless the bank holding company is both well capitalized and well managed. Furthermore, a bank may not engage in an interstate merger with another bank headquartered in another state unless the surviving institution will be well capitalized and well managed. The previous standard in both cases was adequately capitalized and adequately managed.
Limits on Interchange Fees. Dodd-Frank amends the Electronic Fund Transfer Act to, among other things, give the Federal Reserve the authority to establish rules regarding interchange fees charged for electronic debit transactions by payment card issuers having assets over $10 billion and to enforce a new statutory requirement that such fees be reasonable and proportional to the actual cost of a transaction to the issuer. The interchange rules became effective on October 1, 2011.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Dodd-Frank creates a new, independent federal agency called the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), which is granted broad rulemaking, supervisory and enforcement powers under various federal consumer financial protection laws, including the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, Truth in Lending Act, Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act, Fair Credit Reporting Act, Fair Debt Collection Act, the Consumer Financial Privacy provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and certain other statutes. The CFPB has examination and primary enforcement authority with respect to depository institutions with $10 billion or more in assets. Smaller institutions are subject to rules promulgated by the CFPB but continue to be examined and supervised by federal banking regulators for consumer compliance purposes. The CFPB has authority to prevent unfair, deceptive or abusive practices in connection with the offering of consumer financial products. Dodd-Frank authorizes the CFPB to establish certain minimum standards for the origination of residential mortgages including a determination of the borrower’s ability to repay. In addition, Dodd-Frank will allow borrowers to raise certain defenses to foreclosure if they receive any loan other than a “qualified mortgage” as defined by the CFPB. Dodd-Frank permits states to adopt consumer protection laws and standards that are more stringent than those adopted at the federal level and, in certain circumstances, permits state attorneys general to enforce compliance with both the state and federal laws and regulations.
In summary, the Dodd-Frank Act provides for sweeping financial regulatory reform and may have the effect of increasing the cost of doing business, limiting or expanding permissible activities and affect the competitive balance between banks and other financial intermediaries. While many of the provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act do not impact the existing business of the Company, the extension of FDIC insurance to all non-interest bearing deposit accounts and the repeal of prohibitions on the payment of interest on demand deposits, thereby permitting depository institutions to pay interest on business transaction and other accounts, will likely increase deposit funding costs paid by the Company in order to retain and grow deposits. In addition, the limitations imposed on the assessment of interchange fees have reduced the Company’s ability to set revenue pricing on debit and credit card transactions. Many aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act are subject to rulemaking and will take
effect over several years, making it difficult to anticipate the overall financial impact on the Company, its customers or the financial industry as a whole. The Company will continue to monitor legislative developments and assess their potential impact on our business.
Department of Defense Military Lending Rule. In 2015, the U.S. Department of Defense issued a final rule which restricts pricing and terms of certain credit extended to active duty military personnel and their families. This rule, which was implemented effective October 3, 2016, caps the interest rate on certain credit extensions to an annual percentage rate of 36% and restricts other fees. The rule requires financial institutions to verify whether customers are military personnel subject to the rule. The impact of this final rule, and any subsequent amendments thereto, on the Company’s lending activities and the Company’s statements of income or condition has had little or no impact; however, management will continue to monitor the implementation of the rule for any potential side effects on the Company’s business.
Future Federal and State Legislation and Rulemaking
From time-to-time, various types of federal and state legislation have been proposed that could result in additional regulations and restrictions on the business of the Company and the Bank. We cannot predict whether legislation will be adopted, or if adopted, how the new laws would affect our business. As a consequence, we are susceptible to legislation that may increase the cost of doing business. Management believes that the effect of any current legislative proposals on the liquidity, capital resources and the results of operations of the Company and the Bank will be minimal.
It is possible that there will be regulatory proposals which, if implemented, could have a material effect upon our liquidity, capital resources and results of operations. In addition, the general cost of compliance with numerous federal and state laws does have, and in the future may have, a negative impact on our results of operations. As with other banks, the status of the financial services industry can affect the Bank. Consolidations of institutions are expected to continue as the financial services industry seeks greater efficiencies and market share. Bank management believes that such consolidations may enhance the Bank’s competitive position as a community bank.
Future Outlook
The Company is highly impacted by local economic factors that could influence the performance and strength of our loan portfolios and results of operations. Due to COVID-19, the national economy is struggling and the local operating environment continues to be challenging and is expected to be challenging for the near term time horizon and lags national economic trends. A consensus of economists predicts a steepening yield curve with basically flat short-term rates and rising long-term rates in 2021. Uncertainty surrounding the speed of recovery and the effect of a potentially prolonged low rate environment on the interest rate margin is the Company’s greatest interest rate risk. Earning-asset yields are expected to decline throughout the year stemming from the lower rate environment while rates on interest-bearing liabilities are expected to decline to a lesser extent from their already low levels. Jobs declined in December 2020 from a year earlier in the Scranton/Wilkes-Barre metropolitan statistical area. In 2021, we will be expanding our branch network with the acquisition of Landmark and we will continue to expand our footprint in the Allentown/Bethlehem/Easton metropolitan statistical area. We believe expanding our market area gives us opportunity for growth and we will continue to monitor the economic climate in our region, scrutinize growth prospects and proactively observe existing credits for early warning signs of risk deterioration.
In addition to the challenging economic environment, regulatory oversight has changed significantly in recent years. As described in more detail in the “supervision and regulation” section above, the federal banking agencies issued final rules to implement the Basel III regulatory capital reforms and changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The rules revise the quantity and quality of required minimum risk-based and leverage capital requirements and revise the calculation of risk-weighted assets.
Management believes the Company is prepared to face the challenges ahead. We expect that there will be further improvement in asset quality. Our conservative approach to loan underwriting will help improve and keep non-performing asset levels at bay. The Company expects to overcome the relative flattening of the positively sloped yield curve by cautiously growing the balance sheet to enhance financial performance. We intend to grow all lending portfolios in both the business and retail sectors using growth in market-place low costing deposits to stabilize net interest margin and to enhance revenue performance.