ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
ORGANIZATION OF INFORMATION
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition (“MD&A”) of FedEx Corporation (“FedEx” or the “Company”) is composed of three major sections: Results of Operations and Outlook, Financial Condition and Critical Accounting Estimates. These sections include the following information:
•
Results of operations includes an overview of our consolidated 2021 results compared to 2020 results. This section also includes a discussion of key actions and events that impacted our results, as well as our outlook for 2022. Discussion and analysis of 2019 results and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 results and 2019 results can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Annual Report”) for the year ended May 31, 2020.
•
The overview is followed by a financial summary and analysis (including a discussion of both historical operating results and our outlook for 2022) for each of our transportation segments.
•
Our financial condition is reviewed through an analysis of key elements of our liquidity, capital resources and contractual cash obligations, including a discussion of our cash flows, our financial commitments and our liquidity outlook for 2022.
•
Critical accounting estimates discusses those financial statement elements that we believe are most important to understanding the material judgments and assumptions incorporated in our financial results.
The discussion in MD&A should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report, particularly “Item 1. Business,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
- 41 -
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS SEGMENTS
We provide a broad portfolio of transportation, e-commerce and business services through companies competing collectively, operating collaboratively and innovating digitally, under the respected FedEx brand. Our primary operating companies are Federal Express Corporation (“FedEx Express”), the world’s largest express transportation company; FedEx Ground Package System, Inc. (“FedEx Ground”), a leading North American provider of small-package ground delivery services; and FedEx Freight Corporation (“FedEx Freight”), a leading North American provider of less-than-truckload (“LTL”) freight transportation services. These companies represent our major service lines and, along with FedEx Corporate Services, Inc. (“FedEx Services”), constitute our reportable segments. Our FedEx Services segment provides sales, marketing, information technology, communications, customer service, technical support, billing and collection services, and certain back-office functions that support our operating segments. The operating costs of the FedEx Services segment are allocated to the business units it serves. See “Reportable Segments” for further discussion and refer to “Item 1. Business” for a more detailed description of each of our operating companies.
The key indicators necessary to understand our operating results include:
•
the overall customer demand for our various services based on macroeconomic factors and the global economy;
•
the volumes of transportation services provided through our networks, primarily measured by our average daily volume and shipment weight and size;
•
the mix of services purchased by our customers;
•
the prices we obtain for our services, primarily measured by yield (revenue per package or pound or revenue per shipment or hundredweight for LTL freight shipments);
•
our ability to manage our cost structure (capital expenditures and operating expenses) to match shifting volume levels; and
•
the timing and amount of fluctuations in fuel prices and our ability to recover incremental fuel costs through our fuel surcharges.
Many of our operating expenses are directly impacted by revenue and volume levels, and we expect these operating expenses to fluctuate on a year-over-year basis consistent with changes in revenue and volumes. Therefore, the discussion of operating expense captions focuses on the key drivers and trends impacting expenses other than those factors strictly related to changes in revenue and volumes. The line item “Other operating expense” includes costs associated with outside service contracts (such as facility services and cargo handling, temporary labor and security), insurance, professional fees and uniforms.
Except as otherwise specified, references to years indicate our fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 or ended May 31 of the year referenced and comparisons are to the corresponding period of the prior year. References to our transportation segments include, collectively, the FedEx Express segment, the FedEx Ground segment and the FedEx Freight segment.
- 42 -
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND OUTLOOK
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS
The following table compares summary operating results (dollars in millions, except per share amounts) for the years ended May 31:
The following table shows changes in revenue and operating results by reportable segment for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
(1)
The following is a summary of the effects of the (costs) benefits of certain key items affecting our financial results (in millions) for the years ended May 31:
Overview
Volume growth, reflecting increased e-commerce demand accelerated by the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic, as well as yield improvement related to pricing initiatives, drove strong revenue and operating income growth in 2021. Increased operating expenses to support unprecedented levels of demand for our services in the COVID-19 pandemic environment, including higher labor costs, costs related to operating our air network to support higher demand in key international supply chains and higher costs associated with operating our seven-day-per-week network at FedEx Ground, were incurred in 2021. See the “Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic” section below for further information regarding the pandemic’s impact on our business.
- 43 -
Our consolidated operating income improved during 2021 due to international export and U.S. domestic package volume growth at FedEx Express, residential volume growth at FedEx Ground and pricing initiatives across all of our transportation segments. Higher variable incentive compensation expense negatively impacted year-over-year operating income comparisons in 2021 by approximately $1.3 billion, as maximum attainment levels were achieved for team members in our primary annual incentive programs.
We incurred TNT Express integration expenses totaling $210 million ($162 million, net of tax, or $0.60 per diluted share) in 2021, a decrease of $60 million from 2020. The integration expenses are predominantly incremental costs directly associated with the integration of TNT Express, including professional and legal fees, salaries and wages, advertising and travel expenses. Internal salaries and wages are included only to the extent the individuals are assigned full-time to integration activities. These costs were recognized at FedEx Express and FedEx Corporate. The identification of these costs as integration-related expenditures is subject to our disclosure controls and procedures. Integration expenses do not include costs associated with our business realignment activities. See the “Business Realignment Costs” section of this MD&A for further information.
Our 2021 results include business realignment costs of $116 million ($90 million, net of tax, or $0.33 per diluted share) associated with our workforce reduction plan in Europe announced in January 2021. See the “Business Realignment Costs” section of this MD&A for more information.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recognized $369 million ($366 million, net of tax, or $1.40 per diluted share) of goodwill and other asset impairment charges associated with the FedEx Office and Print Services, Inc. (“FedEx Office”) and FedEx Logistics, Inc. (“FedEx Logistics”) operating segments. Our 2020 results also include $66 million ($50 million, net of tax, or $0.19 per diluted share) of asset impairment charges associated with the decision to permanently retire certain aircraft and related engines at FedEx Express. See the “Goodwill and Other Asset Impairment Charges” section of this MD&A for more information.
Consolidated net income includes a pre-tax, noncash gain of $1.2 billion in 2021 ($895 million, net of tax, or $3.33 per diluted share) and a net loss of $794 million in 2020 ($583 million, net of tax, or $2.22 per diluted share) associated with our MTM retirement plans accounting adjustments. See the “Retirement Plans MTM Adjustments” section of this MD&A and Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated net income in 2021 also includes a loss on debt extinguishment of $393 million ($297 million, net of tax, or $1.11 per diluted share) associated with our capital allocation strategy, which includes reducing outstanding debt. See the “Other Income and Expense” section of this MD&A and Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Net income for 2021 includes a tax benefit of $279 million ($1.04 per diluted share) related to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which allows tax losses to be offset against income from prior years that was taxed at higher rates, and a tax benefit of $66 million ($0.25 per diluted share) from a tax rate increase in the Netherlands applied to our deferred tax asset balances. In 2020, we recognized a tax benefit of $133 million ($0.51 per diluted share) from the reduction of a valuation allowance on certain foreign tax loss carryforwards and a tax benefit of $71 million ($0.27 per diluted share) related to the CARES Act. See the “Income Taxes” section of this MD&A and Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic had a profound impact on our industry throughout 2021, resulting in unprecedented demand for our residential delivery services, rivaling our peak holiday season traffic. In addition, demand for our commercial service offerings increased throughout the year as COVID-19 restrictions moderated globally.
During 2021, we were able to flex our networks and make adjustments as needed to accommodate increased volumes under current operating conditions; however, we incurred elevated operating expenses to support demand for our services in the COVID-19 pandemic environment. Our business is labor and capital intensive in nature, which required us to incur higher costs to operate our networks during the pandemic, including increased wage rates and costs for additional personnel in place to support our operations and meet regulatory requirements. The safety of our team members, our customers and the communities in which we operate is our top priority, and we took, and continue to take, measures to adhere to all regulations and guidelines from government authorities related to the containment of COVID-19 and to protect and promote health and safety. In connection with this, we incurred increased operating expenses related to personal protective equipment and medical/safety supplies, as well as additional security and cleaning services, in order to protect our team members and customers during the COVID-19 pandemic, of approximately $255 million in 2021 and approximately $125 million in 2020. As a response to these increased costs, we implemented various pricing initiatives throughout 2021 to mitigate the negative impact of the change in our operating expense profile.
- 44 -
We also took certain actions during 2021 to improve our liquidity and strengthen our financial position, given the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2021, we issued $970 million of pass-through certificates and $3.25 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement. We used the proceeds of the senior unsecured debt offerings during the fourth quarter of 2021 to redeem $5.8 billion of our existing debt, which eliminated near-term debt obligations taken on during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements and “Financial Condition-Liquidity” below for additional information.
At the height of the pandemic, Congress passed the CARES Act, which provided financial relief to businesses to help them survive the economic impact while continuing to employ workers and keep the U.S. economy moving. During 2021, we recorded an income tax benefit of $279 million related to the CARES Act provision allowing tax losses to be offset against income from prior years and a pre-tax benefit of approximately $165 million from the excise tax holiday that expired on December 31, 2020. See Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
We expect continued uncertainty in our business and the global economy due to the duration and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, the success of efforts to contain it and treat its impact, the possibility of additional subsequent widespread outbreaks, the resulting effects on the economic conditions in the global markets in which we operate, the future rate of e-commerce growth and the timeline for recovery of passenger airline cargo capacity. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report for more information.
- 45 -
The following graphs for FedEx Express, FedEx Ground and FedEx Freight show selected volume trends (in thousands) for the years ended May 31:
(1)
International domestic average daily package volume relates to our international intra-country operations. International export average daily package volume relates to our international priority and economy services.
(2)
International average daily freight pounds relate to our international priority, economy and airfreight services.
- 46 -
The following graphs for FedEx Express, FedEx Ground and FedEx Freight show selected yield trends for the years ended May 31:
(1)
International export revenue per package relates to our international priority and economy services. International domestic revenue per package relates to our international intra-country operations.
(2)
International revenue per pound relates to our international priority, economy and airfreight services.
- 47 -
Revenue
Revenue increased 21% in 2021 primarily due to volume growth in residential delivery services at FedEx Ground and U.S. domestic package volume growth at FedEx Express, both reflecting increased e-commerce demand accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. International export package volume growth at FedEx Express, as well as pricing initiatives across all of our transportation segments, also contributed to the increase in revenue during 2021.
At FedEx Ground, revenue increased 34% in 2021 primarily due to residential delivery volume growth. Revenue at FedEx Express increased 18% in 2021 due to international export and U.S. domestic package volume growth. International export volume increased in 2021 driven by strong demand for international priority shipments due to air freight capacity constraints. FedEx Freight revenue increased 10% in 2021 primarily due to higher revenue per shipment and increased average daily shipments.
Business Realignment Costs
In January 2021, FedEx Express announced a workforce reduction plan in Europe as it nears the completion of the network integration of TNT Express. The plan will impact between 5,500 and 6,300 employees in Europe across operational teams and back-office functions. The execution of the plan is subject to a works council consultation process that will occur over an 18-month period in accordance with local country processes and regulations.
We incurred costs during 2021 of $116 million ($90 million, net of tax, or $0.33 per diluted share) associated with our business realignment activities. These costs are related to certain employee severance arrangements. Approximately $15 million was paid under this program in 2021. We expect the pre-tax cost of our business realignment activities to range from $300 million to $575 million through fiscal 2023. We expect savings from our business realignment activities to be between $275 million and $350 million on an annualized basis beginning in fiscal 2024. The actual amount and timing of business realignment costs and related cost savings resulting from the workforce reduction plan are dependent on local country consultation processes and regulations and negotiated social plans and may differ from our current expectations and estimates.
Goodwill and Other Asset Impairment Charges
In 2020, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $358 million predominantly attributable to our FedEx Office reporting unit. As a result, the goodwill attributed to this reporting unit has been fully impaired. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in store closures and declining print revenue at FedEx Office during the fourth quarter of 2020, which negatively impacted its near-term operating performance. We also recorded $11 million of other asset impairment charges at the FedEx Logistics operating segment in 2020.
In 2020, we made the decision to permanently retire from service 10 Airbus A310-300 aircraft and 12 related engines at FedEx Express to align with the needs of the U.S. domestic network and modernize its aircraft fleet. As a consequence of this decision, we recognized noncash impairment charges of $66 million ($50 million, net of tax, or $0.19 per diluted share) in the FedEx Express segment in 2020. For additional information regarding these impairment charges, see the “Critical Accounting Estimates” section of this MD&A and Note 5 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
- 48 -
Operating Expenses
The following table compares operating expenses expressed as dollar amounts (in millions) and as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
(1)
Includes TNT Express integration expenses of $210 million in 2021 and $270 million in 2020.
(2)
Includes business realignment costs associated with the workforce reduction plan in Europe.
(3) Includes goodwill and other asset impairment charges associated with the FedEx Office, FedEx Express and FedEx Logistics operating segments.
Our 2021 operating income improved due to international export and U.S. domestic package volume growth at FedEx Express and residential volume growth at FedEx Ground, reflecting increased demand accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as yield improvement related to pricing initiatives across all of our transportation segments. We incurred increased operating expenses to support unprecedented levels of demand for our services in the COVID-19 pandemic environment. Our business is labor and capital intensive in nature, which has required us to incur higher costs to operate our networks during the pandemic, including increased wage rates and costs for additional personnel in place to support our operations and meet regulatory requirements.
Volume growth in 2021, as discussed above, contributed to a 21% increase in salaries and employee benefits expense, a 24% increase in purchased transportation costs and a 14% increase in other operating expenses. Higher variable incentive compensation expense also contributed to an increase in salaries and employee benefits expense in 2021. Purchased transportation costs were also higher in 2021 primarily due to increased residential service mix at FedEx Ground. In addition, other operating expenses increased in 2021, reflecting higher self-insurance accruals at FedEx Ground.
- 49 -
Fuel
The following graph for our transportation segments shows our average cost of vehicle and jet fuel per gallon for the years ended May 31:
Fuel expense decreased 9% during 2021 due to lower fuel prices. Fuel prices represent only one component of the factors we consider meaningful in understanding the impact of fuel on our business. Consideration must also be given to the fuel surcharge revenue we collect. Accordingly, we believe discussion of the net impact of fuel on our results, which is a comparison of the year-over-year change in these two factors, is important to understand the impact of fuel on our business. In order to provide information about the impact of fuel surcharges on the trend in revenue and yield growth, we have included the comparative weighted-average fuel surcharge percentages in effect for 2021 and 2020 in the accompanying discussions of each of our transportation segments.
Most of our fuel surcharges are adjusted on a weekly basis. The fuel surcharge is based on a weekly fuel price from two weeks prior to the week in which it is assessed. Some FedEx Express international fuel surcharges incorporate a timing lag of approximately six to eight weeks.
The manner in which we purchase fuel also influences the net impact of fuel on our results. For example, our contracts for jet fuel purchases at FedEx Express are tied to various indices, including the U.S. Gulf Coast index. While many of these indices are aligned, each index may fluctuate at a different pace, driving variability in the prices paid for jet fuel. Furthermore, under these contractual arrangements, approximately 70% of our jet fuel is purchased based on the index price for the preceding week, with the remainder of our purchases tied primarily to the index price for the preceding month and preceding day, rather than based on daily spot rates. These contractual provisions mitigate the impact of rapidly changing daily spot rates on our jet fuel purchases.
Because of the factors described above, our operating results may be affected should the market price of fuel suddenly change by a significant amount or change by amounts that do not result in an adjustment in our fuel surcharges, which can significantly affect our earnings either positively or negatively in the short-term. For more information, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
We routinely review our fuel surcharges and periodically update the tables used to determine our fuel surcharges at all of our transportation segments. The net impact of fuel on operating income described below and for each segment below does not include the impact from these ordinary-course table changes.
The net impact of fuel had a modest benefit to operating income in 2021 as decreased fuel prices outpaced lower fuel surcharges.
The net impact of fuel on our operating results does not consider the effects that fuel surcharge levels may have on our business, including changes in demand and shifts in the mix of services purchased by our customers. In addition, our purchased transportation expense may be impacted by fuel costs. While fluctuations in fuel surcharge percentages can be significant from period to period, fuel surcharges represent one of the many individual components of our pricing structure that impact our overall revenue and yield. Additional components include the mix of services sold, the base price and extra service charges we obtain for these services and the level of pricing discounts offered.
- 50 -
Other Income and Expense
Interest expense increased $121 million in 2021 primarily due to our U.S. and euro debt issuances during the year. As part of our capital allocation strategy, we issued $3.25 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement during 2021 and used the net proceeds to redeem outstanding debt. In connection with our debt restructuring, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $393 million ($297 million, net of tax, or $1.11 per diluted share). See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Retirement Plans MTM Adjustments
We incurred a pre-tax, noncash MTM net gain of $1.2 billion in 2021 ($936 million, net of tax, or $3.48 per diluted share) and a net loss of $794 million in 2020 ($583 million, net of tax, or $2.22 per diluted share) from actuarial adjustments to pension and postretirement healthcare plans related to the year-end measurement of plan assets and liabilities. The net gain in 2021 is attributable to higher than expected asset returns and an improved discount rate. The net loss in 2020 is attributable to a significantly lower discount rate, partially offset by higher than expected asset returns.
In addition, we incurred a pre-tax, noncash MTM net loss of $52 million ($41 million, net of tax, or $0.15 per diluted share) in 2021 related to amendments to the TNT Express Netherlands Pension Plan. Benefits for approximately 2,100 employees were frozen effective December 31, 2020. On January 1, 2021, these employees began earning pension benefits under a separate, multi-employer pension plan. This $52 million net loss consists of a $106 million MTM loss due to a lower discount rate and a $54 million curtailment gain.
For more information, see the “Critical Accounting Estimates” section of this MD&A and Note 1 and Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
A reconciliation of total income tax expense and the amount computed by applying the statutory federal income tax to income before income taxes for the years ended May 31 is as follows (dollars in millions):
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted to address the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. Among other things, the CARES Act allows a five-year carryback period for tax losses generated in 2019 through 2021. The 2021 tax provision includes a benefit of $279 million from an increase in our 2020 tax loss that the CARES Act allows to be carried back to 2015, when the U.S. federal income tax rate was 35%. The increase in our estimated 2020 tax loss is attributable to our Application for Change in Accounting Method discussed below, voluntary contributions to our tax-qualified U.S. domestic pension plans (“U.S. Pension Plans”) and other accelerated deductions claimed on the 2020 tax return filed in 2021. The 2021 tax provision also includes a benefit of $66 million from a tax rate increase in the Netherlands applied to our deferred tax asset balances and was unfavorably impacted by an increase in uncertain tax positions for matters in multiple jurisdictions.
- 51 -
We filed an application with the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) in 2020 requesting approval to change our accounting method for depreciation to allow retroactive application of tax regulations issued during 2020 on certain assets placed in service during 2018 and 2019. During 2021, the IRS issued guidance granting automatic approval to change the method of accounting for these assets resulting in an income tax benefit of $130 million.
The 2020 tax provision includes a benefit of $133 million from the reduction of a valuation allowance on certain foreign tax loss carryforwards and a benefit of $71 million in connection with our estimated 2020 tax loss that the CARES Act allows to be carried back to 2015, a tax year when the U.S. federal income tax rate was 35%. The 2020 tax provision also includes a deferred income tax expense of $51 million for a change in deferred tax balances related to future foreign tax credits from our international structure as a result of changes in legal entity forecasts during the fourth quarter. The 2020 effective tax rate was negatively impacted by decreased earnings in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions.
We are subject to taxation in the U.S. and various U.S. state, local and foreign jurisdictions. We are currently under examination by the IRS for the 2016 through 2019 tax years. It is reasonably possible that certain income tax return proceedings will be completed during the next 12 months and could result in a change in our balance of unrecognized tax benefits. However, we believe we have recorded adequate amounts of tax, including interest and penalties, for any adjustments expected to occur.
During 2021, we filed suit in U.S. District Court for the Western District of Tennessee challenging the validity of a tax regulation related to the one-time transition tax on unrepatriated foreign earnings, which was enacted as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”). Our lawsuit seeks to have the court declare this regulation invalid and order the refund of overpayments of U.S. federal income taxes for 2018 and 2019 attributable to the denial of foreign tax credits under the regulation. We have recorded a cumulative benefit of $233 million through 2019 attributable to our interpretation of the TCJA and the Internal Revenue Code. We continue to pursue this lawsuit; however, if we are ultimately unsuccessful in defending our position, we may be required to reverse the benefit previously recorded.
For more information on income taxes, see the “Critical Accounting Estimates” section of this MD&A and Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Business Acquisitions
See Note 4 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of business acquisitions.
Outlook
During 2022, we expect volume and yield growth across our transportation segments to drive improved revenue and operating income. We anticipate our volume to continue to benefit from growing demand for our e-commerce services and international export package services. We also expect to continue to incur higher costs required to meet anticipated demand, including higher labor costs as a result of challenging labor markets. However, variable incentive compensation expenses are not expected to be an expense headwind in 2022.
The uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to continue to impact our business in 2022, as the extent and timing of the post-pandemic economic recovery remains uncertain. We expect continued demand growth for our e-commerce services and global capacity constraints to continue driving strong demand for international export shipments in 2022. We will continue to manage network capacity to the demand levels, flexing our network and making adjustments as needed to align with volumes and operating conditions.
We will continue optimizing our FedEx Ground seven-day-per-week residential delivery network capacity to meet evolving customer needs in 2022. In addition, we will continue to focus on last-mile delivery optimization by directing certain U.S. day-definite FedEx Express shipments into the FedEx Ground network to increase efficiency and lower our cost-to-serve. We also are focused on improving revenue quality and lowering costs through investments in technology aimed at improving productivity and safety.
We expect to complete the final phase of FedEx Express and TNT Express international air network interoperability in early calendar 2022 allowing us to leverage the capabilities that TNT Express adds to our portfolio, which is expected to improve our European revenue and profitability.
We expect to incur approximately $150 million of TNT Express integration expenses in 2022 in the form of professional fees, outside service contracts, salaries and wages and other operating expenses. We now expect the aggregate integration program expenses to be approximately $1.8 billion through the completion of the physical network integration of TNT Express into FedEx Express in 2022, which is slightly higher than our previous estimates due to costs associated with further optimizing our international legal entity structures and improving back-office automation to enhance long-term cost savings.
- 52 -
During 2022, we will continue to execute initiatives in addition to the integration to transform and optimize the FedEx Express international business, particularly in Europe. These actions are focused on reducing the complexity and fragmentation of our international business, improving efficiency to meet changing customer expectations and business dynamics, lowering costs, increasing profitability and improving service levels. We expect to incur additional costs, over multiple years, including transformation costs and capital investments related to these actions. As part of this strategy, in January 2021 we announced a workforce reduction plan in Europe. We expect the pre-tax cost of the severance benefits to be provided under the plan to range from $300 million to $575 million in cash expenditures through fiscal 2023. We expect savings from our business realignment activities to be between $275 million and $350 million on an annualized basis beginning in fiscal 2024. See the “Business Realignment Costs” section of this MD&A for additional information.
Our capital expenditures for 2022 are expected to be approximately $7.2 billion, an increase of $1.3 billion from 2021 due to investments in capacity to support increased volume levels, facility modernization, as well as replacement capital spend which was postponed in 2021 to improve liquidity and strengthen our financial position. Our 2022 expected capital expenditures include investments in aircraft fleet modernization, strategic investments to increase capacity and improve productivity and safety, and the FedEx Express Indianapolis and Memphis hub modernization and expansion programs.
Our aircraft fleet modernization and hub modernization and expansion programs at FedEx Express are multi-year programs that will entail significant investments over the next several years. See the “Contractual Cash Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements” section of this MD&A for details of our capital commitments for 2022 and beyond. We will continue to evaluate our investments in critical long-term strategic projects to ensure our capital expenditures are expected to generate high returns on investment and are balanced with our outlook for global economic conditions. For additional details on key 2022 capital projects, refer to the “Financial Condition - Capital Resources” and “Financial Condition - Liquidity Outlook” sections of this MD&A.
See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of these and other potential risks and uncertainties that could materially affect our future performance.
Seasonality of Business
Our businesses are cyclical in nature, as seasonal fluctuations affect volumes, revenue and earnings. Historically, the U.S. express package business experiences an increase in volumes in late November and December. International business, particularly in the Asia-to-U.S. market, peaks in October and November in advance of the U.S. holiday sales season. Our first and third fiscal quarters, because they are summer vacation and post winter-holiday seasons, have historically experienced lower volumes relative to other periods. Normally, the fall is the busiest shipping period for FedEx Ground, while late December, June and July are the slowest periods. However, FedEx Ground experienced peak-level volumes since the fourth quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For FedEx Freight, the spring and fall are the busiest periods and the latter part of December through February is the slowest period. Shipment levels, operating costs and earnings for each of our companies can also be adversely affected by inclement weather, particularly the impact of severe winter weather in our third fiscal quarter. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for more information.
RECENT ACCOUNTING GUIDANCE
See Note 2 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting guidance.
REPORTABLE SEGMENTS
FedEx Express, FedEx Ground and FedEx Freight represent our major service lines and, along with FedEx Services, constitute our reportable segments. Our reportable segments include the following businesses:
FedEx Express Segment
FedEx Express (express transportation, small-package ground delivery and freight transportation)
FedEx Custom Critical, Inc. (“FedEx Custom Critical”) (time-critical transportation)
FedEx Cross Border Holdings, Inc. (“FedEx Cross Border”) (cross-border e-commerce technology and e-commerce transportation solutions)
FedEx Ground Segment
FedEx Ground (small-package ground delivery)
FedEx Freight Segment
FedEx Freight (LTL freight transportation)
FedEx Services Segment
FedEx Services (sales, marketing, information technology, communications, customer service, technical support, billing and collection services and back-office functions)
- 53 -
FEDEX SERVICES SEGMENT
The FedEx Services segment provides direct and indirect support to our operating segments, and we allocate all of the net operating costs of the FedEx Services segment to reflect the full cost of operating our businesses in the results of those segments. We review and evaluate the performance of our transportation segments based on operating income (inclusive of FedEx Services segment allocations). For the FedEx Services segment, performance is evaluated based on the impact of its total allocated net operating costs on our operating segments.
The operating expense line item “Intercompany charges” on the accompanying consolidated financial statements of our transportation segments reflects the allocations from the FedEx Services segment to the respective operating segments. The allocations of net operating costs are based on metrics such as relative revenue or estimated services provided. We believe these allocations approximate the net cost of providing these functions. Our allocation methodologies are refined periodically, as necessary, to reflect changes in our businesses.
CORPORATE, OTHER AND ELIMINATIONS
Corporate and other includes corporate headquarters costs for executive officers and certain legal and finance functions, as well as certain other costs and credits not attributed to our core business, including certain costs associated with developing our innovate digitally strategic pillar. These costs are not allocated to the other business segments.
Also included in Corporate and other are the FedEx Office operating segment, which provides an array of document and business services and retail access to our customers for our package transportation businesses, and the FedEx Logistics operating segment, which provides integrated supply chain management solutions, specialty transportation, customs brokerage and global ocean and air freight forwarding. Additionally, Corporate and other includes the financial results of ShopRunner, Inc. beginning December 23, 2020.
In 2021, the decrease in revenue in “Corporate, other and eliminations” was due to a decline in non-shipping revenue at FedEx Office resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher revenue at FedEx Logistics. The higher revenue at FedEx Logistics in 2021 is driven by increased volumes and yields also resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the transfer of FedEx Custom Critical and FedEx Cross Border into the FedEx Express segment.
Certain FedEx operating companies provide transportation and related services for other FedEx companies outside their reportable segment in order to optimize our resources. For example, during 2021 FedEx Freight provided road and intermodal support for both FedEx Ground and FedEx Express, and FedEx Ground provided delivery support for certain FedEx Express packages as part of our last-mile optimization efforts. In addition, FedEx Express is working with FedEx Logistics to secure air charters for U.S. customers. Billings for such services are based on negotiated rates, which we believe approximate fair value, and are reflected as revenue of the billing segment. These rates are adjusted from time to time based on market conditions. Such intersegment revenue and expenses are eliminated in our consolidated results and are not separately identified in the following segment information because the amounts are not material.
- 54 -
FEDEX EXPRESS SEGMENT
FedEx Express offers a wide range of U.S. domestic and international shipping services for delivery of packages and freight including priority, deferred and economy services, which provide delivery on a time-definite or day-definite basis. The following table compares revenue, operating expenses, operating income (dollars in millions), operating margin and operating expenses as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
(1)
International domestic revenue relates to our international intra-country operations.
(2)
Includes the operations of FedEx Custom Critical beginning March 1, 2020 and FedEx Cross Border beginning June 1, 2020.
- 55 -
The following table compares selected statistics (in thousands, except yield amounts) for the years ended May 31:
(1)
International domestic statistics relate to our international intra-country operations.
FedEx Express Segment Revenue
FedEx Express segment revenue increased 18% in 2021 primarily due to international export and U.S. domestic package volume growth, as well as pricing initiatives resulting from global air freight capacity constraints.
International export average daily volumes increased 23% in 2021 led by volume growth from Asia-Pacific and Europe. In addition, industry-wide capacity constraints and actions to prioritize premium-yielding products drove a mix shift from international economy to international priority services in 2021. International export package yield increased slightly in 2021 due to favorable exchange rates and pricing initiatives resulting from global air freight capacity constraints, partially offset by base yield declines and lower fuel surcharges. U.S. domestic package average daily volumes increased 17% in 2021 driven by growth in deferred service offerings, reflecting increased e-commerce demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as growth in overnight box service offerings. U.S. domestic package yield decreased 3% in 2021 due to lower package weights and lower fuel surcharges. Average daily freight pounds increased 2% in 2021 primarily due to volume growth in international priority and U.S. services. Composite freight yield increased 11% in 2021 primarily due to improved base yields. Other revenue increased 92% in 2021 due to the transfer of FedEx Custom Critical and FedEx Cross Border into the FedEx Express segment.
- 56 -
FedEx Express’s U.S. domestic and outbound fuel surcharge and international fuel surcharges ranged as follows for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Express Segment Operating Income
FedEx Express segment operating income increased substantially in 2021 primarily due to international export and U.S. domestic package volume growth. FedEx Express segment operating results include a pre-tax benefit of approximately $165 million in 2021 from a reduction in aviation excise taxes provided by the CARES Act, which expired on December 31, 2020. These factors were partially offset by higher variable incentive compensation expense of approximately $800 million in 2021, which includes approximately $125 million in special bonuses paid in January 2021 to our front-line operational team members. We experienced constrained commercial air capacity leading to high usage of our aircraft fleet and increased costs of operating our global network in 2021 as result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Results in 2020 were negatively impacted by $66 million of asset impairment charges associated with the decision to permanently retire certain aircraft and related engines.
FedEx Express segment results include approximately $176 million of TNT Express integration expenses in 2021, a decrease of $46 million from 2020.
Salaries and employee benefits expense increased 18% in 2021 primarily due to staffing to support volume growth and higher variable incentive compensation expense. In addition, higher labor expense and increased costs associated with network contingencies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to the increase in salaries and employee benefits expense in 2021. Purchased transportation expense increased 19% in 2021 primarily due to the transfer of FedEx Custom Critical and FedEx Cross Border into the FedEx Express segment, as well as higher utilization of third-party transportation providers. Other operating expense increased 16% in 2021 primarily due to bad debt expense and additional volume-related expenses. Maintenance and repairs expense increased 19% in 2021 primarily due to additional flight hours as constrained commercial air capacity drove increased usage of owned assets.
Fuel expense decreased 8% in 2021 due to lower fuel prices, partially offset by higher aircraft and vehicle fuel usage. The net impact of fuel had a slightly negative impact to operating income in 2021 as lower fuel surcharges outpaced decreased fuel prices. See the “Results of Operations and Outlook - Consolidated Results - Fuel” section of this MD&A for a description and additional discussion of the net impact of fuel on our operating results.
FedEx Express Segment Outlook
We expect increased demand for our e-commerce services, international export volume growth and pricing initiatives to drive improved revenue and operating income in 2022. As a result of business growth and service improvement initiatives, we anticipate increases in staffing costs, purchased transportation and other operating expenses in 2022. We also expect continued high usage of our aircraft fleet resulting from limited commercial availability on transoceanic lanes.
We expect the FedEx Express segment to incur approximately $125 million of TNT Express integration expenses in 2022. See the “Outlook” section of this MD&A for additional information regarding the integration of TNT Express.
Capital expenditures at FedEx Express are expected to increase in 2022 primarily related to facility investments and vehicle purchases, partially offset by a decrease in aircraft-related payments. We continue to make multi-year investments in our facilities of approximately $1.5 billion to significantly expand the Indianapolis hub and approximately $1.5 billion to modernize the Memphis World Hub.
- 57 -
FEDEX GROUND SEGMENT
FedEx Ground service offerings include day-certain delivery to businesses in the U.S. and Canada and to 100% of U.S. residences. The following table compares revenue, operating expenses, operating income (dollars in millions), operating margin, selected package statistics (in thousands, except yield amounts) and operating expenses as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Ground Segment Revenue
FedEx Ground segment revenue increased 34% in 2021 due to residential delivery volume growth reflecting increased e-commerce demand accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, improved yields related to pricing initiatives positively impacted revenue in 2021.
Average daily volume increased 23% in 2021 primarily due to continued growth in residential services driven by e-commerce, as well as growth in commercial services. FedEx Ground yields increased 9% in 2021 primarily due to pricing initiatives.
The FedEx Ground fuel surcharge is based on a rounded average of the national U.S. on-highway average price for a gallon of diesel fuel, as published by the Department of Energy. The fuel surcharge ranged as follows for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Ground Segment Operating Income
FedEx Ground segment operating income increased 59% in 2021 primarily due to residential delivery volume growth and yield improvement. These factors were partially offset by higher purchased transportation service provider settlements related to residential service mix, increased labor expenses and higher self-insurance accruals in 2021.
Purchased transportation expense increased 31% in 2021 due to higher volumes and increased residential service mix. Salaries and employee benefits expense increased 49% in 2021 due to additional staffing to support volume growth, including costs associated with operating our seven-day-per-week U.S. network, merit increases and higher variable incentive compensation expense of approximately $215 million. Other operating expense increased 30% in 2021 primarily due to higher self-insurance accruals and additional volume-related expenses.
The net impact of fuel had a moderate benefit to operating income in 2021 as decreased fuel prices outpaced lower fuel surcharges. See the “Results of Operations and Outlook - Consolidated Results - Fuel” section of this MD&A for a description and additional discussion of the net impact of fuel on our operating results.
- 58 -
FedEx Ground Segment Outlook
We anticipate increased demand for residential and commercial services to continue at FedEx Ground in 2022. We will continue to focus on pricing initiatives to align with market demand, network capacity dynamics and labor market challenges in 2022.
FedEx Ground is making strategic technology investments to optimize last-mile deliveries via route optimization, expand capabilities to better handle large items and improve scheduling at its hubs and stations, leading to anticipated productivity improvements. Strategic investments for safety technology will remain a critical focus in 2022 throughout the FedEx Ground network. We believe these initiatives will allow for the more efficient use of our existing assets, which will drive improved performance and enhance our competitive position over the long term.
Capital expenditures at FedEx Ground are expected to increase in 2022 primarily for new and expanded facilities, as well as trailer purchases to support increased demand for our services.
FEDEX FREIGHT SEGMENT
FedEx Freight LTL service offerings include priority services when speed is critical and economy services when time can be traded for savings. Prior year statistical information has been revised to conform to the current year presentation. The following table compares revenue, operating expenses, operating income (dollars in millions), operating margin, selected statistics and operating expenses as a percent of revenue for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Freight Segment Revenue
FedEx Freight segment revenue increased 10% in 2021 primarily due to higher revenue per shipment and increased average daily shipments.
- 59 -
Revenue per shipment increased 4% in 2021 primarily due to higher base rates reflecting our ongoing revenue quality initiatives, partially offset by lower weight per shipment and lower fuel surcharge rates. Average daily shipments increased 5% in 2021 due to volumes returning to pre-COVID-19 levels and higher demand for our service offerings.
The weekly indexed fuel surcharge is based on the average of the U.S. on-highway prices for a gallon of diesel fuel, as published by the Department of Energy. The indexed FedEx Freight fuel surcharge ranged as follows for the years ended May 31:
FedEx Freight Segment Operating Income
FedEx Freight segment operating income increased 73% in 2021 driven by continued focus on revenue quality initiatives, managing our costs and improving operational efficiencies.
Salaries and employee benefits increased 6% in 2021 primarily due to higher variable incentive compensation expense of approximately $115 million, higher volumes and merit increases. Purchased transportation increased 19% in 2021 primarily due to higher utilization of third-party transportation and rail providers.
Fuel expense decreased 16% in 2021 primarily due to lower fuel prices. The net impact of fuel had a slightly negative impact to operating income in 2021 as lower fuel surcharges outpaced decreased fuel prices. See the “Results of Operations and Outlook - Consolidated Results - Fuel” section of this MD&A for a description and additional discussion of the net impact of fuel on our operating results.
FedEx Freight Segment Outlook
We expect higher revenue and operating results at FedEx Freight during 2022, and we will continue to remain focused on safety, profitable market share growth and cost management. We will also remain committed to our revenue quality initiatives and will utilize technology and engineering to improve operational productivities and efficiencies throughout our network. We will continue to invest in new service offerings and deliver improved customer experiences, including growing our FedEx Freight Direct employee-based and company-branded basic, standard and premium service offerings. FedEx Freight will continue its collaboration with FedEx Ground and FedEx Express during 2022 by providing road and intermodal support.
Capital expenditures at FedEx Freight are expected to increase in 2022 due to fleet modernization and strategic initiatives to improve the safety and security of our employees.
- 60 -
FINANCIAL CONDITION
LIQUIDITY
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $7.1 billion at May 31, 2021, compared to $4.9 billion at May 31, 2020. The following table provides a summary of our cash flows for the years ended May 31 (in millions):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities. Cash flows from operating activities increased $5.0 billion in 2021 primarily due to higher net income, the timing of variable incentive compensation payments and lower pension contributions.
Cash Used in Investing Activities. Capital expenditures increased slightly in 2021 primarily due to higher aircraft spending at FedEx Express, partially offset by lower vehicle spending across all of our transportation segments. See “Capital Resources” below for a more detailed discussion of capital expenditures during 2021.
Financing Activities. We issued $3.25 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement during 2021 and used the net proceeds to redeem $5.8 billion of outstanding debt and pay associated redemption premiums of $393 million, eliminating all debt maturities through 2025 and one maturity in 2027. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on the terms of the senior unsecured debt, including the Sustainability Notes, as well as the debt maturities redeemed.
Additionally, during 2021 FedEx Express issued $970 million of Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2020-1AA (the “Certificates”) with a fixed interest rate of 1.875% due in February 2034 utilizing pass-through trusts. The Certificates are secured by 19 Boeing aircraft. The payment obligations of FedEx Express in respect of the Certificates are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by FedEx. FedEx Express is using the proceeds from the issuance for general corporate purposes. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the terms of the Certificates.
During 2020, we issued $5.1 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement and used the net proceeds to make voluntary contributions to our U.S. Pension Plans, to redeem the $400 million aggregate principal amount of 2.30% notes due 2020 and the €500 million aggregate principal amount of 0.50% notes due 2020, to repay $1.5 billion of borrowings under our 364-Day Credit Agreement that we drew in March 2020 and $136 million of commercial paper outstanding under our commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes.
- 61 -
The following table provides a summary of repurchases of our common stock for the periods ended May 31 (dollars in millions, except per share amounts):
In January 2016, our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program of up to 25 million shares. Shares under the current repurchase program may be repurchased from time to time in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The timing and volume of repurchases are at the discretion of management, based on the capital needs of the business, the market price of FedEx common stock and general market conditions. No time limit was set for the completion of the program, and the program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. As of May 31, 2021, 5.1 million shares remained under the current stock repurchase authorization.
Effective March 16, 2021, we further amended our amended and restated $2.0 billion five-year credit agreement (the “Five-Year Credit Agreement”) and entered into a new $1.5 billion 364-day credit agreement (the “364-Day Credit Agreement” and together with the Five-Year Credit Agreement, the “Credit Agreements”). The Credit Agreements no longer contain the temporary covenant added in the fourth quarter of 2020 restricting us from repurchasing any shares of our common stock or from increasing the amount of our quarterly dividend payable per share of common stock from $0.65 per share. Prior to the amendment of the Five-Year Credit Agreement and entry into the current 364-Day Credit Agreement on March 16, 2021, our credit agreements contained a financial covenant requiring us to maintain a ratio of debt to consolidated earnings (excluding noncash retirement plans MTM adjustments, noncash pension service costs and noncash asset impairment charges) before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”) of not more than 3.75 to 1.0, calculated as of May 31, 2021 on a rolling four-quarter basis. Effective March 16, 2021, we are required to maintain a ratio of debt to adjusted EBITDA of not more than 3.5 to 1.0, calculated as of the end of the applicable quarter on a rolling four-quarter basis. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the Credit Agreements.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our operations are capital intensive, characterized by significant investments in aircraft, package handling and sort equipment, vehicles and trailers, technology and facilities. The amount and timing of capital investments depend on various factors, including pre-existing contractual commitments, anticipated volume growth, domestic and international economic conditions, new or enhanced services, geographical expansion of services, availability of satisfactory financing and actions of regulatory authorities.
The following table compares capital expenditures by asset category and reportable segment for the years ended May 31 (in millions):
Capital expenditures increased slightly during 2021 primarily due to higher aircraft spending at FedEx Express and increased spending on package handling equipment at FedEx Ground, partially offset by lower vehicle spending across all of our transportation segments, as well as lower facility expenditures at FedEx Express.
- 62 -
GUARANTOR FINANCIAL INFORMATION
We are providing the following information in compliance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X, “Financial Disclosures about Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities” with respect to our senior unsecured debt securities and the Certificates.
The $19.7 billion principal amount of the senior unsecured notes issued by FedEx under a shelf registration statement are guaranteed by certain direct and indirect subsidiaries of FedEx (“Guarantor Subsidiaries”). See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the terms of the senior unsecured debt securities. FedEx owns, directly or indirectly, 100% of each Guarantor Subsidiary. The guarantees (1) are unsecured obligations of the respective Guarantor Subsidiary, (2) rank equally with all of their other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness, and (3) are full and unconditional and joint and several. If we sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of all of the capital stock or all or substantially all of the assets of a Guarantor Subsidiary to any person that is not an affiliate of FedEx, the guarantee of that Guarantor Subsidiary will terminate and holders of debt securities will no longer have a direct claim against such subsidiary under the guarantee.
Additionally, FedEx fully and unconditionally guarantees the payment obligation of FedEx Express in respect of the $944 million principal amount of the Certificates. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the terms of the Certificates.
The following tables present summarized financial information for FedEx (as Parent) and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis after transactions and balances within the combined entities have been eliminated.
Parent and Guarantor Subsidiaries
The following table presents the summarized balance sheet information as of May 31, 2021 (in millions):
The following table presents the summarized statement of income information as of May 31, 2021 (in millions):
The following table presents summarized financial information for FedEx (as Parent Guarantor) and FedEx Express (as Subsidiary Issuer) on a combined basis after transactions and balances within the combined entities have been eliminated.
Parent Guarantor and Subsidiary Issuer
The following table presents the summarized balance sheet information as of May 31, 2021 (in millions):
- 63 -
The following table presents the summarized statement of income information as of May 31, 2021 (in millions):
LIQUIDITY OUTLOOK
In response to current business and economic conditions as referenced above in the “Outlook” section of this MD&A, we have and will continue to actively manage our cash flow and seek to protect capital in a still challenging macroeconomic environment from the ongoing pandemic. Following our 11% debt reduction in the fourth quarter of 2021, our liquidity position remains strong with $7.1 billion in cash and $3.5 billion in available liquidity under our Credit Agreements, and we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations and available financing sources will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs, including expected 2022 capital expenditures. As business and economic conditions improve, we will routinely evaluate our capital allocation strategy with a continued focus on strengthening our balance sheet.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance at May 31, 2021 includes $2.3 billion of cash in foreign jurisdictions associated with our permanent reinvestment strategy. We are able to access the majority of this cash without a material tax cost and do not believe that the indefinite reinvestment of these funds impairs our ability to meet our U.S. domestic debt or working capital obligations.
Our capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $7.2 billion in 2022, which will include strategic investments to increase capacity to support elevated volume levels, aircraft modernization at FedEx Express and investments in productivity and safety. In addition, we are making investments over multiple years of approximately $1.5 billion to significantly expand the FedEx Express Indianapolis hub and approximately $1.5 billion to modernize the FedEx Express Memphis World Hub. We expect approximately 50% of capital expenditures in 2022 to be designated for growth initiatives. Our expected capital expenditures for 2022 include $1.7 billion for delivery of aircraft and related equipment and progress payments toward future aircraft deliveries at FedEx Express. While we continue to invest in our business, the capital intensity relative to revenue remains below historical levels.
We have several aircraft modernization programs underway that are supported by the purchase of Boeing 777 Freighter and Boeing 767-300 Freighter (“B767F”) aircraft. These aircraft are significantly more fuel-efficient per unit than the aircraft types previously utilized, and these expenditures are necessary to achieve significant long-term operating savings and to replace older aircraft. Our ability to delay the timing of these aircraft-related expenditures is limited without incurring significant costs to modify existing purchase agreements.
On June 22, 2021, FedEx Express exercised options to purchase an additional 20 B767F aircraft, ten of which will be delivered in 2024 and ten of which will be delivered in 2025.
We have a shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) that allows us to sell, in one or more future offerings, any combination of our unsecured debt securities and common stock and allows pass-through trusts formed by FedEx Express to sell, in one or more future offerings, pass-through certificates.
The Five-Year Credit Agreement expires in March 2026 and includes a $250 million letter of credit sublimit. The 364-Day Credit Agreement expires in March 2022. See Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of the terms and significant covenants of the Credit Agreements.
For 2022, we anticipate making voluntary contributions of $500 million to our U.S. Pension Plans. As noted in our discussion of critical accounting estimates, we do not anticipate contributions to our U.S. Pension Plans will be required for the foreseeable future based on our funded status and the fact we have a credit balance related to our cumulative excess voluntary pension contributions over those required that exceeds $3 billion. The credit balance is subtracted from plan assets to determine the minimum funding requirements. Therefore, we could eliminate all required contributions to our principal U.S. Pension Plans for several years if we were to choose to waive part of that credit balance in any given year. Our U.S. Pension Plans have ample funds to meet expected benefit payments.
On June 14, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.75 per share of common stock. The dividend was paid on July 12, 2021 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on June 28, 2021. Each quarterly dividend payment is subject to review and approval by our Board of Directors, and we evaluate our dividend payment amount on an annual basis.
- 64 -
The Credit Agreements no longer contain the temporary covenant added in the fourth quarter of 2020 restricting us from repurchasing any shares of our common stock, as mentioned above. During the first quarter of 2022, we resumed our stock repurchase program. See Note 1 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information regarding our stock repurchase program.
Standard & Poor’s has assigned us a senior unsecured debt credit rating of BBB, a Certificates rating of AA-, a commercial paper rating of A-2 and a ratings outlook of “stable.” Moody’s Investors Service has assigned us an unsecured debt credit rating of Baa2, a Certificates rating of Aa3, a commercial paper rating of P-2 and a ratings outlook of “stable.” If our credit ratings drop, our interest expense may increase. If our commercial paper ratings drop below current levels, we may have difficulty utilizing the commercial paper market. If our senior unsecured debt credit ratings drop below investment grade, our access to financing may become limited.
CONTRACTUAL CASH OBLIGATIONS AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The following table sets forth a summary of our contractual cash obligations as of May 31, 2021. Certain of these obligations are reflected in our balance sheet, while others are disclosed as future obligations. We have certain contingent liabilities that are not accrued in our balance sheet in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. These contingent liabilities are not included in the table below. We have other long-term liabilities reflected in our balance sheet, including deferred income taxes, qualified and nonqualified pension and postretirement healthcare plan liabilities and other self-insurance accruals. Unless statutorily required, the payment obligations associated with these liabilities are not reflected in the table below due to the absence of scheduled maturities. Accordingly, this table is not meant to represent a forecast of our total cash expenditures for any of the periods presented.
Open purchase orders that are cancelable are not considered unconditional purchase obligations for financial reporting purposes and are not included in the table above. Such purchase orders often represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements. See Note 18 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information on such purchase orders. The table above does not include estimated payments of approximately $2.5 billion primarily related to build-to-suit arrangements that have not yet commenced, as we cannot reasonably estimate the timing of the associated payments. See Note 8 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Operating Activities
The amounts reflected in the table above for operating leases represent undiscounted future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases (principally facilities and aircraft) with an initial or remaining term in excess of one year at May 31, 2021. Under the new lease accounting rules, the majority of these leases are recognized at the net present value on the balance sheet as a liability with an offsetting right-to-use asset effective in 2020. See Note 8 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information. Credit rating agencies routinely use information concerning minimum lease payments required for our operating leases to calculate our debt capacity.
The amounts reflected for purchase obligations represent noncancelable agreements to purchase goods or services that are not capital-related. Such contracts include those for printing and advertising and promotions contracts.
Included in the table above within the caption entitled “Non-capital purchase obligations and other” is our estimate of the current portion of the liability ($103 million) for uncertain tax positions. We cannot reasonably estimate the timing of the long-term payments or the amount by which the liability will increase or decrease over time; therefore, the long-term portion of the liability ($89 million) is excluded from the table. See Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
- 65 -
The amounts reflected in the table above for interest on long-term debt represent future interest payments due on our long-term debt.
Investing Activities
The amounts reflected in the table above for capital purchase obligations represent noncancelable agreements to purchase capital-related equipment. Such contracts include those for certain purchases of aircraft, aircraft modifications, vehicles and trailers, facilities, computers and other equipment.
As of May 31, 2021, we had $948 million in deposits and progress payments on aircraft purchases and other planned aircraft-related transactions.
Financing Activities
We have certain financial instruments representing potential commitments, not reflected in the table above, that were incurred in the normal course of business to support our operations, including standby letters of credit and surety bonds. These instruments are required under certain U.S. self-insurance programs and are also used in the normal course of operations. The underlying liabilities insured by these instruments are reflected in our balance sheets, where applicable. Therefore, no additional liability is reflected for the letters of credit and surety bonds themselves.
The amounts reflected in the table above for long-term debt represent future scheduled principal payments on our long-term debt.
The amounts reflected in the table above for finance leases represent undiscounted future minimum lease payments under noncancelable finance leases with an initial or remaining term in excess of one year at May 31, 2021.
We do not have any guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, which we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity.
OTHER BUSINESS MATTERS
On June 24, 2019, FedEx filed suit in U.S. District Court in the District of Columbia seeking to enjoin the U.S. Department of Commerce (the “DOC”) from enforcing prohibitions contained in the Export Administration Regulations against FedEx. On September 11, 2020, the court granted the DOC’s motion to dismiss the lawsuit. On November 5, 2020, we appealed this decision.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make significant judgments and estimates to develop amounts reflected and disclosed in the financial statements. In many cases, there are alternative policies or estimation techniques that could be used. We maintain a thorough process to review the application of our accounting policies and to evaluate the appropriateness of the many estimates that are required to prepare the financial statements of a complex, global corporation. However, even under optimal circumstances, estimates routinely require adjustment based on changing circumstances and new or better information.
The estimates discussed below include the financial statement elements that are either the most judgmental or involve the selection or application of alternative accounting policies and are material to our financial statements. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and with our independent registered public accounting firm.
RETIREMENT PLANS
OVERVIEW. We sponsor programs that provide retirement benefits to most of our employees. These programs include defined benefit pension plans, defined contribution plans and postretirement healthcare plans and are described in Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. The rules for pension accounting are complex and can produce volatility in our earnings, financial condition and liquidity.
We are required to record annual year-end adjustments to our financial statements for the net funded status of our defined benefit pension and postretirement healthcare plans. The funded status of our plans also impacts our liquidity; however, the cash funding rules operate under a completely different set of assumptions and standards than those used for financial reporting purposes. As a result, our actual cash funding requirements can differ materially from our reported funded status.
- 66 -
Over the past several years, we have taken numerous actions to reduce pension-related risk and expense, including the introduction of our portable pension account benefit, freezing our traditional pension benefit, employing a liability-driven investment strategy, permitting certain former employees with a traditional pension benefit to make a one-time, irrevocable election to receive their benefits in a lump-sum distribution and transferring approximately $6 billion of our U.S. Pension Plan obligations to Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
In 2020, we announced the closing of our U.S.-based defined benefit pension plans to new non-union employees hired on or after January 1, 2020. We will introduce an all-401(k)-plan retirement benefit structure for eligible employees with a higher company match of up to 8% across all U.S.-based operating companies in 2022. During calendar 2021, current eligible employees under the Portable Pension Account (PPA) pension formula will be given a one-time option to continue to be eligible for pension compensation credits under the existing PPA formula and remain in the existing 401(k) plan with its company match of up to 3.5%, or to cease receiving compensation credits under the PPA and move to the new 401(k) plan with the higher company match of up to 8%. Changes to the new 401(k) plan structure become effective beginning January 1, 2022. While this new program will provide employees greater flexibility and reduce our long-term pension costs, it will not have a material impact on current or near-term financial results.
The “Salaries and employee benefits” caption of our accompanying consolidated income statements includes retirement plan expense associated with service costs. The “Other retirement plans income (expense)” caption of our accompanying consolidated income statements includes our fourth quarter MTM adjustment, expense associated with prior service and interest costs, the expected return on assets (“EROA”) and settlements. The retirement plans MTM adjustments for 2021 also include the MTM retirement plan accounting adjustment related to amendments to the TNT Express Netherlands Pension Plan. A summary of our retirement plan costs affecting our financial results over the past two years is as follows (in millions):
The components of the MTM adjustments are as follows (presented as (gain) loss in millions):
Service cost for our defined benefit pension and postretirement healthcare plans was $978 million in 2021 and $906 million in 2020 and is expected to be approximately $939 million in 2022.
Net of all fees and expenses, the actual rate of return on our U.S. Pension Plan assets was 12.90%, which was higher than our expected return of 6.75%. Positive portfolio returns derived from our return-seeking assets were partially offset by losses from our fixed-income assets due to rising long-term interest rates. The weighted-average discount rate for all our pension and postretirement healthcare plans increased six basis points from 3.05% at May 31, 2020 to 3.11% at May 31, 2021. The demographic experience in 2021 reflects an update to our mortality and retirement rate assumptions and a current-year actuarial loss due to unfavorable experience compared to various demographic assumptions.
- 67 -
The weighted-average discount rate for all our pension and postretirement healthcare plans decreased 64 basis points from 3.69% at May 31, 2019 to 3.05% at May 31, 2020. The demographic experience in 2020 reflects an update to our mortality assumption and a current-year actuarial loss due to unfavorable experience compared to various demographic assumptions. The actual rate of return, which is net of all fees and expenses, on our U.S. Pension Plan assets of 15.00% was higher than our expected return of 6.75%, as return-seeking assets, primarily equities, were positive despite equity market volatility. Additionally, fixed-income assets performed as expected as interest rates declined.
DISCOUNT RATE. The discount rate is the interest rate used to discount the estimated future benefit payments that have been accrued to date (the projected benefit obligation or “PBO”) to their net present value and to determine the succeeding year’s ongoing pension expense (prior to any year-end MTM adjustment). The discount rate is determined each year at the plan measurement date. The discount rate for our U.S. Pension Plans at each measurement date was as follows:
We determine the discount rate with the assistance of actuaries, who calculate the yield on a theoretical portfolio of high-grade corporate bonds (rated Aa or better). In developing this theoretical portfolio, we select bonds that match cash flows to benefit payments, limit our concentration by industry and issuer, and apply screening criteria to ensure bonds with a call feature have a low probability of being called. To the extent scheduled bond proceeds exceed the estimated benefit payments in a given period, the calculation assumes those excess proceeds are reinvested at one-year forward rates.
The measurement of our PBO and the related impact on our annual MTM adjustment is highly sensitive to the discount rate assumption. For our largest pension plan, a 50-basis-point increase in the discount rate would have decreased our 2021 PBO by approximately $2.1 billion and a 50-basis-point decrease in the discount rate would have increased our 2021 PBO by approximately $2.3 billion. However, our annual net pension expense is less sensitive to changes in the discount rate. For example, a one-basis-point increase in the discount rate for our largest pension plan would have a $43 million effect on the fourth quarter MTM adjustment but only a net $0.1 million impact on net pension expense.
PLAN ASSETS. The expected average rate of return on plan assets is a long-term, forward-looking assumption. It is required to be the expected future long-term rate of earnings on plan assets. Our U.S. Pension Plan assets are invested primarily in publicly tradable securities, and our pension plans hold only a minimal investment in FedEx common stock that is entirely at the discretion of third-party pension fund investment managers. As part of our strategy to manage pension costs and funded status volatility, we follow a liability-driven investment strategy to better align plan assets with liabilities.
Establishing the expected future rate of investment return on our pension assets is a judgmental matter, which we review on an annual basis and revise as appropriate. Management considers the following factors in determining this assumption:
•
the duration of our pension plan liabilities, which drives the investment strategy we can employ with our pension plan assets;
•
the types of investment classes in which we invest our pension plan assets and the expected compound geometric return we can reasonably expect those investment classes to earn over time, net of all fees and expenses; and
•
the investment returns we can reasonably expect our investment management program to achieve in excess of the returns we could expect if investments were made strictly in indexed funds.
For consolidated pension expense, we assumed a 6.75% expected long-term rate of return on our U.S. Pension Plan assets in 2021 and 2020. For 2022, we have decreased our EROA assumption to 6.50% due to the significant increase in 2021 administrative expenses payable from the pension trust due to higher Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (“PBGC”) variable-rate premiums (“VRP”) and based on our long-term outlook for the capital markets. The higher 2021 PBGC VRP resulted in a 25-basis point lower rate of return compared to 2020. The historical annual return on our U.S. Pension Plan assets, calculated on a compound geometric basis, was 7.9%, net of all fees and expenses, for the 15-year period ended May 31, 2021. For our U.S. Pension Plans, a one-basis-point change in our EROA would impact our 2022 pension expense by $3 million.
- 68 -
FUNDED STATUS. The following is information concerning the funded status of our pension plans as of May 31 on a financial reporting basis (in millions):
FUNDING. The funding requirements for our U.S. Pension Plans are governed by the Pension Protection Act of 2006, which has aggressive funding requirements in order to avoid benefit payment restrictions that become effective if the funded status determined under IRS rules falls below 80% at the beginning of a plan year. All of our U.S. Pension Plans have funded status levels in excess of 80% and our plans are fully funded under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (“ERISA”). Additionally, current benefit payments do not materially impact our total plan assets (benefit payments for our U.S. Pension Plans for 2021 were approximately $929 million, or 3.1% of plan assets).
Over the past several years, we have made voluntary contributions to our U.S. Pension Plans in excess of the minimum required contributions. For 2022, no pension contributions are required for our U.S. Pension Plans as they are fully funded under ERISA. However, we expect to make voluntary contributions of $500 million to these plans in 2022.
See Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information about our retirement plans.
INCOME TAXES
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our income taxes are a function of our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. The tax laws in the various jurisdictions are complex and subject to different interpretations by us and the respective governmental taxing authorities. As a result, significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties. Also, our effective tax rate is significantly affected by the earnings generated in each jurisdiction, so unexpected fluctuations in the geographic mix of earnings could significantly impact our tax rate. Our intercompany transactions are based on globally accepted transfer pricing principles, which align profits with the business operations and functions of the various legal entities in our international business.
We evaluate our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. These evaluations are based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax laws or their interpretations, audit activity and changes in our business. In addition, management considers the advice of third parties in making conclusions regarding tax consequences.
Tax contingencies arise from uncertainty in the application of tax rules throughout the many jurisdictions in which we operate. Despite our belief that our tax return positions are consistent with applicable tax laws, taxing authorities could challenge certain positions. We record tax benefits for uncertain tax positions based upon management’s evaluation of the information available at the reporting date. To be recognized in the financial statements, a tax benefit must be at least more likely than not of being sustained based on the technical merits. The benefit for positions meeting the recognition threshold is measured as the largest benefit more likely than not of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Significant judgment is required in making these determinations and adjustments to unrecognized tax benefits may be necessary to reflect actual taxes payable upon settlement.
Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income rely heavily on estimates to make this determination so there is a risk that these estimates will have to be revised as new information is received. To the extent we do not consider it more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered, a valuation allowance is established. We believe we will generate sufficient future taxable income to realize the tax benefits related to the remaining net deferred tax assets in our consolidated balance sheets that are not subject to valuation allowances. We record the taxes for global intangible low-taxed income as a period cost.
- 69 -
Our income tax positions are based on currently enacted tax laws, including the TCJA and the CARES Act. As further guidance is issued by the U.S. Treasury Department, the IRS and other standard-setting bodies, any resulting changes to our estimates will be treated in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance.
For more information, including impacts from the TCJA and the CARES Act, see the “Income Taxes” section of this MD&A and Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
SELF-INSURANCE ACCRUALS
We are self-insured up to certain limits for costs associated with workers’ compensation claims, vehicle accidents, property and cargo loss, general business liabilities and benefits paid under employee healthcare and disability programs. Our reserves are established for estimates of loss on all incurred claims, including incurred-but-not-reported claims. Self-insurance accruals reflected in our balance sheet were $4.0 billion at May 31, 2021 and $3.3 billion at May 31, 2020. Approximately 39% of these accruals were classified as current liabilities.
Our self-insurance accruals are primarily based on the actuarially estimated cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. These estimates include consideration of factors such as severity of claims, frequency and volume of claims, healthcare inflation, seasonality and plan designs. Cost trends on material accruals are updated each quarter. We self-insure up to certain limits that vary by type of risk. Periodically, we evaluate the level of insurance coverage and adjust insurance levels based on risk tolerance and premium expense.
We believe the use of actuarial methods to account for these liabilities provides a consistent and effective way to measure these highly judgmental accruals. However, the use of any estimation technique in this area is inherently sensitive given the magnitude of claims involved and the length of time until the ultimate cost is known. We believe our recorded obligations for these expenses are consistently measured on a conservative basis. Nevertheless, changes in healthcare costs, accident frequency and severity, insurance retention levels and other factors can materially affect the estimates for these liabilities.
LONG-LIVED ASSETS
USEFUL LIVES AND SALVAGE VALUES. Our business is capital intensive, with approximately 53% of our owned assets invested in our transportation and information system infrastructures.
The depreciation or amortization of our capital assets over their estimated useful lives, and the determination of any salvage values, requires management to make judgments about future events. Because we utilize many of our capital assets over relatively long periods (the majority of aircraft costs are depreciated over 15 to 30 years), we periodically evaluate whether adjustments to our estimated service lives or salvage values are necessary to ensure these estimates properly match the economic use of the asset. This evaluation may result in changes in the estimated lives and residual values used to depreciate our aircraft and other equipment. For our aircraft, we typically assign no residual value due to the utilization of these assets in cargo configuration, which results in little to no value at the end of their useful life. These estimates affect the amount of depreciation expense recognized in a period and, ultimately, the gain or loss on the disposal of the asset. Changes in the estimated lives of assets will result in an increase or decrease in the amount of depreciation recognized in future periods and could have a material impact on our results of operations (as described below). Historically, gains and losses on disposals of operating equipment have not been material. However, such amounts may differ materially in the future due to changes in business levels, technological obsolescence, accident frequency, regulatory changes and other factors beyond our control.
IMPAIRMENT. As of May 31, 2021, the FedEx Express global air network included a fleet of 684 aircraft (including approximately 300 supplemental aircraft) that provide delivery of packages and freight to more than 220 countries and territories through a wide range of U.S. and international shipping services. While certain aircraft are utilized in primary geographic areas (U.S. versus international), we operate an integrated global network, and utilize our aircraft and other modes of transportation to achieve the lowest cost of delivery while maintaining our service commitments to our customers. Because of the integrated nature of our global network, our aircraft are interchangeable across routes and geographies, giving us flexibility with our fleet planning to meet changing global economic conditions and maintain and modify aircraft as needed.
Because of the lengthy lead times for aircraft manufacture and modifications, we must anticipate volume levels and plan our fleet requirements years in advance, and make commitments for aircraft based on those projections. Furthermore, the timing and availability of certain used aircraft types (particularly those with better fuel efficiency) may create limited opportunities to acquire these aircraft at favorable prices in advance of our capacity needs. These activities create risks that asset capacity may exceed demand. At May 31, 2021, we had three purchased aircraft that were not yet placed into service.
- 70 -
The accounting test for whether an asset held for use is impaired involves first comparing the carrying value of the asset with its estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If the cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, the asset must be adjusted to its current fair value. We operate integrated transportation networks, and accordingly, cash flows for most of our operating assets are assessed at a network level, not at an individual asset level for our analysis of impairment. Further, decisions about capital investments are evaluated based on the impact to the overall network rather than the return on an individual asset. We make decisions to remove certain long-lived assets from service based on projections of reduced capacity needs or lower operating costs of newer aircraft types, and those decisions may result in an impairment charge. Assets held for disposal must be adjusted to their estimated fair values less costs to sell when the decision is made to dispose of the asset and certain other criteria are met. The fair value determinations for such aircraft may require management estimates, as there may not be active markets for some of these aircraft. Such estimates are subject to revision from period to period.
In the normal management of our aircraft fleet, we routinely idle aircraft and engines temporarily due to maintenance cycles and adjustments of our network capacity to match seasonality and overall customer demand levels. Temporarily idled assets are classified as available-for-use, and we continue to record depreciation expense associated with these assets. These temporarily idled assets are assessed for impairment and remaining life on a quarterly basis. The criteria for determining whether an asset has been permanently removed from service (and, as a result, is potentially impaired) include, but are not limited to, our global economic outlook and the impact of our outlook on our current and projected volume levels, including capacity needs during our peak shipping seasons; the introduction of new fleet types or decisions to permanently retire an aircraft fleet from operations; and changes to planned service expansion activities. At May 31, 2021, we had nine aircraft temporarily idled. These aircraft have been idled for an average of 17 months and are expected to return to revenue service in order to meet expected demand.
During 2020, we made the decision to permanently retire from service 10 Airbus A310-300 aircraft and 12 related engines at FedEx Express to align with the needs of the U.S. domestic network and modernize its aircraft fleet. As a consequence of this decision, we recognized noncash impairment charges of $66 million ($50 million, net of tax, or $0.19 per diluted share) in the FedEx Express segment in 2020.
LEASES. We utilize operating leases to finance certain of our aircraft, facilities and equipment. Such arrangements typically shift the risk of loss on the residual value of the assets at the end of the lease period to the lessor. In accordance with the new lease accounting standard adopted June 1, 2019, we had approximately $16 billion in operating lease liabilities and approximately $15 billion related right-of-use assets on the balance sheet as of May 31, 2021. The weighted-average remaining lease term of all operating leases outstanding at May 31, 2021 was approximately 10 years.
Our leases generally contain options to extend or terminate the lease. We reevaluate our leases on a regular basis to consider the economic and strategic incentives of exercising the renewal options, and how they align with our operating strategy. Therefore, substantially all the renewal option periods are not included within the lease term and the associated payments are not included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset and lease liability as the options to extend are not reasonably certain at lease commencement. Short-term leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recognized in the right-to-use asset and lease liability on the consolidated balance sheets.
The lease liabilities are measured at the lease commencement date and determined using the present value of the minimum lease payments not yet paid and our incremental borrowing rate, which approximates the rate at which we would borrow, on a collateralized basis, over the term of a lease in the applicable currency environment. The interest rate implicit in the lease is generally not determinable in transactions where we are the lessee.
The determination of whether a lease is accounted for as a finance lease or an operating lease requires management to make estimates primarily about the fair value of the asset and its estimated economic useful life. In addition, our evaluation includes ensuring we properly account for build-to-suit lease arrangements and making judgments about whether various forms of lessee involvement during the construction period allow the lessee to control the underlying leased asset during the construction period. We believe we have well-defined and controlled processes for making these evaluations, including obtaining third-party appraisals for material transactions to assist us in making these evaluations.
GOODWILL. We had $7.0 billion of recorded goodwill at May 31, 2021 and $6.4 billion of recorded goodwill at May 31, 2020 from our business acquisitions, representing the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Several factors give rise to goodwill in our acquisitions, such as the expected benefits from synergies of the combination and the existing workforce of the acquired business.
- 71 -
Goodwill is reviewed at least annually for impairment. In our evaluation of goodwill impairment, we perform a qualitative assessment that requires management judgment and the use of estimates to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. An entity has an unconditional option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit and proceed directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. An entity may resume performing the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. We performed both qualitative and quantitative assessments of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020. This included comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value (including attributable goodwill). Fair value is estimated using standard valuation methodologies (principally the income or market approach classified as Level 3 within the fair value hierarchy) incorporating market participant considerations and management’s assumptions on revenue growth rates, operating margins, discount rates and expected capital expenditures. Estimates used by management can significantly affect the outcome of the impairment test. Changes in forecasted operating results and other assumptions could materially affect these estimates.
Our reporting units with significant recorded goodwill include FedEx Express, FedEx Ground and FedEx Freight. We evaluated these reporting units during the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2020 and the estimated fair value of each of these reporting units exceeded their carrying values as of the end of 2021 and 2020; therefore, we do not believe that any of these reporting units were impaired as of the balance sheet dates.
In connection with our annual impairment testing of goodwill conducted in the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded impairment charges of $358 million predominantly attributable to our FedEx Office reporting unit. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in store closures and declining print revenue at FedEx Office during the fourth quarter of 2020, which negatively impacted its near-term operating performance. Based on these factors, our outlook for the FedEx Office business and retail industry changed in the fourth quarter of 2020.
LEGAL AND OTHER CONTINGENCIES
We are subject to various loss contingencies in connection with our operations. Contingent liabilities are difficult to measure, as their measurement is subject to multiple factors that are not easily predicted or projected. Further, additional complexity in measuring these liabilities arises due to the various jurisdictions in which these matters occur, which makes our ability to predict their outcome highly uncertain. Moreover, different accounting rules must be employed to account for these items based on the nature of the contingency. Accordingly, significant management judgment is required to assess these matters and to make determinations about the measurement of a liability, if any. Certain pending loss contingencies are described in Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In the opinion of management, the aggregate liability, if any, of individual matters or groups of related matters not specifically described in Note 19 is not expected to be material to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. The following describes our methods and associated processes for evaluating these matters.
Because of the complex environment in which we operate, we are subject to numerous legal proceedings and claims, including those relating to general commercial matters, governmental enforcement actions, employment-related claims and FedEx Ground’s service providers. Accounting guidance for contingencies requires an accrual of estimated loss from a contingency, such as a non-income tax or other legal proceeding or claim, when it is probable (i.e., the future event or events are likely to occur) that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. This guidance also requires disclosure of a loss contingency matter when, in management’s judgment, a material loss is reasonably possible or probable.
During the preparation of our financial statements, we evaluate our contingencies to determine whether it is probable, reasonably possible or remote that a liability has been incurred. A loss is recognized for all contingencies deemed probable and estimable, regardless of amount. For unresolved contingencies with potentially material exposure that are deemed reasonably possible, we evaluate whether a potential loss or range of loss can be reasonably estimated.
Our evaluation of these matters is the result of a comprehensive process designed to ensure that accounting recognition of a loss or disclosure of these contingencies is made in a timely manner and involves our legal and accounting personnel, as well as external counsel where applicable. The process includes regular communications during each quarter and scheduled meetings shortly before the completion of our financial statements to evaluate any new legal proceedings and the status of existing matters.
In determining whether a loss should be accrued or a loss contingency disclosed, we evaluate, among other factors:
•
the current status of each matter within the scope and context of the entire lawsuit or proceeding (e.g., the lengthy and complex nature of class-action matters);
•
the procedural status of each matter;
•
any opportunities to dispose of a lawsuit on its merits before trial (i.e., motion to dismiss or for summary judgment);
•
the amount of time remaining before a trial date;
- 72 -
•
the status of discovery;
•
the status of settlement, arbitration or mediation proceedings; and
•
our judgment regarding the likelihood of success prior to or at trial.
In reaching our conclusions with respect to accrual of a loss or loss contingency disclosure, we take a holistic view of each matter based on these factors and the information available prior to the issuance of our financial statements. Uncertainty with respect to an individual factor or combination of these factors may impact our decisions related to accrual or disclosure of a loss contingency, including a conclusion that we are unable to establish an estimate of possible loss or a meaningful range of possible loss. We update our disclosures to reflect our most current understanding of the contingencies at the time we issue our financial statements. However, events may arise that were not anticipated and the outcome of a contingency may result in a loss to us that differs materially from our previously estimated liability or range of possible loss.
Despite the inherent complexity in the accounting and disclosure of contingencies, we believe that our processes are robust and thorough and provide a consistent framework for management in evaluating the potential outcome of contingencies for proper accounting recognition and disclosure.