Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As used in this discussion and analysis, the words “we,” “us,” “our” and the “Company” are used to refer to Flushing Financial Corporation (the “Holding Company”) and its direct and indirect wholly owned subsidiaries, Flushing Bank (the “Bank”), Flushing Preferred Funding Corporation, Flushing Service Corporation, and FSB Properties Inc. Discussion and analysis of our 2018 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2019 financial performance to 2018, are located under Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020, which is available on our investor relations website at www.flushingbank.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
General
We are a Delaware corporation organized in 1994. The Bank was organized in 1929 as a New York State-chartered mutual savings bank. Today the Bank operates as a full-service New York State commercial bank. The primary business of the Holding Company has been the operation of the Bank. The Bank owns three subsidiaries: Flushing Preferred Funding Corporation, Flushing Service Corporation, and FSB Properties Inc. The Bank also operates an internet branch, which operates under the brands of iGObanking.com® and BankPurely® (the “Internet Branch”). The Bank’s primary regulator is the New York State Department of Financial Services, and its primary federal regulator is the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”). The Bank’s deposits are insured to the maximum allowable amount by the FDIC.
The Holding Company also owns Flushing Financial Capital Trust II, Flushing Financial Capital Trust III, and Flushing Financial Capital Trust IV (the “Trusts”), which are special purpose business trusts formed during 2007 to issue a total of $60.0 million of capital securities, and $1.9 million of common securities (which are the only voting securities). The Holding Company owns 100% of the common securities of the Trusts. The Trusts used the proceeds from the issuance of these securities to purchase junior subordinated debentures from the Holding Company. The Trusts are not included in our consolidated financial statements, as we would not absorb the losses of the Trusts if losses were to occur.
The following discussion of financial condition and results of operations includes the collective results of the Holding Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”), but reflects principally the Bank’s activities. Management views the Company as operating as a single unit - a community bank. Therefore, segment information is not provided.
Overview
Our principal business is attracting retail deposits from the general public and investing those deposits together with funds generated from ongoing operations and borrowings, primarily in (1) originations and purchases of multi-family residential properties, commercial business loans, commercial real estate mortgage loans and, to a lesser extent, one-to-four family (focusing on mixed-use properties, which are properties that contain both residential dwelling units and commercial units); (2) construction loans; (3) Small Business Administration (“SBA”) loans; (4) mortgage loan surrogates such as mortgage-backed securities; and (5) U.S. government securities, corporate fixed-income securities and other marketable securities. We also originate certain other consumer loans including overdraft lines of credit. Our results of operations depend primarily on net interest income, which is the difference between the income earned on its interest-earning assets and the cost of our interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is the result of our interest rate margin, which is the difference between the average yield earned on interest-earning assets and the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities, adjusted for the difference in the average balance of interest-earning assets as compared to the average balance of interest-bearing liabilities. We also generate non-interest income from loan fees, service charges on deposit accounts, mortgage servicing fees, and other fees, income earned on Bank Owned Life Insurance (“BOLI”), dividends on Federal Home Bank of New York (“FHLB-NY”) stock and net gains and losses on sales of securities and loans. Our operating expenses consist principally of employee compensation and benefits, occupancy and equipment costs, other general and administrative expenses and income tax expense. Our results of operations also can be significantly affected by our periodic provision for loan losses and specific provision for losses on real estate owned.
Management Strategy. Our strategy is to continue our focus on being an institution serving consumers, businesses, and governmental units in our local markets. In furtherance of this objective, we intend to:
● manage cost of funds and continue to improve funding mix;
● resume historical loan growth while achieving appropriate risk adjusted returns;
● enhance earnings power by improving scalability and efficiency;
● manage credit risk;
● remain well capitalized;
● increase our commitment to the multi-cultural marketplace, with a particular focus on the Asian community;
● manage enterprise-wide risk.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to effectively implement this strategy. Our strategy is subject to change by the Board of Directors.
Manage cost of funds and continue to improve funding mix. We have a relatively stable retail deposit base drawn from our market area through our full-service offices. Although we seek to retain existing deposits and maintain depositor relationships by offering quality service and competitive interest rates to our customers, we also seek to keep deposit growth within reasonable limits and our strategic plan. In order to implement our strategic plan, we have built multi-channel deposit gathering capabilities. In addition to our full-service branches we gather deposits through our Internet Branch and a government banking unit. The Internet Branch currently offers savings accounts, money market accounts, checking accounts, and certificates of deposit. This allows us to compete on a national scale without the geographical constraints of physical locations. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, total deposits at our Internet Branch were $221.7 million and $314.0 million, respectively. The government banking unit provides banking services to public municipalities, including counties, cities, towns, villages, school districts, libraries, fire districts, and the various courts throughout the New York City metropolitan area. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, total deposits in our government banking unit totaled $1,615.4 million and $1,265.1 million, respectively. Additionally, we have a business banking group which was designed specifically to develop full business relationships thereby bringing in lower-costing checking and money market deposits. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, deposits balances in the business banking group were $298.9 million and $281.7 million, respectively. We also obtain deposits through brokers and the CDARS® and ICS network. Management intends to balance its goal to maintain competitive interest rates on deposits while seeking to manage its overall cost of funds to finance its strategies. We generally rely on our deposit base as our principal source of funding. During 2020, we realized an increase in due to depositors of $1,068.7 million, as core deposits increased $1,368.2 million and certificates of deposit decreased $299.5 million. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of Empire.
A growing portion of our lending and deposit customers have both their loans and deposits with us. We intend to continue to focus on obtaining additional deposits from our lending customers and originating additional loans to our deposit customers. Product offerings were expanded and are expected to be further expanded to accommodate perceived customer demands. In addition, specific employees are assigned responsibilities of generating these additional deposits and loans by coordinating efforts between lending and deposit gathering departments.
Resume historical loan growth while achieving appropriate risk adjusted returns. During 2020, gross loans grew by $944.7 million, or 16.4% to $6.7 billion at December 31, 2020 from $5.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the Empire acquisition.
We have emphasized the strategic growth of multi-family residential mortgage loans, non-owner occupied commercial mortgage loans and floating rate commercial business loans. The commercial business and other loans have increased to 19.45% of the entire loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020 compared to 18.44% at December 31, 2019. In
the multi-family portfolio, we allowed loans to prepay rather than refinance at a rate below our criteria. We no longer originate taxi medallion loans.
The following table shows loan originations and purchases during 2020, and loan balances as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, multi-family residential, commercial business and other loans and commercial real estate loans, totaled 83.4% of our gross loans. We have repositioned our loan growth to reduce credit risk; however, our concentration in these types of loans could require us to increase our provisions for loan losses and to maintain an allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans in excess of the allowance currently maintained.
Enhance earnings power by improving scalability and efficiency. We are improving scalability and efficiency by converting our branches to the Universal Banker model with our unique video banker service that gives customers face-to-face video chat access from 7am to 11pm daily via at our ATM terminals. The Universal Banker model provides customers with cutting-edge technology, including state-of-the-art ATMs and a higher-quality service experience, all while further reducing overall costs. We have been rolling this model out across our network as branches are renovated and new branches are opened. As of December 31, 2020, all Flushing locations were operating under the Universal Banker model, while the legacy Empire locations were not. In the branches that have been converted to the Universal Banker model, almost 50% of customer transactions were completed at our high powered ATMs. The Empire merger closed on October 30, 2020, adding $669.7 million in loans and $861.3 million in deposits, while recording only $1.5 million of goodwill. We completed our systems conversions in November 2020.
Manage credit risk. By adherence to our conservative underwriting standards, we have been able to minimize net losses from non-performing loans. We recorded net charge-offs of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net charge-offs of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net charge-offs recorded in 2020 were primarily due the economic deterioration resulting from the impact of COVID-19. We seek to minimize losses by adhering to our defined underwriting standards, which among other things generally requires a debt service coverage ratio of at least 125% and loan to value ratio of 75% or less. The loan to value for the real estate dependent loan portfolio was 38.0% and the average loan to value for non-performing loans collateralized by real estate was 30.5% at December 31, 2020. We seek to maintain our loans in performing status through, among other things, disciplined collection efforts, and consistently monitoring non-performing assets in an effort to return them to performing status. To this end, we review the quality of our loans and report to the Loan Committee of the Board of Directors of the Bank on a monthly basis. We sold 2 delinquent loans totaling $0.6 million, 11 delinquent loans totaling $13.0 million, and 12 delinquent loans totaling $8.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. There can be no assurances that we will continue this strategy in future periods, or if continued, we will be able to find buyers to pay adequate consideration. Non-performing loans totaled $21.1 million and $13.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Non-performing assets as a percentage of total assets were 0.26% and 0.19% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Remain well capitalized. The Bank faces several minimum capital requirements imposed by federal regulation. Failure to adhere to these minimums could limit the dividends the Bank is allowed to pay, including the payment of dividends to the Holding Company, and could limit the annual growth of the Bank. Under the Dodd Frank Act, banks with assets greater than $10 billion in total assets are required to complete stress tests, which predict capital levels under certain stress levels. Although, our total assets are currently $8.0 billion, as a best practice, we completed these tests. As of December 31, 2020, under all stress scenarios, we remained well capitalized per current regulations.
Increase Our Commitment to the Multi-Cultural Marketplace, with a Particular Focus on the Asian Community. Our branches are all located in the New York City metropolitan area with particular concentration in the borough of Queens. Queens is characterized with a high level of ethnic diversity. An important element of our strategy is to service multi-ethnic consumers and businesses. We have a particular presence and concentration in Asian communities, including in particular the Chinese and Korean populations. Both groups are noted for high levels of savings, education and entrepreneurship. In order to service these and other important ethnic groups in our market, our staff speaks more than 20 languages. We have an Asian advisory board to help broaden our links to the community by providing guidance and fostering awareness of our active role in the local community. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed our acquisition of Empire, which expanding our branch footprint in Long Island. As of December 31, 2020, we had six branches which have a particular focus on the Asian community, of which four are in the borough of Queens, one is in the borough of Manhattan and one on Long Island, with deposits and loans totaling in excess of $900 million and $650 million, respectively, in these locations.
Manage Enterprise-Wide Risk. We identify, measure and attempt to mitigate risks that affect, or have the potential to affect, our business. Due to past economic crises and recent increases in government regulation, we devote significant resources to risk management. We have a seasoned risk officer to provide executive risk leadership, and an enterprise-wide risk management program. Several enterprise risk management analytical products are in use which include key risk indicators. We also have had a chief information security officer even before one will be required by recent NYDFS rulemaking. Our management of enterprise-wide risk enables us to recognize and monitor risks and establish procedures to disseminate the risk information across our organization and to our Board of Directors. The objective is to have a robust and focused risk management process capable of identifying and mitigating emerging threats to the Bank’s safety and soundness.
Trends and Contingencies. Our operating results are significantly affected by national and local economic and competitive conditions, including changes in market interest rates, the strength of the local economy, government policies and actions of regulatory authorities. We have remained strategically focused on the origination of multi-family residential mortgages, commercial mortgages and commercial business loans with a full banking relationship. Because of this strategy, we were able to continue to achieve a higher yield on our mortgage portfolio than we would have otherwise experienced.
Loan originations and purchases were $1,004.1 million, $1,162.3 million and $1,250.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. While we primarily rely on originating our own loans, we purchased $193.3 million, $221.2 million and $294.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We purchase loans when the loans complement our loan portfolio strategy. Loans purchased must meet our underwriting standards when they were originated.
During the three-year period ended December 31, 2020, the allocation of our loan portfolio has remained fairly consistent with a steady increase in non-mortgage loans. The majority of our loans are collateralized by real estate, which comprised 78.0% of our portfolio at December 31, 2020 compared to 81.3% at December 31, 2019 and 83.8% at December 31, 2018, while non-mortgage loans comprised 22.0% of our portfolio at December 31, 2020, compared to 18.7% at December 31, 2019 and 16.2% at December 31, 2018.
Due to depositors increased $1,068.7 million, $106.1 million and $575.3 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Lower-costing core deposits increased $1,368.2 million, $231.5 million and $363.9 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Higher-costing certificates of deposit decreased $299.5 million during 2020 compared to a decrease of $125.4 million in 2019 and an increase of $211.4 million during 2018. Brokered deposits represented 17.5%, 7.7% and
6.1% of total deposits at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. During 2018, Section 29 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act was amended to no longer consider reciprocal deposits held by an FDIC-insured depository institution brokered deposits. At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, reciprocal deposits totaled $735.4 million, $805.6 million and $685.3 million, respectively.
Prevailing interest rates affect the extent to which borrowers repay and refinance loans. In a declining interest rate environment, the number of loan prepayments and loan refinancing tends to increase, as do prepayments of mortgage-backed securities. Call provisions associated with our investments in U.S. government agency and corporate securities may also adversely affect yield in a declining interest rate environment. Such prepayments and calls may adversely affect the yield of our loan portfolio and mortgage-backed and other securities as we reinvest the prepaid funds in a lower interest rate environment. However, we typically receive additional loan fees when existing loans are refinanced, which partially offsets the reduced yield on our loan portfolio resulting from prepayments. In periods of low interest rates, our level of core deposits also may decline if depositors seek higher-yielding instruments or other investments not offered by us, which in turn may increase our cost of funds and decrease our net interest margin to the extent alternative funding sources, are utilized. By contrast, an increasing interest rate environment would tend to extend the average lives of lower yielding fixed rate mortgages and mortgage-backed securities, which could adversely affect net interest income. In addition, depositors tend to open longer term, higher costing certificate of deposit accounts which could adversely affect our net interest income if rates were to subsequently decline. Additionally, adjustable rate residential mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities generally contain interim and lifetime caps that limit the amount the interest rate can increase at re-pricing dates.
Net interest income increased $33.3 million, or 20.5%, to $195.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from $161.9 million for the prior year, as a 38 basis points increase in the net interest margin to 2.85% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was coupled with balance sheet growth. The increase in the net interest margin for 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in our funding costs resulting from the Federal Reverse lowering rates, partially offset by a decrease in the yield of our interest-earning assets. The decrease in the yield of our interest earning assets was primarily due to loans being both originated and repriced at lower rates. During 2020, the cost of borrowed funds decreased 34 basis points to 1.97% from 2.31% in the comparable period while the cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 99 basis points to 0.92% from 1.91% for the prior year. The cost of money market, NOW and certificates of deposits accounts decreased 111 basis points, 106 basis points and 74 basis points, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from the prior year. The cost of deposits decreased as we decreased the rates we pay resulting from Federal Reverse lowering rates.
We are unable to predict the direction or timing of future interest rate changes. Approximately 81% of our certificates of deposit accounts and borrowings will reprice or mature during the next year. Also, in an increasing interest rate environment, mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities may prepay at slower rates than experienced in the past, which could result in a reduction of prepayment penalty income.
On October 30, 2020, the Company completed its acquisition of 100% of the outstanding voting and non-voting shares of Empire. The shareholders of Empire received total consideration of $87.5 million which consisted of $54.8 million in cash and 2,557,028 shares of Flushing Financial Corporation common stock. The combined company has $8.0 billion in assets, $6.7 billion in loans, $6.1 billion in deposits, and 25 branches in Queens, Brooklyn, Manhattan, and on Long Island.
Interest Rate Sensitivity Analysis
A financial institution’s exposure to the risks of changing interest rates may be analyzed, in part, by examining the extent to which its assets and liabilities are “interest rate sensitive” and by monitoring the institution’s interest rate sensitivity “gap.” An asset or liability is said to be interest rate sensitive within a specific time period if it will mature or reprice within that time period. The interest rate sensitivity gap is defined as the difference between the amount of interest-earning assets maturing or repricing within a specific time period and the amount of interest-bearing liabilities maturing or repricing within that time period. A gap is considered positive when the amount of interest-earning assets maturing or repricing exceeds the amount of interest-bearing liabilities maturing or repricing within the same period. A gap is considered negative when the amount of interest-bearing liabilities maturing or repricing exceeds the amount of interest-earning assets maturing or repricing within the same period. Accordingly, a positive gap may enhance net interest income
in a rising rate environment and reduce net interest income in a falling rate environment. Conversely, a negative gap may enhance net interest income in a falling rate environment and reduce net interest income in a rising rate environment.
The table below sets forth the amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities outstanding at December 31, 2020 which are anticipated by the Company, based upon certain assumptions, to reprice or mature in each of the future time periods shown. Except as stated below, the amount of assets and liabilities shown that reprice or mature during a particular period was determined in accordance with the earlier of the term to repricing or the contractual terms of the asset or liability. Prepayment assumptions for mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities are based on our experience and industry averages, which generally range from 3% to 50%, depending on the contractual rate of interest and the underlying collateral. NOW Accounts, money market accounts and savings accounts were assumed to have withdrawal or “run-off” rates of 19%, 13% and 9%, respectively, based on our experience. While management bases these assumptions on actual prepayments and withdrawals experienced by us, there is no guarantee that these trends will continue in the future.
(1) Consists of interest-earning deposits.
(2) Does not include non-interest bearing demand accounts totaling $435.1 million at December 31, 2020.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the method of analysis presented in the foregoing table. For example, although certain assets and liabilities may have similar estimated maturities or periods to repricing, they may react in differing degrees to changes in market interest rates and may bear rates that differ in varying degrees from the rates that would apply upon maturity and reinvestment or upon repricing. Also, the interest rates on certain types of assets and liabilities may fluctuate in advance of changes in market interest rates, while interest rates on other types may lag behind changes in market rates. Additionally, certain assets, such as ARM loans, have features that restrict changes in interest rates on a short-term basis and over the life of the asset. Further, in the event of a significant change in the level of interest rates, prepayments on loans and mortgage-backed securities, and deposit withdrawal or “run-off” levels, would likely
deviate materially from those assumed in calculating the above table. In the event of an interest rate increase, some borrowers may be unable to meet the increased payments on their adjustable-rate debt. The interest rate sensitivity analysis assumes that the nature of the Company’s assets and liabilities remains static. Interest rates may have an effect on customer preferences for deposits and loan products. Finally, the maturity and repricing characteristics of many assets and liabilities as set forth in the above table are not governed by contract but rather by management’s best judgment based on current market conditions and anticipated business strategies.
Interest Rate Risk
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in fair value of certain investments due to changes in interest rates. Generally, the fair value of financial investments such as loans and securities fluctuates inversely with changes in interest rates. As a result, increases in interest rates could result in decreases in the fair value of our interest-earning assets which could adversely affect our results of operations if such assets were sold, or, in the case of securities classified as available for sale, decreases in our stockholders’ equity if such securities were retained.
We manage the mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on a continuous basis to maximize return and adjust our exposure to interest rate risk. On a quarterly basis, management prepares the “Earnings and Economic Exposure to Changes in Interest Rate” report for review by the Board of Directors, as summarized below. This report quantifies the potential changes in net interest income and net portfolio value should interest rates go up or down (shocked) 200 basis points, assuming the yield curves of the rate shocks will be parallel to each other. Net portfolio value is defined as the market value of assets net of the market value of liabilities. The market value of assets and liabilities is determined using a discounted cash flow calculation. The net portfolio value ratio is the ratio of the net portfolio value to the market value of assets. All changes in income and value are measured as percentage changes from the projected net interest income and net portfolio value at the base interest rate scenario. The base interest rate scenario assumes interest rates at December 31, 2020. Various estimates regarding prepayment assumptions are made at each level of rate shock. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. At December 31, 2020, we were within the guidelines established by the Board of Directors for each interest rate level.
Analysis of Net Interest Income
Net interest income represents the difference between income on interest-earning assets and expense on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income depends upon the relative amount of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the interest rate earned or paid on them.
The following table sets forth certain information relating to our Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition and Consolidated Statements of Income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, and reflects the average yield on assets and average cost of liabilities for the periods indicated. Such yields and costs are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balance of assets or liabilities, respectively, for the periods shown. Average balances are derived from average daily balances. The yields include amortization of fees that are considered adjustments to yields.
(1) Average balances include non-accrual loans.
(2) Loan interest income includes loan fee income (which includes net amortization of deferred fees and costs, late charges, and prepayment penalties) of approximately $2.3 million, $2.0 million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In addition, it includes net losses from fair value adjustments in qualifying hedges of $1.2 million and $1.7 million for December 31, 2020 and 2019; and none for the years ended December 31, 2018.
(3) Interest and yields are calculated on the tax equivalent basis using statutory federal income tax rate of 21% for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
(4) Interest rate spread represents the difference between the average rate on interest-earning assets and the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(5) Net interest margin represents net interest income before the provision for loan losses divided by average interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the impact of changes in interest rates and in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on the Company’s interest income and interest expense during the periods indicated. Information is provided in each category with respect to (1) changes attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior rate), (2) changes attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by the prior volume) and (3) the net change. The changes attributable to the combined impact of volume and rate have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General. Net income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $34.7 million, a decrease of $6.6 million, or 16.0%, compared to $41.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Diluted earnings per common share were $1.18 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.26, or 18.06%, from $1.44 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Return on average equity decreased to 5.98% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, from 7.35% for the prior year. Return on average assets decreased to 0.48% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 0.59% for the prior year.
Interest Income. Interest income decreased $14.6 million, or 5.24%, to $264.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $279.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to a decrease of 39 basis points in the yield of interest-earning assets to 3.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 4.25% for the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by an increase of $280.3 million in the average balance of interest-earning assets to $6,862.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6,582.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 39 basis point decrease in the yield of interest-earning assets was primarily due to a 35 basis point decrease in the yield on total loans to 4.13% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 4.48% from December 31, 2019 combined with a 82 basis point decrease in the yield of total securities to 2.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.98% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The yield on the loan portfolio,
excluding prepayment penalty income, decreased 34 basis points to 4.09% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 4.43 % for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $47.9 million, or 40.92%, to $69.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $117.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a decrease of 84 basis points in the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities to 1.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.00% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The 84 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities was primarily due to the Company’s quick response to the Federal Reserve lowering rates.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $195.2 million, an increase of $33.3 million, or 20.54%, from $161.9 million for 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to a 45 basis point increase in the net interest spread to 2.70% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 2.25% for the prior year. The yield on interest-earning assets decreased 39 basis points to 3.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 4.25% for the year ended December 31, 2019, and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased 84 basis points to 1.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.00% for the prior year. The net interest margin increased 38 basis points to 2.85% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.47% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding prepayment penalty income, the net interest margin would have been 2.81% and 2.42% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Provision for Credit Losses. Provision for credit losses of $23.1 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.8 million during the prior year. The provision was primarily the result of economic deterioration resulting from the impact of COVID-19. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, non-accrual loans increased $5.5 million to $18.3 million from $12.8 million at December 31, 2019. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Bank recorded net charge-offs totaling $3.6 million. The average loan-to-value ratio for our non-performing loans collateralized by real estate was 30.5% at December 31, 2020. The Bank continues to maintain conservative underwriting standards. We anticipate that we will continue to see low loss content in our loan portfolio.
Non-Interest Income. Non-interest income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $11.0 million, an increase of $1.6 million, or 16.60%, from $9.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Non-interest income increased primarily due to a decrease in net losses from fair value adjustments of $3.2 million, partially offset by a decrease of $1.6 million in net gains from the sale of assets and loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year.
Non-Interest Expense. Non-interest expense was $137.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $22.7 million, or 19.66%, from $115.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase in non-interest expense was primarily due to the year ended December 31, 2020 including $8.7 million in merger expenses and $7.8 million in prepayment penalties from the early extinguishment of FHLB borrowings combined with increases in salaries and employee benefits and occupancy and equipment expense due to the growth of the Bank.
Income Tax Provisions. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1.5 million, or 12.81%, to $10.5 million, compared to $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the $8.1 million decrease in income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23.3% compared to 22.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (1)
Liquidity, Regulatory Capital and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of funds are deposits, borrowings, principal and interest payments on loans, mortgage-backed and other securities, and proceeds from sales of securities and loans. Deposit flows and mortgage prepayments, however, are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. At December 31, 2020, the Bank was able to borrow up to $3,568.0 million from the FHLB-NY in Federal Home Loan Bank advances and letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had $1,652.6 million outstanding in combined balances of FHLB-NY advances and letters of credit. At December 31, 2020, the Bank also has unsecured lines of credit with other commercial banks totaling $618.0 million, with no outstanding amount. In addition, the Holding Company has subordinated debentures with a principal balance totaling $90.3 million and junior subordinated debentures with a face amount of $61.9 million and a carrying amount of $43.1 million (which are both included in Borrowed Funds). (See Note 10 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.) Management believes its available sources of funds are sufficient to fund current operations.
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents, which include cash and due from banks, overnight interest-earning deposits and federal funds sold with original maturities of 90 days or less. The level of these assets is dependent on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $157.4 million, an increase of $107.6 million from December 31, 2019. We also held marketable securities available for sale with a market value of $648.0 million at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we had commitments to extend credit (principally real estate mortgage loans) of $62.4 million and open lines of credit for borrowers (principally business lines of credit and home equity loan lines of credit) of $411.7 million. Since generally all of the loan commitments are expected to be drawn upon, the total loan commitments approximate future cash requirements, whereas the amounts of lines of credit may not be indicative of our future cash requirements. The loan commitments generally expire in 90 days, while construction loan lines of credit mature within 18 months and home equity loan lines of credit mature within 10 years. We use the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as we do for on-balance-sheet instruments.
Our total interest expense and non-interest expense in 2020 were $69.1 million and $137.9 million, respectively.
We maintain three postretirement defined benefit plans for our employees: a noncontributory defined benefit pension plan which was frozen as of September 30, 2006, a contributory medical plan, and a noncontributory life insurance plan. The life insurance plan was amended to discontinue providing life insurance benefits to future retirees after January 1, 2010 and the medical plan was frozen to future retirees as of January 1, 2011. We also maintain a noncontributory defined benefit plan for certain of our non-employee directors, which was frozen as of January 1, 2004. The employee pension plan is the only plan that we have funded. During 2020, we incurred cash expenditures of $0.1 million for each of the medical and life insurance plans and the non-employee director plan. We did not make a contribution to the employee pension plan in 2020. We expect to pay similar amounts for these plans in 2021. (See Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
(1) - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020, which is available on our investor relations website at www.flushingbank.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
The amounts reported in our financial statements are obtained from reports prepared by independent actuaries, and are based on significant assumptions. The most significant assumption is the discount rate used to determine the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (“APBO”) for these plans. The APBO is the present value of projected benefits that employees and retirees have earned to date. The discount rate is a single rate at which the liabilities of the plans are discounted into today’s dollars and could be effectively settled or eliminated. The discount rate used is based on the FTSE Pension Discount Curve (formerly the Citigroup Pension Liability Index), and reflects a rate that could be earned on bonds over a similar period that we anticipate the plans’ liabilities will be paid. An increase in the discount rate would reduce the APBO, while a reduction in the discount rate would increase the APBO. During the past several years, when interest rates have been at historically low levels, the discount rate used for our plans has declined from 7.25% for 2001 to 2.18% for 2020. This decline in the discount rate has resulted in an increase in our APBO.
The Company’s actuaries use several other assumptions that could have a significant impact on our APBO and periodic expense for these plans. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, expected rate of return on plan assets, future increases in medical and life insurance premiums, turnover rates of employees, and life expectancy. The accounting standards for postretirement plans involve mechanisms that serve to limit the volatility of earnings by allowing changes in the value of plan assets and benefit obligations to be amortized over time when actual results differ from the assumptions used, there are changes in the assumptions used, or there are plan amendments. At December 31, 2020, our employee pension plan had an unrecognized loss of $1.8 million and the medical and life insurance plan had an unrecognized loss of $1.3 million. At December 31, 2020, the non-employee director plan had an unrecognized gain of $0.3 million due to experience different from what had been estimated and changes in actuarial assumptions. The employee pension plan’s and medical and life insurance plan’s unrecognized losses are primarily attributed to the reduction in the discount rate. In addition, the medical and life insurance plan has a $0.1 million past service credit due to plan amendments. The net after tax effect of the unrecognized gains and losses associated with these plans has been recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss in stockholders’ equity, resulting in a reduction of stockholders’ equity of $0.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
The change in the discount rate, the pension plan’s mortality table and the reduction in medical premiums are the only significant changes made to the assumptions used for these plans for each of the three years ended December 31, 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the actual return on the employee pension plan assets was approximately 311%, 372% and 94%, respectively, of the assumed return used to determine the periodic pension expense for that respective year.
The market value of the assets of our employee pension plan is $27.7 million at December 31, 2020, which is $3.5 million more than the projected benefit obligation. We do not anticipate a change in the market value of these assets which would have a significant effect on liquidity, capital resources, or results of operations.
During 2020, funds were provided by the Company’s investing activities and operating activities which amounted to $93.1 million and $71.3 million, respectively and were used for financing activities totaling $56.8 million. The Company’s primary business objective is the origination and purchase of multi-family residential loans, commercial business loans and commercial real estate mortgage loans and to a lesser extent one-to-four family (including mixed-use properties). During the year ended December 31, 2020, the net total of loan originations and purchases less loan repayments and sales was $241.1 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also purchased $217.4 million in securities and used $54.8 million to fund the purchase of Empire. During 2020, funds were provided by a net increase of $208.5 million in total deposits and $215.4 million in long-term borrowings. Additionally, funds were provided by $504.5 million in proceeds from maturities, sales, calls and prepayments of securities and $86.3 million provided by the acquisition of Empire. The Company also used funds of $452.0 million, $24.8 million and $3.9 million for the repayment of long-term borrowed funds, dividend payments and treasury stock, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
At the time of the Bank’s conversion from a federally chartered mutual savings bank to a federally chartered stock savings bank, the Bank was required by its primary regulator to establish a liquidation account which is reduced as and to the extent that eligible account holders reduce their qualifying deposits. Upon completion of the merger, the liquidation account was assumed by the Bank. The balance of the liquidation account at December 31, 2020 was $0.4 million. In the unlikely event of a complete liquidation of the Bank, each eligible account holder will be entitled to receive
a distribution from the liquidation account. The Bank is not permitted to declare or pay a dividend or to repurchase any of its capital stock if the effect would be to cause the Bank’s regulatory capital to be reduced below the amount required for the liquidation account but approval of the NYDFS Superintendent is required if the total of all dividends declared by the Bank in a calendar year would exceed the total of its net profits for that year combined with its retained net profits for the preceding two years less prior dividends paid. The Holding Company is subject to the same regulatory restrictions on the declaration of dividends as the Bank.
Regulatory Capital Position. Under applicable regulatory capital regulations, the Bank and the Company are required to comply with each of four separate capital adequacy standards: leverage capital, common equity Tier I risk-based capital, Tier I risk-based capital and total risk-based capital. Such classifications are used by the FDIC and other bank regulatory agencies to determine matters ranging from each institution’s quarterly FDIC deposit insurance premium assessments, to approvals of applications authorizing institutions to grow their asset size or otherwise expand business activities. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Bank and the Company exceeded each of their four regulatory capital requirements. (See Note 15 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s accounting policies are integral to understanding the results of operations and statement of financial condition. These policies are described in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Several of these policies require management’s judgment to determine the value of the Company’s assets and liabilities. The Company has established detailed written policies and control procedures to ensure consistent application of these policies. The Company has identified four accounting policies that require significant management valuation judgment: the allowance for loan losses, fair value of financial instruments, including other-than-temporary impairment assessment, goodwill impairment and income taxes.
Allowance for Loan Losses. An allowance for loan losses (“ALL”) is provided to absorb probable estimated losses inherent in the loan portfolio. Management reviews the adequacy of the ALL by reviewing individual loans when it has disparate risk characteristics from the rest of the loan portfolio. These loans include non-accrual and TDR loans, while the remainder of the portfolio is grouped by categories with similar risk characteristics. The amount of the ALL is based upon a loss rate model that considers multiple factors which reflects management’s assessment of the credit quality of the loan portfolio. Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The factors are both quantitative and qualitative in nature including, but not limited to, historical losses, economic conditions, trends in delinquencies, value and adequacy of underlying collateral, volume and portfolio mix, and internal loan processes Judgment is required to determine how many years of historical loss experience are to be included when reviewing historical loss experience. A full credit cycle must be used, or loss estimates may be inaccurate. This evaluation is inherently subjective, as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revisions as more information becomes available.
The quantitative allowance is calculated using a number of inputs and assumptions. The process and guidelines were developed using, among other factors, the guidance from federal banking regulatory agencies and GAAP. The results of this process, support management’s assessment as to the adequacy of the ALL at each balance sheet date.
Notwithstanding the judgment required in assessing the components of the ALL, the Company believes that the ALL is adequate to cover losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The policy has been applied on a consistent basis for all periods presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Notes 2 and 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments. The Company carries certain financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value under the fair value option. Fair value is considered the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
The securities portfolio also consists of mortgage-backed and other securities for which the fair value election was not selected. These securities are classified as available for sale or held-to-maturity. Securities classified as available for sale are carried at fair value in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, with changes in fair value recorded
in accumulated other comprehensive loss. Securities held-to-maturity are carried at their amortized cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Financial assets and financial liabilities reported at fair value are required to be measured based on the following alternatives: (1) quoted prices in active markets for identical financial instruments (Level 1), (2) significant other observable inputs (Level 2), or (3) significant unobservable inputs (Level 3). Judgment is required in selecting the appropriate level to be used to determine fair value. The majority of financial assets and financial liabilities for which the fair value election was made, and the majority of investments classified as available for sale and held-to-maturity, were measured using Level 2 inputs, which require judgment to determine the fair value. The trust preferred securities held in the investment portfolio, and the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, were measured using Level 3 inputs due to the inactive market for these securities. See Notes 2, 7 and 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Goodwill Impairment. Goodwill is presumed to have an indefinite life and is tested for impairment, rather than amortized, on at least an annual basis. For the purpose of goodwill impairment testing, management has concluded that Company has one reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment of goodwill.
Quoted market prices in active markets are the best evidence of fair value and are to be used as the basis for measurement, when available. Other acceptable valuation methods include an asset approach, which determines a fair value based upon the value of assets net of liabilities, an income approach, which determines fair value using one or more methods that convert anticipated economic benefits into a present single amount, and a market approach, which determines a fair value based on the similar businesses that have been sold.
As described above, fair value of our reporting unit is derived using a combination of an asset approach, an income approach and a market approach. These valuation techniques consider several other factors beyond our market capitalization, such as the estimated future cash flows of our reporting unit, the discount rate used to present value such cash flows and the market multiples of comparable companies. Changes to input assumptions used in the analysis could result in materially different evaluations of goodwill impairment. See Notes 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Income Taxes. The Company estimates its income taxes payable based on the amounts it expects to owe to the various taxing authorizes (i.e. federal, state and local). In estimating income taxes, management assesses the relative merits and risks of the tax treatment of transactions, taking into account statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance in the context of the Company’s tax position. Management also relies on tax opinions, recent audits, and historical experience.
The Company also recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. A valuation allowance is required for deferred tax assets that the Company estimates are more likely than not to be unrealizable, based on evidence available at the time the estimate is made. These estimates can be affected by changes to tax laws, statutory tax rates, and future income levels. See Notes 2 and 11 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Contractual Obligations
We have significant obligations that arise in the normal course of business. We finance our assets with deposits and borrowings. We also use borrowings to manage our interest-rate risk. Borrowings with call provisions are included in the period of the next call date. We have the means to refinance these borrowings as they mature or are called through financing arrangements with the FHLB-NY and our ability to arrange repurchase agreements with broker-dealers and the FHLB-NY. (See Notes 10 and 11 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
We focus our balance sheet growth on the origination of mortgage loans. At December 31, 2020, we had commitments to extend credit and lines of credit of $474.0 million for mortgage and other loans. These loans will be funded through principal and interest payments received on existing mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities, growth in customer deposits, and, when necessary, additional borrowings. (See Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
At December 31, 2020, the Bank had 25 branches, which were all leased. In addition, we lease our executive offices. We currently outsource our data processing, loan servicing and check processing functions. We believe that this is the most cost effective method for obtaining these services. These arrangements are usually volume dependent and have varying terms. The contracts for these services usually include annual increases based on the increase in the consumer price index. The amounts shown above for purchase obligations represent the current term and volume of activity of these contracts. We expect to renew these contracts as they expire.
The amounts shown for pension and other postretirement benefits reflect our directors’ pension plan and amounts due under our plan for medical and life insurance benefits for retired employees. The amount shown in the “Less Than 1 Year” column represents our current estimate for these benefits, some of which are based on information supplied by actuaries. The amounts shown in columns reflecting periods over one year represent our current estimate based on the past year’s actual disbursements and information supplied by actuaries. The amounts do not include an increase for possible future retirees or increases in health plan costs. The amount shown in the “More Than 5 Years” column represents the amount required to increase the total amount to the projected benefit obligation of the directors’ plan and the medical and life insurance benefit plans, since these are unfunded plans and the underfunded portion of the employee pension plan. (See Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report.)
We currently provide a non-qualified deferred compensation plan for officers who have achieved the designated level and completed one year of service. However, certain officers who have not reached the designated level but were already participants remain eligible to participate in the Plan. In addition to the amounts deferred by the officers, we match 50% of their contributions, generally up to a maximum of 5% of the officer’s salary. These plans generally require the deferred balance to be credited with earnings at a rate earned by certain mutual funds. The amounts shown in the columns for less than five years represent the estimate of the amounts we will contribute to a rabbi trust with respect to matching contributions under these plans. The amount shown in the “More Than 5 Years” column represents the current accrued liability for these plans, adjusted for the activity in the columns for less than five years. This expense is provided in the Consolidated Statements of Income, and the liability has been provided in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.