Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements; Risk Factors Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on February 11, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On January 27, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub and FF. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into FF, with FF surviving the merger. As a result of the Transactions, FF will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, with the stockholders of FF becoming stockholders of the Company, which will be renamed “Faraday Future Intelligent Electric, Inc.”
Under the Merger Agreement, the outstanding FF shares and the outstanding FF converting debt will be converted into a number of shares of our new Class A common stock following the Transactions and, for FF Top, shares of our New FF common stock following the Transactions based on the Exchange Ratio.
Additionally, each FF option or FF warrant that is outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger (and by its terms will not terminate upon the closing of the Merger) will remain outstanding and convert into the right to purchase a number of shares of our Class A common stock equal to the number of FF ordinary shares subject to such option or warrant multiplied by the Exchange Ratio at an exercise price per share equal to the current exercise price per share for such option or warrant divided by the Exchange Ratio.
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
On February 28, 2021, we entered into a convertible promissory note with the sponsor pursuant to which the sponsor agreed to loan us up to an aggregate principal amount of $500,000 (the “Note”). The Note is non-interest bearing and due on the date on which we consummate a business combination. If we do not consummate a business combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Note; however, no proceeds from the Trust Account may be used for such repayment. Up to $500,000 of the Note may be converted into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the sponsor. The units would be identical to the Private Units. There is no outstanding balance under the Note.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and, subsequent to the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,109,383, which consists of operating costs of $2,218,182, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $99,990 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $8,809.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 24, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 22,977,568 Units, which included the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option on July 31, 2020, in the amount of 2,977,568 additional Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $229,775,680. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering and the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of 594,551 Private Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $5,945,510.
Following the initial public offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters’ and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $229,775,680 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $813,980 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the initial public offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $5,117,030 in transaction costs, including $4,595,510 of underwriting fees and $521,520 of other offering costs.
For the period from February 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $304,885. Net loss of $2,109,383 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $99,990 and unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $8,809. Changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $1,913,297 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $229,884,479. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $549,395 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amount out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, such loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Units. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest.
We monitor the adequacy of our working capital in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Company’s executive officers a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space and related services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on July 21, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
We have engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with a business combination to assist us in holding meetings with its shareholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a business combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the business combination and assist us with its press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a business combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of initial public offering (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 33% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other third parties who are investment banks or financial advisory firms not participating in our initial public offering that assist us in identifying and consummating a business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.