Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to facilitate the understanding and assessment of significant changes and trends in our businesses that accounted for the changes in our results of operations in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to our results of operations in the year ended December 31, 2019; in our results of operations in the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to our results of operations in the year ended December 31, 2018, and our financial condition at December 31, 2020 as compared to our financial condition at December 31, 2019. This discussion and analysis is based on and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Some of the factors that could cause results to differ materially from expectations are discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and accounting practices in the banking industry. Certain of those accounting policies are considered critical accounting policies, because they require us to make estimates and assumptions regarding circumstances or trends that could materially affect the value of those assets, such as economic conditions or trends that could impact our ability to fully collect our loans or ultimately realize the carrying value of certain of our other assets. Those estimates and assumptions are made based on current information available to us regarding those economic conditions or trends or other circumstances. If changes were to occur in the events, trends or other circumstances on which our estimates or assumptions were based, or other unanticipated events were to occur that might affect our operations, we may be required under GAAP to adjust our earlier estimates and to reduce the carrying values of the affected assets on our balance sheet, generally by means of charges against income, which could also affect our results of operations in the fiscal periods when those charges are recognized.
Allowance for Credit Losses - Securities Available-for-Sale (“AFS”) - For securities AFS in an unrealized loss position, the Company first evaluates whether it intends to sell, or whether it is more likely than not that it will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. If either of these criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met, the security amortized cost basis is written down to fair value through income. If the criteria is not met, the Company is required to assess whether the decline in fair value has resulted from credit losses or noncredit-related factors. If the present value of expected cash flows to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit loss exists, and an allowance for credit loss is recorded through income as a component of provision for credit loss expense. If the assessment indicates that a credit loss does not exist, the Company records the decline in fair value through other comprehensive income, net of related income tax effects. The Company has made the election to exclude accrued interest receivable on securities from the estimate of credit losses and report accrued interest separately on the consolidated balance sheets. Changes in the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit loss expense. Losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of a security is confirmed or when either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met. See Note 4, Securities, for additional information related to the Company’s allowance for credit losses on securities AFS.
Allowance for Credit Losses - Loans. Our ACL for loans and investments are established through a provision for credit losses charged to expense and may be reduced by a recapture of previously established loss reserves, which are also reflected in the statement of income. Loans and investments are charged against the ACL when management believes that collectability of the principal is unlikely. The ACL for loans is an amount that management believes will be adequate to absorb estimated losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible based on an evaluation of the collectability of loans and prior loan loss experience. This evaluation also takes into consideration such factors as changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, review of specific problem loans, current economic conditions and certain other subjective factors that may affect the borrower’s ability to pay. While we use the best information available to make this evaluation, future adjustments to our ACL may be necessary if there are significant changes in economic or other conditions that can affect the collectability in full of loans and investments in our loan or investment portfolios.
Utilization and Valuation of Deferred Income Tax Benefits. We record as a “deferred tax asset” on our balance sheet an amount equal to the tax credit and tax loss carryforwards and tax deductions (collectively “tax benefits”) that we believe will be available to us to offset or reduce income taxes in future periods. Under applicable federal and state income tax laws and regulations, tax benefits related to tax loss carryforwards will expire if they cannot be used within specified periods of time. Accordingly, the ability to fully use our deferred tax asset related to tax loss carryforwards to reduce income taxes in the future depends on the amount of taxable income that we generate during those time periods. At least once each year, or more frequently, if warranted, we make estimates of future taxable income that we believe we are likely to generate during those future periods. If we conclude, on the basis of those estimates and the amount of the tax benefits available to us, that it is more likely, than not, that we will be able to fully utilize those tax benefits prior to their expiration, we recognize the deferred tax asset in full on our balance sheet. On the other hand, if we conclude on the basis of those estimates and the amount of the tax benefits available to us that it has become more likely, than not, that we will be unable to utilize those tax benefits in full prior to their expiration, then, we would establish a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax asset on our balance sheet to the amount with respect to which we believe it is still more likely, than not, that we will be able to use to offset or reduce taxes in the future. The establishment of such a valuation allowance, or any increase in an existing valuation allowance, would be effectuated through a charge to the provision for income taxes or a reduction in any income tax credit for the period in which such valuation allowance is established or increased.
We have two business segments, “Banking” and “Investment Management and Wealth Planning” (“Wealth Management”). Banking includes the operations of FFB, FFIS and Blue Moon Management LLC and Wealth Management includes the operations of FFA. The financial position and operating results of the stand-alone holding company, FFI, are included under the caption “Other” in certain of the tables that follow, along with any consolidation elimination entries.
Overview and Recent Developments
We continued strong growth during 2020 with loan originations of $2.5 billion, and deposit growth of $1.0 billion. Total revenues (net interest income and noninterest income) in 2020 increased by 19% over 2019.
The results of operations for Banking reflect the benefits of this growth. Income before taxes for Banking increased $37.5 million, from $82.2 million in 2019, to $119.6 million in 2020. On a consolidated basis, income before taxes increased $39.3 million, from $79.5 million in 2019, to $118.8 million in 2020.
On January 26, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.09 per common share to be paid on February 15, 2021 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 5, 2021.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The primary sources of revenue for Banking are net interest income, fees from its deposits and trust services, gains on sales of loans, certain loan fees, and consulting fees. The primary sources of revenue for Wealth Management are asset management fees assessed on the balance of AUM. Compensation and benefit costs, which represent the largest component of noninterest expense, accounted for 55% and 75%, respectively, of the total noninterest expense for Banking and Wealth Management in 2020.
The following tables show key operating results for each of our business segments for the years ended December 31:
General. Our net income and income before taxes in 2020 were $84.4 million and $118.8 million, respectively, as compared to $56.2 million and $79.5 million, respectively, in 2019. The $39.3 million increase in income before taxes was the result of a $37.5 million increase in income before taxes for Banking, a $0.5 million increase in income before taxes for Wealth Management and a $1.3 million decrease in corporate expenses. The increase in Banking was due to higher net interest income, higher noninterest income, and lower noninterest expenses. The increase in Wealth Management was due to higher noninterest income and lower noninterest expenses. The decrease in corporate expenses was due to decreases in interest expense and noninterest expenses.
Our effective tax rate for 2020 was 29.0% as compared to 29.3% for 2019 and as compared to our statutory tax rate of 29.0%.
Net Interest Income. The following tables set forth information regarding (i) the total dollar amount of interest income from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yields on those assets; (ii) the total dollar amount of interest expense and the average rate of interest on our interest-bearing liabilities; (iii) net interest income; (iv) net interest rate spread; and (v) net interest margin for the years ended December 31:
Net interest income is impacted by the volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate), interest rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume) and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The following table provides a breakdown of the changes in net interest income due to volume and rate changes between 2020 as compared to 2019.
Net interest income for Banking increased from $170.3 million in 2019, to $196.8 million in 2020 due primarily to a 9% increase in interest-earning assets. On a consolidated basis, the net interest margin (“NIM”) increased 16 basis points to 3.03% in 2020 from 2.87% in 2019, as the current low interest rate environment continues to impact our NIM positively as our cost of funds have fallen faster than the yield on our earnings assets. The realization of net PPP fee income of $1.9 million helped offset the decrease in interest income due to lower average loan rates during 2020. The decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities was due to a decrease in costs of interest-bearing deposits and decreased costs of borrowings. The cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased from 1.81% in 2019 to 1.04% in 2020. The average rate on borrowings decreased from 2.34% in 2019 to 1.28% in 2020. The average balance outstanding under the holding company line of credit decreased from $6.1 million in 2019 to $3.9 million in 2020, resulting in a $0.2 million decrease in corporate interest expense.
Provision for credit losses. The provision for credit losses represents our estimate of the amount necessary to be charged against the current period’s earnings to maintain the ACL for loans and investments at a level that we consider adequate in relation to the estimated losses inherent in the loan and investment portfolios. The provision for credit losses for loans is impacted by changes in loan balances as well as changes in estimated loss assumptions and charge-offs and recoveries. The amount of the provision for loans also takes into consideration such factors as changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, review of specific problem loans, current economic conditions and certain other subjective factors that may affect the ability of borrowers to meet their repayment obligations to us. For 2020 and 2019, we recorded provisions for credit losses of $6.7 million and $2.6 million, respectively. The provision for credit losses in 2020 and 2019 were due to the growth in loan balances and $0.8 million of net chargeoffs in each year.
Noninterest income. Noninterest income for Banking includes fees charged to clients for trust services and deposit services, consulting fees, prepayment and late fees charged on loans, gain on sale of loans, and gains and losses from capital market activities. The following table provides a breakdown of noninterest income for Banking for the years ended December 31:
Noninterest income in Banking in 2020 was $12.7 million higher than 2019 due to a higher gain on sale of loans, higher loan fees, and higher trust fees, which were partially offset by a decrease in other expenses. The $10.9 million higher gain on sale was due to the benefits of a declining interest rate environment in 2020. The $1.7 million increase in loan fees was due primarily to higher prepayment fees and higher servicing fees. The $0.5 million increase in trust fees relates primarily to new clients.
Noninterest income for Wealth Management includes fees charged to high net-worth clients for managing their assets and for providing financial planning consulting services. The following table provides the amounts of noninterest income for Wealth Management for the years ended December 31:
Noninterest income for Wealth Management increased slightly in 2020 when compared to 2019, as the level of billable AUM remained the same in both years.
Noninterest Expense. The following table provides a breakdown of noninterest expense for Banking and Wealth Management for the years ended December 31:
Noninterest expense in Banking decreased to $102 million in 2020 from $104.4 million in 2019 due to a decrease in customer service costs, offset partially by increases in compensation and benefits, occupancy and depreciation, and professional services and marketing. Customer service costs for Banking decreased to $7.4 in 2020 from $17.9 million in 2019 due to decreases in the earnings credit rates paid on the related deposit balances, as interest rates declined during 2020. Compensation and benefits for Banking increased $4.4 million during 2020 as compared to 2019, due to salary increases and an increase in the FTE in Banking, which increased to 436.8 in 2020, from 410.4 in 2019, as a result of the increased staffing related to additional personnel added to support the growth in loans and deposits. The increase in occupancy and depreciation for Banking to $21.4 million in 2020 from $18.4 million in 2019 was due to higher core processing costs related to higher volumes and services added during 2019.
Noninterest expenses for Wealth Management decreased by $0.2 million for 2020, when compared to the comparable period in 2019, due to decreased compensation costs.
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The primary sources of revenue for Banking are net interest income, fees from its deposits and trust services, gains on sales of loans, certain loan fees, and consulting fees. The primary sources of revenue for Wealth Management are asset management fees assessed on the balance of AUM. Compensation and benefit costs, which represent the largest component of noninterest expense, accounted for 50% and 76%, respectively, of the total noninterest expense for Banking and Wealth Management in 2019.
The following tables show key operating results for each of our business segments for the years ended December 31:
General. Our net income and income before taxes in 2019 were $56.2 million and $79.5 million, respectively, as compared to $43.0 million and $60.1 million, respectively, in 2018. The $19.4 million increase in income before taxes was the result of an $18.5 million increase in income before taxes for Banking, a $1.4 million decrease in income before taxes for Wealth Management and a $2.4 million decrease in corporate expenses. The increase in Banking was due to higher net interest income, a lower provision for loan losses and higher noninterest income which were partially offset by higher noninterest expenses. The decrease in Wealth Management was due to lower noninterest income and higher noninterest expenses. The decrease in corporate expenses was due to decreases in interest expense and noninterest expenses.
Our effective tax rate for 2019 was 29.3% as compared to 28.5% for 2018 and as compared to our statutory tax rate of 29.0%. During 2018, the effective tax rate benefited from excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise or vesting of stock awards.
Net Interest Income. The following tables set forth information regarding (i) the total dollar amount of interest income from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yields on those assets; (ii) the total dollar amount of interest expense and the average rate of interest on our interest-bearing liabilities; (iii) net interest income; (iv) net interest rate spread; and (v) net interest margin for the years ended December 31:
Net interest income is impacted by the volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate), interest rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume) and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The following table provides a breakdown of the changes in net interest income due to volume and rate changes between 2019 as compared to 2018.
Net interest income for Banking increased from $157.4 million in 2018, to $170.3 million in 2019 due primarily to a 14% increase in interest-earning assets which was partially offset by a decrease in our net yield on interest earning assets. On a consolidated basis, the net yield on interest earning assets decreased from 2.99% in 2018 to 2.87% in 2019 due to a decrease in the net interest rate spread which was partially offset by a larger benefit derived from noninterest bearing funding sources, including noninterest-bearing deposits and equity, as interest rates rise. The net interest margin decreased from 2.99% in 2018 to 2.87% in 2019 due to an increase in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities which was partially offset by an increase in yield on total interest-earning assets. The yield on interest-earning assets increased as new loans added to the portfolio during the year bore interest rates higher than the current portfolio rates. The increase in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities was due to increased costs of interest-bearing deposits, resulting from increases in deposit market rates, and increased costs of borrowings as the average rate on FHLB advances and other Bank borrowings increased from 1.92% in 2018 to 2.30% in 2019. The average balance outstanding under the holding company line of credit decreased from $31.4 million in 2018 to $6.1 million in 2019, resulting in a $1.4 million decrease in corporate interest expense.
Provision for credit losses. The provision for loan losses represents our estimate of the amount necessary to be charged against the current period’s earnings to maintain the ACL at a level that we consider adequate in relation to the estimated losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The provision for credit losses is impacted by changes in loan balances as well as changes in estimated loss assumptions and charge-offs and recoveries. The amount of the provision also takes into consideration such factors as changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, review of specific problem loans, current economic conditions and certain other subjective factors that may affect the ability of borrowers to meet their repayment obligations to us. For 2019 and 2018, we recorded provisions for credit losses of $2.6 million and $4.2 million, respectively. The provision for credit losses in 2019 was due to the growth in loan balances and $0.8 million of net chargeoffs. The provision for credit losses in 2018 was due to $3.5 million of net chargeoffs and growth in loan balances.
Noninterest income. Noninterest income for Banking includes fees charged to clients for trust services and deposit services, consulting fees, prepayment and late fees charged on loans, gain on sale of loans, and gains and losses from capital market activities. The following table provides a breakdown of noninterest income for Banking for the years ended December 31:
Noninterest income in Banking in 2019 was $7.5 million higher than 2018 due to a higher gain on sale of loans, higher loan fees, higher trust fees and gains on sales of Real estate owned (“REO”) which were partially offset by a $0.3 million loss on the sale of securities. The $3.8 million higher gain on sale was due to the benefits of a declining interest rate environment in 2019. The $2.2 million increase in loan fees was due primarily to higher prepayment fees and higher servicing fees. The $1.3 million increase in trust fees relates primarily to new clients, some of which were transferred from or referred by Wealth Management.
Noninterest income for Wealth Management includes fees charged to high net-worth clients for managing their assets and for providing financial planning consulting services. The following table provides the amounts of noninterest income for Wealth Management for the years ended December 31:
Noninterest income for Wealth Management decreased by $1.1 million in 2019 when compared to 2018 due primarily to lower levels, on average, of billable AUM in 2019.
Noninterest Expense. The following table provides a breakdown of noninterest expense for Banking and Wealth Management for the years ended December 31:
Noninterest expense in Banking increased from $100.8 million in 2018 to $104.4 million in 2019, due to increases in staffing and other costs associated with the Bank’s expansion, including the acquisition of PBB in June 2018, and increases in customer service costs which were partially offset by a $3.4 million decrease in merger related costs. Compensation and benefits for Banking increased $2.0 million during 2019 as compared to 2018 due to salary increases and an increase in the FTE in Banking, which increased to 421.4 in 2019 from 385.8 in 2018 primarily as a result of the increased staffing related to the PBB acquisition. The $1.1 million increase in occupancy and depreciation for Banking in 2019 as compared to 2018 was due to costs related to the PBB acquisition and increases in our data processing costs due to increased volumes. Customer service costs for Banking increased from $15.1 million in 2018 to $17.9 million in 2019 due to increases in the earnings credit rates paid on the related deposit balances. Other expenses decreased by $2.5 million in 2019 when compared to the corresponding period in 2018 due to a $3.4 million decrease in merger related costs which was partially offset by increases in the amortization of core deposit intangibles and FDIC insurance. Increases in FDIC insurance were partially offset by a $1.2 million refund received from the FDIC for deposit insurance fees in the third quarter of 2019.
Noninterest expenses for Wealth Management increased by $0.3 million for 2019, when compared to the comparable period in 2018, due to increased compensation costs.
Financial Condition
The following table shows the financial position for each of our business segments, and of FFI and elimination entries used to arrive at our consolidated totals which are included in the column labeled Other, at December 31:
Our consolidated balance sheet is primarily affected by changes occurring in our Banking operations as our Wealth Management operations do not maintain significant levels of assets. Banking has experienced and is expected to continue to experience increases in its total assets as a result of our growth strategy.
During 2020, total assets increased by $643 million primarily due to increases in cash and loans, including loans held for sale. Loans and loans held for sale increased $259 million in 2020 as a result of $2.5 billion of originations which were partially offset by the sale of $555 million of loans and payoffs or scheduled payments of $1.7 billion. The $1 billion growth in deposits during 2020 included increases in branch deposits of $736 million, specialty deposits of $979 million, and digital banking deposits of $402 million, offset by a $1.1 billion decrease in wholesale deposits. Borrowings decreased to $269 million at December 31, 2020, from $743 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on the holding company line of credit was $14 million.
Cash and cash equivalents, certificates of deposit and securities: Cash and cash equivalents, which primarily consist of funds held at the Federal Reserve Bank or at correspondent banks, including fed funds, increased by $564 million during 2020. Changes in cash and cash equivalents are primarily affected by the funding of loans, investments in securities, and changes in our sources of funding: deposits, FHLB advances and FFI borrowings.
Securities available for sale (“AFS”): The following table provides a summary of the Company’s AFS securities portfolio at December 31:
The US Treasury Securities are pledged as collateral to the State of California to meet regulatory requirements related to FFB’s trust operations.
Excluding allowance for credit losses, the $200 million decrease in AFS securities in 2020 was due to primarily to $270 million in principal payments, partially offset by $56 million of securities purchased. The $205 million increase in AFS securities in 2019 was due to primarily from $576 million of securities purchased from our loan securitization in the third quarter, partially offset by the sale of $284 million of lower yielding securities and $96 million in principal payments.
The table below indicates, as of December 31, 2019, the gross unrealized losses and fair values of our investments, aggregated by investment category and length of time that the individual securities have been in a continuous unrealized loss position.
There were no securities with unrealized losses at December 31, 2020.
Unrealized losses on agency notes and agency mortgage-backed securities have not been recognized into income because the issuer bonds are of high credit quality, management does not intend to sell and it is not more likely than not that management would be required to sell the securities prior to their anticipated recovery, and the decline in fair value is largely due to changes in interest rates. The fair value is expected to recover as the bonds approach maturity.
The scheduled maturities of securities AFS, other than agency mortgage backed securities, and the related weighted average yield is as follows as of December 31, 2020:
Agency mortgage backed securities and beneficial interests in FHLMC securitizations are excluded from the above table because such securities are not due at a single maturity date. The weighted average yield of the agency mortgage backed securities and beneficial interests in FHLMC securitizations as of December 31, 2020 was 2.39%.
Loans. The following table sets forth our loans, by loan category, as of December 31:
Loans and loans held for sale increased $259 million in 2020 as a result of $2.5 billion of originations which were partially offset by the sale of $553 million of loans and payoffs or scheduled payments of $1.7 billion. Loans and loans held for sale increased $249 million in 2019 as a result of $1.9 billion of originations which were partially offset by the sale of $551 million of loans and payoffs or scheduled payments of $1.1 billion.
The scheduled maturities, as of December 31, 2020, of the performing loans categorized as land loans and as commercial and industrial loans, are as follows:
Deposits: The following table sets forth information with respect to our deposits and the average rates paid on deposits, as of December 31:
The $1 billion increase in deposits during 2020 was due to increases in branch deposits of $736 million, specialty deposits of $979 million, and digital bank deposits of $402 million, offset partially by a $1 billion decrease in wholesale deposits. The $358 million increase in deposits during 2019 was due to increases in branch deposits of $138 million and specialty deposits of $222 million and a $2 million decrease in wholesale deposits.
The weighted average rate of interest-bearing deposits increased from 1.34% at December 31, 2018 to 1.61% at December 31, 2019, and decreased to 0.52% at December 31, 2020, while the weighted average interest rates of both interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing deposits decreased from 1.26% at December 31, 2018, to 1.22% at December 31, 2019, and decreased to 0.38% at December 31, 2020. The financial impact of the increase in noninterest-bearing deposits is reflected in customer service costs, which are included in noninterest expenses.
The maturities of our certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more were as follows as of December 31, 2020:
From time to time, the Bank will utilize brokered deposits as a source of funding. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank held $326 million of deposits which are classified as brokered deposits.
Borrowings: At December 31, 2020, our borrowings consisted of $255 million in FHLB term advances at the Bank, and $14 million of borrowings under a company line of credit. At December 31, 2019, our borrowings consisted of $233 million of an overnight FHLB advance at the Bank, a $500 million FHLB term advance at the Bank, and $10 million of borrowings under a company line of credit. The overnight FHLB advance was paid in full in the early part of January 2020. Because FFB utilizes overnight borrowings, the balance of outstanding borrowings fluctuates on a daily basis. The average balance of borrowings at the Bank during 2020 was $609 million, as compared to $620 million during 2019. The weighted average interest rate on these borrowings was 1.26% during 2020, as compared to 2.30% during 2019. The maximum amount of short-term FHLB advances outstanding at any month-end during 2020 and 2019, was $860 million and $956 million, respectively.
Delinquent Loans, Nonperforming Assets and Provision for Credit Losses
Loans are considered past due following the date when either interest or principal is contractually due and unpaid. Loans on which the accrual of interest has been discontinued are designated as nonaccrual loans. Accrual of interest on loans is discontinued when reasonable doubt exists as to the full, timely collection of interest or principal and, generally, when a loan becomes contractually past due for 90 days or more with respect to principal or interest. However, the accrual of interest may be continued on a well-secured loan contractually past due 90 days or more with respect to principal or
interest if the loan is in the process of collection or collection of the principal and interest is deemed probable. The following tables provide a summary of past due and nonaccrual loans as of December 31:
The following table presents the composition of troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) by accrual and nonaccrual status as of:
These loans were classified as a TDR as a result of a reduction in required principal payments and/or an extension of the maturity date of the loans.
The following is a breakdown of our loan portfolio by the risk category of loans at December 31:
We consider a loan to be impaired when, based upon current information and events, we believe that it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan. We measure impairment using either the present value of the expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, or the fair value of the properties collateralizing the loan, for collateral dependent loans. Impairment losses are included in the allowance for credit losses through a charge to provision for credit losses. Adjustments to impairment losses due to changes in the fair value of the property collateralizing an impaired loan are considered in computing the provision for credit losses. Loans collectively reviewed for impairment include all loans except for loans which are individually reviewed based on specific criteria, such as delinquency, debt coverage, adequacy of collateral and condition of property collateralizing the loans. Impaired loans include nonaccrual loans (excluding those collectively reviewed for impairment), certain restructured loans and certain performing loans less than ninety days delinquent (“other impaired loans”) which we believe are not likely to be collected in accordance with contractual terms of the loans.
Allowance for Credit Losses. The following table summarizes the activity in our ACL related to loans for the year ended December 31:
Excluding the loans acquired in an acquisition and any related allocated ACL for loans, our ACL related to loans represented 0.50% and 0.49% of total loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The amount of the ACL for loans is adjusted periodically by charges to operations (referred to in our income statement as the “provision for credit losses”) (i) to replenish the ACL after it has been reduced due to loan write-downs or charge-offs, (ii) to reflect increases in the volume of outstanding loans, and (iii) to take account of changes in the risk of potential loan losses due to a deterioration in the condition of borrowers, or in the value of property securing non-performing loans, or adverse changes in economic conditions. The amounts of the provisions we make for loan losses are based on our estimate of losses in our loan portfolio. In estimating such losses, we use economic and loss migration models that are based on bank regulatory guidelines and industry standards, and our historical charge-off experience and loan delinquency rates, local and national economic conditions, a borrower’s ability to repay its borrowings, and the value of any property collateralizing the loan, as well as a number of subjective factors. However, these determinations involve judgments about changes and trends in current economic conditions and other events that can affect the ability of borrowers to meet their loan obligations to us and a weighting among the quantitative and qualitative factors we consider in determining the sufficiency of the ACL. Moreover, the duration and anticipated effects of prevailing economic conditions or trends can be uncertain and can be affected by a number of risks and circumstances that are outside of our control. If
changes in economic or market conditions or unexpected subsequent events were to occur, or if changes were made to bank regulatory guidelines or industry standards that are used to assess the sufficiency of the ACL, it could become necessary for us to incur additional, and possibly significant, charges to increase the ACL, which would have the effect of reducing our income.
In addition, the FDIC and the DFPI, as an integral part of their examination processes, periodically review the adequacy of our ACL. These agencies may require us to make additional provisions for loan losses, over and above the provisions that we have already made, the effect of which would be to reduce our income.
On January 1, 2020, we adopted a new accounting standard which replaces the “incurred loss” model for measuring credit losses discussed above with a new “expected loss” model. See “Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-New Accounting Pronouncements” for additional details.
The following table presents the balance in the ACL and the recorded investment in loans by impairment method at December 31:
The column labeled “Unaccreted Credit Component Other Loans” represents the amount of unaccreted credit component discount for the other loans acquired in acquisitions, and the stated principal balance of the related loans. The discount is equal to 0.53% of the stated principal balance of these loans as of December 31, 2019. In addition to this unaccreted credit component discount, an additional $0.3 million of the ACL were provided for these loans as of December 31, 2019.
Liquidity
Liquidity management focuses on our ability to generate, on a timely and cost-effective basis, cash sufficient to meet the funding needs of current loan demand, deposit withdrawals, principal and interest payments with respect to outstanding borrowings and to pay operating expenses. Our liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of funds management. Liquid assets are generally invested in marketable securities or held as cash at the FRBSF or other financial institutions.
We monitor our liquidity in accordance with guidelines established by our Board of Directors and applicable regulatory requirements. Our need for liquidity is affected by our loan activity, net changes in deposit levels and the maturities of our borrowings. The principal sources of our liquidity consist of deposits, loan interest and principal payments and prepayments, investment management and consulting fees, FHLB advances and proceeds from borrowings and sales
of FFI common stock. The remaining balances of the Company’s lines of credit available to draw down totaled $2.4 billion at December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities provided net cash of $70 million, comprised primarily of our net income of $84 million and $13 million increase in other liabilities, offset partially by a $36 million increase in other assets. During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities provided net cash of $60 million, comprised primarily of our net income of $56 million and $6 million increase in other liabilities.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities used net cash of $28 million, primarily to fund a $798 million net increase in loans and $56 million in purchases of securities AFS, offset partially by $553 million in proceeds from loan sales, and $270 million in principal collections of securities AFS. During the year ended December 31, 2019, investing activities used net cash of $427 million, primarily to fund a $803 million net increase in loans and $578 million in purchases of securities AFS, offset partially by $574 million in proceeds from loan sales, and $379 million in principal collections of securities AFS.
Cash Flow Provided by Financing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided net cash of $522 million, consisting primarily of a net increase of $1.0 billion in deposits, offset partially by a $478 million decrease in FHLB advances, $12 million in dividends paid and $12 million paid in swap settlements. During the year ended December 31, 2019, financing activities provided net cash of $365 million, consisting primarily of a net increase of $358 million in deposits and $35 million increase in borrowings, offset partially by $9 million in dividends paid and $20 million paid swap settlements.
Ratio of Loans to Deposits. The relationship between gross loans and total deposits can provide a useful measure of a bank’s liquidity. Since repayment of loans tends to be less predictable than the maturity of investments and other liquid resources, the higher the loan-to-deposit ratio the less liquid are our assets. On the other hand, since we realize greater yields on loans than we do on other interest-earning assets, a lower loan-to-deposit ratio can adversely affect interest income and earnings. As a result, our goal is to achieve a loan-to-deposit ratio that appropriately balances the requirements of liquidity and the need to generate a fair return on our assets. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the loan-to-deposit ratios at FFB were 90%, and 103%, respectively.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the indicated contractual obligations of the Company as of the December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table provides the off-balance sheet arrangements of the Company as of December 31, 2020:
Some of the commitments to fund existing loans, lines of credit and letters of credit are expected to expire without being drawn upon. Therefore, the total commitments do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. As of December 31, 2020, FFB was obligated on $277 million of letters of credit to the FHLB which were being used as collateral for public fund deposits, including $263 million of deposits from the State of California.
Asset and Liability Management: Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is inherent in financial services businesses. Management of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities in terms of rate and maturity has an important effect on our liquidity and net interest margin. Interest rate risk results from interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities maturing or repricing at different times, on a different basis or in unequal amounts. The Board of Directors of FFB approves policies and limits governing the management of interest rate risk. The asset / liability committee formed by these policies is responsible for monitoring our interest rate risk and providing periodic reports to the Board of Directors regarding our compliance with these policies and limits. We have established three primary measurement processes to quantify and manage our interest rate risk. These include: (i) gap analysis which measures the repricing mismatches of asset and liability cash flows; (ii) net interest income simulations which are used to measure the impact of instantaneous parallel changes in interest rates on net interest income over a 12 month forecast period; and (iii) economic value of equity calculations which measure the sensitivity of our economic value of equity to simultaneous parallel changes in interest rates.
Gap Analysis. Under this analysis, rate sensitivity is measured by the extent to which our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities reprice or mature at different times. Rate sensitivity gaps in which the repricing of interest-earning assets exceed the repricing of interest-bearing liabilities tend to produce an expanded net yield on interest-earning assets in rising interest rate environments and a reduced net yield on interest-earning assets in declining interest rate environments. Conversely, when the repricing of interest-bearing liabilities exceed the repricing of interest-earning assets, the net yield on interest-earning assets generally declines in rising interest rate environments and increases in declining interest rate environments. The following table sets forth the interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on the basis of when they reprice or mature as of December 31, 2020:
The cumulative positive total of $2.1 billion reflects the funding provided by noninterest-bearing deposits and equity. Because we had a $1.0 billion net negative position at December 31, 2020 for the repricing period of less than one year, the result of this analysis indicate that we would be adversely impacted by a short term increase in interest rates and would benefit from a short term decrease in interest rates.
However, the extent to which our net interest margin will be impacted by changes in prevailing interest rates will depend on a number of factors, including how quickly interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities react to interest rate changes. It is not uncommon for rates on certain assets or liabilities to lag behind changes in the market rates of interest. Additionally, prepayments of loans and early withdrawals of certificates of deposit could cause interest sensitivities to vary. As a result, the relationship or “gap” between interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as shown in the above table, is only a general indicator of interest rate sensitivity and the effect of changing rates of interest
on our net interest income is likely to be different from that predicted solely on the basis of the interest rate sensitivity analysis set forth in the above table.
Net Interest Income Simulations (“NII”). Under this analysis, we use a simulation model to measure and evaluate potential changes in our net interest income resulting from changes in interest rates. This model measures the impact of instantaneous shocks of 100, 200, 300 and 400 basis points on our net interest income over a 12 month forecast period. The computed changes to our net interest income between hypothetical rising and declining rate scenarios for the twelve month period beginning December 31, 2020 are as follows:
The modeled one year NII results indicate that the bank would be adversely impacted in the up rate shock scenarios of 100 and 200 basis points and would be positively impacted in the up rate shock scenarios of 300 and 400 basis points. We would be positively impacted in the down rate shock scenario of 100 basis points. We did not include rate shock scenarios below the minus 100 basis points because we believe those scenarios are not meaningful for IRR modeling based on the current interest rate environment.
Economic Value of Equity Calculations (“EVE”). The EVE measures the sensitivity of our market value equity to simultaneous changes in interest rates. EVE is derived by subtracting the economic value of FFB’s liabilities from the economic value of its assets, assuming current and hypothetical interest rate environments. EVE is based on all of the future cash flows expected to be generated by the FFB’s current balance sheet, discounted to derive the economic value of FFB’s assets & liabilities. These cash flows may change depending on the assumed interest rate environment and the resulting changes in other assumptions, such as prepayment speeds. The computed changes to our economic value of equity between hypothetical rising and declining rate scenarios as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
We did not include scenarios below the minus 200 basis point scenario because we believe those scenarios are not meaningful based on current interest rate levels. The EVE results indicate that we would benefit from a short term increase in interest rates and adversely impacted by a short term decrease in interest rates. This differs from the NII results because, in the current interest rate environment, assumed interest rate floors for loans eliminate the benefit normally derived for loans in a declining interest rate environment. The results of the EVE are hypothetical, and a variety of factors might cause actual results to differ substantially from what is depicted. These could include, but are not limited to, non-parallel yield curve shifts, changes in market interest rate spreads and the actual reaction to changes in interest rate levels of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. It is not uncommon for rates on certain assets or liabilities to lag behind changes in the market rates of interest. Additionally, prepayments of loans and early withdrawals of certificates of deposit could cause interest sensitivities to vary.
The results of these analyses and simulations do not contemplate all of the actions that we may undertake in response to changes in interest rates. In response to actual or anticipated changes in interest rates, we have various alternatives for managing and reducing FFB’s exposure to interest rate risk, such as entering into hedges and obtaining long-term fixed rate FHLB advances.
Capital Resources and Dividends
The Capital Rules apply to United States based bank holding companies and federally insured depository institutions and require the Company (on a consolidated basis) and FFB (on a stand-alone basis) to meet specific capital adequacy requirements that, for the most part, involve quantitative measures, primarily in terms of the ratios of their capital to their assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items, calculated under regulatory accounting practices. For additional information regarding these Capital Rules, see Item 1 “Business -Supervision and Regulation-Capital Requirements Applicable to Banks and Bank Holding Companies” in Part I above.
In addition, prompt correct action regulations place a federally insured depository institution, such as FFB, into one of five capital categories on the basis of its capital ratios: (i) well capitalized; (ii) adequately capitalized; (iii) undercapitalized; (iv) significantly undercapitalized; or (v) critically undercapitalized. A depository institution’s primary federal regulatory agency may determine that, based on certain qualitative assessments, the depository institution should be assigned to a lower capital category than the one indicated by its capital ratios. At each successive lower capital category, a depository institution is subject to greater operating restrictions and increased regulatory supervision by its federal bank regulatory agency.
The following table sets forth the capital and capital ratios of FFI (on a consolidated basis) and FFB (on a stand-alone basis) as of the respective dates and as compared to the respective regulatory requirements applicable to them:
As of each of the dates set forth in the above table, the Company exceeded the minimum required capital ratios applicable to it and FFB’s capital ratios exceeded the minimums necessary to qualify as a well-capitalized depository institution under the prompt corrective action regulations. The required ratios for capital adequacy set forth in the above table do not include the Capital Rules’ additional capital conservation buffer, though each of the Company and FFB maintained capital ratios necessary to satisfy the capital conservation buffer requirements as of the dates indicated.
As of December 31, 2020, the amount of capital at FFB in excess of amounts required to be well capitalized for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations was $261 million for the CET1 capital ratio, $262 million for the Tier 1 Leverage Ratio, $185 million for the Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio and $114 million for the Total risk-based capital ratio.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, FFI made capital contributions to FFB of $10 million. As of December 31, 2020, FFI had $10.9 million of available capital and, therefore, has the ability and financial resources to contribute additional capital to FFB, if needed.
On January 26, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.09 per common share to be paid on February 15, 2021 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 5, 2021. It is our current intention to continue to pay quarterly dividends. The amount and declaration of future cash dividends are subject to approval by our Board of Directors and certain regulatory restrictions which are discussed in Item 1 “Business-Supervision and Regulation-Dividends and Stock Repurchases” in Part I above. Additionally, under the terms of the holding company line of credit agreement, FFI may only declare and pay a dividend if the total amount of dividends and
stock repurchases during the current twelve months does not exceed 50% of FFI’s net income for the same twelve month period. We paid $12.5 million ($0.28 per share) and $8.9 million ($0.20 per share) in dividends in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We did not pay dividends in 2018.
We had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2020. However, we intend to take advantage of opportunities that may arise in the future to grow our businesses, which may include opening additional offices or acquiring complementary businesses that we believe will provide us with attractive risk-adjusted returns. As a result, we may seek to obtain additional borrowings and to sell additional shares of our common stock to raise funds which we might need for these purposes. There is no assurance, however, that, if required, we will succeed in obtaining additional borrowings or selling additional shares of our common stock on terms that are acceptable to us, if at all, as this will depend on market conditions and other factors outside of our control, as well as our future results of operations. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors” in Part I above for information regarding the impact that future sales of our common stock may have on the share ownership of our existing stockholders.