ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and information included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this annual report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis and set forth elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Unless context denotes otherwise, the terms “Company,” “FGF,” “we,” “us,” and “our,” refer to FG Financial Group, Inc., and its subsidiaries.
Overview
FG Financial Group, Inc. (“FGF”, the “Company”, “we”, or “us”) is a reinsurance and investment management holding company focused on opportunistic collateralized and loss capped reinsurance, while allocating capital to SPAC and SPAC sponsor-related businesses. The Company’s principal business operations are conducted through its subsidiaries and affiliates. From our inception through December 2, 2019, we operated as an insurance holding company, writing property and casualty insurance throughout the states of Louisiana, Florida and Texas through our subsidiaries. On December 2, 2019 we sold our three insurance subsidiaries as further described below under the heading “Sale of the Maison Business” and embarked on a new strategy focused on insurance, reinsurance, real estate, and asset management. Accordingly, on December 14, 2020, our shareholders approved a change in our corporate name to FG Financial Group, Inc., to better align with this new business strategy.
As of December 31, 2020, Fundamental Global Investors, LLC, a privately owned investment management company, and its affiliates, or FGI, beneficially owned approximately 61% of our outstanding shares of common stock. D. Kyle Cerminara, Chairman of our Board of Directors, serves as Chief Executive Officer, Co-Founder and Partner of FGI.
Sale of the Maison Business
On December 2, 2019, we completed the sale of all of the issued and outstanding equity of three of the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiaries, Maison Insurance Company (“Maison”), Maison Managers Inc. (“MMI”) and ClaimCor, LLC (“ClaimCor” and, together with Maison and MMI, the “Maison Business”), to FedNat Holding Company, a Florida corporation (“FedNat”), pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Equity Purchase Agreement, dated as of February 25, 2019 (the “Purchase Agreement”), by and among the Company and each of Maison, MMI and ClaimCor, on the one hand, and FedNat, on the other hand (the “Asset Sale”).
As consideration for the Asset Sale, FedNat paid the Company $51.0 million, consisting of $25.5 million in cash and $25.5 million in FedNat’s common stock, or 1,773,102 shares of common stock. In addition, upon the closing of the Asset Sale, $18.0 million of outstanding surplus note obligations payable by Maison to the Company, plus all accrued but unpaid interest, was repaid to the Company.
For more information on the Purchase Agreement, Asset Sale, and the Company’s future plans, see “Item 1. Business.”
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Coronavirus Impact
We continue to monitor the recent outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) on our operations.
Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the circumstances, it is difficult to predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Adverse events such as health-related concerns about working in our offices, the inability to travel and other matters affecting the general work environment have negatively impacted and could continue to harm our business and our business strategy. In addition, during the pandemic, we have experienced significant losses related to the value of our investment in shares of FedNat common stock, and we may continue to experience such losses to the extent the pandemic negatively impacts FedNat’s business. The extent to which our operations and investments may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new developments concerning the severity of the pandemic and actions by government authorities to contain the pandemic or treat its impact. Furthermore, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and the continued disruptions to and volatility in the financial markets remain unknown. In the event of a major disruption caused by the pandemic, we may lose the services of our employees, experience system interruptions or face challenges accessing the capital or credit markets, which could lead to diminishment of our business operations. Any of the foregoing could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
Critical accounting policies are those that require us to make significant judgments, estimates or assumptions that affect amounts reported in our financial statements or the notes thereto. We base our judgments, estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable and prudent. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. The business and economic uncertainty resulting from the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has made such estimates and assumptions difficult to calculate. Set forth below is a summary of what we believe to be our most critical accounting policies and estimates.
Discontinued Operations
On December 2, 2019, we sold all of the issued and outstanding equity of Maison, MMI and ClaimCor. As a result, these operations have been classified as discontinued operations in the Company’s financial statements presented herein. Certain transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries, which have historically been eliminated upon consolidation, are shown on a gross basis in the accompanying financial statements as such transactions have occurred between discontinued operations and those operations which the Company has continued to utilize following the closing of the Asset Sale. These items include surplus notes in the amount of $18 million plus accrued interest, all of which were settled upon the closing of the Asset Sale. Interest associated with these surplus notes has been recorded as part of net investment income from continuing operations as well as interest expense as part of discontinued operations on the Company’s consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. All other significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated upon consolidation.
Valuation of Investments
The Company’s equity securities are recorded at fair value using observable inputs such as quoted prices in inactive markets, quoted prices in active markets for similar instruments, benchmark interest rates, broker quotes and other relevant inputs. Any change in the estimated fair value of its investments could impact the amount of unrealized gain or loss the Company has recorded, which could change the amount the Company has recorded for its investments and on its consolidated balance sheets and statements of income.
Gains and losses realized on the disposition of investments are determined on the first-in first-out basis and credited or charged to the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. Premium and discount on investments are amortized and accreted using the interest method and charged or credited to net investment income.
The Company performs a quarterly analysis of its investment portfolio to determine if declines in market value are other-than-temporary. Further information regarding its detailed analysis and factors considered in establishing an other-than-temporary impairment on an investment is discussed within Note 5 - Investments, to the consolidated financial statements.
Variable Interest Entities
The determination of whether or not to consolidate a variable interest entity under GAAP requires a significant amount of judgment concerning the degree of control over an entity by its holders of variable interests. To make these judgments, management has conducted an analysis, on a case-by-case basis, of whether we are the primary beneficiary and are therefore required to consolidate the entity. Management continually reconsiders whether we should consolidate a variable interest entity. Upon the occurrence of certain events, such as modifications to organizational documents and investment management agreements, management will reconsider its conclusion regarding the status of an entity as a variable interest entity.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Valuation of Net Deferred Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is calculated based on the expected tax treatment of transactions recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. In determining its provision for income taxes, the Company interprets tax legislation in a variety of jurisdictions and makes assumptions about the expected timing of the reversal of deferred income tax assets and liabilities and the valuation of net deferred income taxes.
The ultimate realization of the deferred income tax asset balance is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which the Company’s temporary differences reverse and become deductible. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred income tax asset balance will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, management considers all available positive and negative evidence affecting specific deferred income tax asset balances, including the Company’s past and anticipated future performance, the reversal of deferred income tax liabilities, and the availability of tax planning strategies. To the extent a valuation allowance is established in a period, an expense must be recorded within the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
The Company uses the fair-value method of accounting for stock-based compensation awards granted. The Company determines the fair value of the stock options on their grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and determines the fair value of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) on their grant date using the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date the RSUs were issued (for those RSU which vest solely based upon the passage of time), as well as using multiple Monte Carlo simulations for those RSUs with market-based vesting conditions. The fair value of these awards is recorded as compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the expected period over which the awards will vest, with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in capital. When the stock options are exercised, or correspondingly, when the RSUs vest, the amount of proceeds together with the amount recorded in additional paid-in capital is recorded in shareholders’ equity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8, Note 3 - Recently Issued Accounting Standards in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their effect, if any, on the Company.
Analysis of Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
Investments
The table below summarizes, by type, the Company’s investments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
FedNat Common Stock
On December 2, 2019, the Company received 1,773,102 shares of FedNat Holding Company common stock (Nasdaq: FNHC), along with $25.5 million cash as consideration for the Asset Sale. On July 14, 2020, the Company transferred 156,000 shares of FedNat common stock to FGRe, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, as a capital contribution for no consideration, and, on September 15, 2020, the Company transferred 330,231 shares of FedNat common stock to the Hale Parties as further described under the heading “Related Party Transactions”. Following the transactions, the Company directly holds 1,286,871 shares of FedNat common stock. As of March 15, 2021, the estimated fair value of the 1,442,871 shares of FedNat common stock held in the aggregate by the Company and its subsidiary was $6.9 million.
Limited Liability Investments
The Company’s limited liability investments are comprised of investments in a limited partnership and a limited liability company which seek to provide equity and asset-backed debt investment in a variety of privately-owned companies. The Company’s total investment in these two entities was approximately $638,000 as of December 31, 2020. The limited liability company is managed by Argo Management Group, LLC, an entity which is wholly owned by KFSI. The Company has accounted for these two investments at cost minus impairment, if any, as the investments do not have readily determinable fair values. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has received profit distributions of $80,000 and $91,000 on these investments, respectively, which has been included in income. Furthermore, both investments began the process of returning capital back to its investors in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has received approximately 18% of its initial $776,000 investment back from these investments.
On June 18, 2018, the Company invested approximately $2.2 million in FGI Metrolina Property Income Fund, LP (“Metrolina”), which invests in real estate through a real estate investment trust which is wholly owned by Metrolina. The general partner of Metrolina, FGI Metrolina GP, LLC, is managed, in part, by Mr. Cerminara, the Chairman of the Company’s Board of Directors. The Company, a limited partner of Metrolina, does not have a controlling interest, but exerts significant influence over the entity’s operating and financial policies as it owns an economic interest of approximately 53% as of December 31, 2020. Accordingly, the Company has accounted for this investment under the equity method of accounting, recognizing any unrealized holding gains or losses in income. On August 6, 2020, the Company increased its total investment in Metrolina to $4.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, Metrolina’s carrying amount on the Company’s balance sheet was approximately $4.7 million, including of $0.7 million in undistributed earnings.
Limited Liability Investment in Consolidated VIE
In September 2020, the Company invested $5.0 million into its joint venture, Fundamental Global Asset Management, LLC (“FGAM’), to capitalize FG Special Situations Fund Advisor, LLC (“Advisor”), a Delaware limited liability company formed on September 2, 2020, and to sponsor the launch of FG Special Situations Fund, LP (the “Fund”), a Delaware limited partnership formed on September 2, 2020. The Fund is wholly owned by FGAM through the Fund’s general partner and Advisor, both of which are ultimately controlled by Mr. Cerminara, the Chairman of the Company’s Board of Directors. Of the total $5.0 million invested into the Fund, $4.0 million was used by FG New America Investors, LLC (the “Sponsor”) as part of a total $8.6 million of risk capital used to launch FG New America Acquisition Corp (NYSE: FGNA), a special purpose acquisition company which consummated its initial public offering on October 2, 2020, and entered into a definitive business combination with Opportunity Financial, LLC, on February 10, 2021. The Fund’s specific investment consists of both class A and class A-1 interests of the Sponsor, purchased for approximately $4.0 million. The interests represent a potential beneficial ownership of approximately 1.4 million common shares of FGNA as well as approximately 0.4 million warrants to purchase common shares of FGNA at a price of $11.50 per share. Both the class A and class A-1 interests of the Sponsor are subject to complete loss if FGNA is not able to consummate a business combination in accordance with the terms of its initial public offering. The class A and class A-1 interests have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and are not transferrable, except as provided for in the operating agreement of the Sponsor. The remaining $987,000 invested in FGAM consists of cash equivalents owned by the Fund as of December 31, 2020, which are expected to be invested by the Fund in the future. Mr. Cerminara, the Chairman of our Board, is the President and a director of FGNA and a manager of the Sponsor. Mr. Swets, our Chief Executive Officer, is the Chief Executive Officer and a director of FGNA and a manager of the Sponsor.
The Company has determined that its investment in FGAM represents an investment in a variable interest entity (“VIE”), in which the Company is the primary beneficiary, and as such, has consolidated the financial results of FGAM as of December 31, 2020. The Company evaluates whether it is the primary beneficiary of a VIE at the time it becomes involved with a variable interest entity and continuously reconsiders that conclusion. In determining whether the Company is the primary beneficiary, the Company evaluates its control rights as well as economic interests in the entity held either directly, or indirectly through affiliates via both qualitative and quantitative analysis. Further investments in, or redemptions of investments in FGAM, by either member of the joint venture could affect the entity’s status as a VIE or the determination of the primary beneficiary. At each reporting date, the Company assesses whether it is the primary beneficiary and will consolidate or deconsolidate accordingly.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
The Fund is considered an investment company for GAAP purposes, following the accounting and reporting guidance in ASC Topic 946, Financial Services - Investment Companies. FG Financial Group, Inc., as a noninvestment company parent of an investment company, has retained the specialized industry accounting principles of its investment company subsidiary when preparing its consolidated financial statements. This specialized accounting includes the measurement of the investment company’s investments at fair value. Furthermore, cash flows from investing activities of the Fund, such as the purchase and sale of investments, have been included in cash flows from operating activities in the Company’s consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the assets of the Fund, which have been included in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of the dates listed are as follows in the table below. The Fund reported no liabilities as of either date presented. The assets of the Fund may only be used to settle its obligations. The Company’s maximum exposure to loss as a result of its involvement with the Fund is $5.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Impairment
The Company performs a quarterly analysis of its investments to determine if an impairment exists on its investments. Further information regarding the Company’s detailed analysis and factors considered in the evaluation of impairment is discussed within Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this report.
We have not recorded any write-downs for an other-than-temporary impairment on our investments for either of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Funds Deposited with Reinsured Companies
On November 12, 2020, FGRe, our Cayman Islands based reinsurance subsidiary, initially funded a trust account at Lloyd’s with approximately $2.4 million in cash, to collateralize its obligations under a quota share agreement with a Funds at Lloyds syndicate. The quota share agreement is effective January 1, 2021.
Current Income Taxes Recoverable
Current income taxes recoverable were approximately $1.7 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to approximately $1.3 million as of December 31, 2019, representing the estimate of both the Company’s state and federal income taxes receivable as of each date.
Net Deferred Taxes
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes, as compared to the amounts used for income tax purposes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an unrealized loss of approximately $12.2 million on its investment of FedNat common stock, resulting in a deferred tax asset of approximately $2.5 million. The Company’s gross deferred tax assets are $3.9 million as of December 31, 2020; however, the Company has recorded a valuation allowance against all of its deferred tax assets, resulting in a net deferred income tax asset of $0 as of December 31, 2020, due to the uncertain nature surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits in the future. As of December 31, 2019, the financial statements show a net deferred tax liability in the amount of $106,000, due to the sale of the Maison Business. Significant components of the Company’s net deferred taxes are as follows:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) for federal income tax purposes of approximately $5.4 million, which will be available to offset future taxable income. Approximately $0.6 million of the Company’s NOLs will expire on December 31, 2039, while the remaining $4.8 million of the Company’s NOLs do not expire under current tax law.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Other Assets
Other assets increased $329,000, to $517,000 as of December 31, 2020, from $188,000 as of December 31, 2019. The major components of other assets, and the change therein, are shown below.
Related Party Transactions
Investment in Limited Liability Company and Limited Partnership
On April 21, 2016, KFSI completed the acquisition of Argo Management Group LLC (“Argo”). Argo’s primary business is to act as the Managing Member of Argo Holdings Fund I, LLC, an investment fund in which the Company has committed to invest $0.5 million. The managing member of Argo, Mr. John T. Fitzgerald, was appointed as President and Chief Executive Officer of KFSI on September 5, 2018 and has served on its board of directors since April 21, 2016. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has invested $0.3 million in Argo.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has invested $4.0 million as a limited partner in FGI Metrolina Property Income Fund, LP (“Metrolina”), which invests in real estate through a real estate investment trust wholly owned by Metrolina. The general partner of Metrolina, FGI Metrolina GP, LLC, is managed, in part, by Mr. Cerminara, the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company. For the year ending December 31, 2020, the Company paid $80,000 in performance-based fees to the general partner of Metrolina. For the year ending December 31, 2019, approximately $37,000 in performance-based fees were waived by the general partner of Metrolina. Metrolina’s investment program is managed by FGI Funds Management LLC, an affiliate of FGI, which, with its affiliates, is the largest stockholder of the Company. The Company’s investment represents an approximate 53% ownership stake in Metrolina as of December 31, 2020.
Joint Venture Agreement
On March 31, 2020, the Company entered into the Limited Liability Company Agreement (the “LLC Agreement”) of Fundamental Global Asset Management, LLC (“FGAM”), a newly formed joint venture owned 50% by each of the Company and FGI Funds Management, LLC, an affiliate of FGI (“FGIFM” and together with the Company, each a “Member” and collectively, the “Members”). The purpose of FGAM is to sponsor, capitalize and provide strategic advice to investment managers (“Underlying Managers”) in connection with the launch and/or growth of their asset management business and the investment products they sponsor (each, a “Sponsored Fund”).
FGAM is governed by a Board of Managers consisting of four managers, two of which have been appointed by each Member. The Company has appointed two of its independent directors to the Board of Managers of FGAM. Certain major actions, including any decision to sponsor a new investment manager, require the prior consent of both Members.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
The LLC Agreement provides that each Member will contribute its proportionate interest of the amount of capital determined by the Board of Managers to be required to operate FGAM (“Operating Capital”). Unless otherwise agreed, the Company will contribute the capital required to be contributed to a Sponsored Fund (“Seed Capital”), as well as any amounts required to be contributed to an Underlying Manager for working capital purposes (“Working Capital”). Proceeds attributable to a contribution, directly or indirectly through an Underlying Manager, to a Sponsored Fund will be distributed to the Members in proportion to their capital contributions in respect of Seed Capital. All other proceeds received by FGAM attributable to a Sponsored Fund, including proceeds from revenue shares or ownership interests in Underlying Managers, will be distributed as follows: (i) first, to the Members until they have received cumulative distributions up to an amount of the Operating Capital funded by them; (ii) second, to the Members until they have received cumulative distributions up to an amount of Working Capital previously funded by them, plus a return of 5% per annum; and (iii) third, to the Members in proportion to their percentage interests.
In addition, neither FGIFM nor any of its affiliates may participate in a Sponsored Fund Transaction other than through FGAM unless FGIFM has first presented the opportunity to FGAM and either the Board of Managers or the Company has rejected such opportunity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if such opportunity requires in excess of $5.0 million, FGIFM may offer amounts in excess of $5.0 million to a third party, subject to certain conditions.
On September 14, 2020 and September 28, 2020, the Company provided Seed Capital of $2.0 million and $3.0 million, respectively, into FGAM, to capitalize FG Special Situations Fund Advisor, LLC (“Advisor”), a Delaware limited liability company formed on September 2, 2020, and to sponsor the launch of FG Special Situations Fund, LP (the “Fund”), a Delaware limited partnership also formed on September 2, 2020. The Fund is wholly owned by FGAM through the Fund’s general partner and the Advisor, both of which are ultimately controlled by Mr. Cerminara, the Chairman of the Company’s Board of Directors. Of the total $5.0 million invested into the Fund, $4.0 million was used by FG New America Investors, LLC (the “Sponsor”) as part of a total $8.6 million of risk capital used to launch FG New America Acquisition Corp (NYSE: FGNA), a newly formed special purpose acquisition company which consummated its initial public offering on October 2, 2020, and entered into a definitive business combination with Opportunity Financial, LLC, on February 10, 2021. The Fund’s specific investment consists of both class A and class A-1 interests of the Sponsor, purchased for approximately $4.0 million. The class A and class A-1 interests represent beneficial ownership of approximately 1.4 million common shares of FGNA as well as approximately 0.4 million warrants to purchase common shares of FGNA at a price of $11.50 per share. Both the class A and class A-1 interests of the Sponsor are subject to complete loss if FGNA is not able to consummate a business combination in accordance with the terms of its initial public offering. The class A and class A-1 interests have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and are not transferrable except as provided for in the operating agreement of the Sponsor. The remaining $1.0 million invested in FGAM consists of cash owned by the Fund as of December 31, 2020 and will be used by the Fund to sponsor additional future investments. Mr. Cerminara, the Chairman of our Board, is the President and a director of FGNA and a manager of the Sponsor. Mr. Swets, our Chief Executive Officer, is the Chief Executive Officer and a director of FGNA and a manager of the Sponsor.
Investment Advisory Agreement
Pursuant to the Investment Advisory Agreement entered into upon closing of the Asset Sale, FG Strategic Consulting (“FGSC,”, formerly Fundamental Global Advisors LLC), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, has agreed to provide investment advisory services to FedNat, including identifying, analyzing and recommending potential investments, advising as to existing investments and investment optimization, recommending investment dispositions, and providing advice regarding macro-economic conditions. In exchange for providing the investment advisory services, FedNat has agreed to pay FGSC an annual fee of $100,000. FGI Funds Management, LLC will serve as the manager to FGSC. Both Advisor and FGI Funds Management, LLC are affiliates of Fundamental Global Investors, LLC, the Company’s largest stockholder. The Investment Advisory Agreement runs through December 2, 2024.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Shared Services Agreement
On March 31, 2020, the Company entered into a Shared Services Agreement (the “Shared Services Agreement”) with Fundamental Global Management, LLC (“FGM”), an affiliate of FGI, pursuant to which FGM provides the Company with certain services related to the day-to-day management of the Company, including assisting with regulatory compliance, evaluating the Company’s financial and operational performance, providing a management team to supplement the executive officers of the Company, and such other services consistent with those customarily performed by executive officers and employees of a public company (collectively, the “Services”). In exchange for the Services, the Company pays FGM a fee of $456,250 per quarter (the “Shared Services Fee”), plus reimbursement of expenses incurred by FGM in connection with the performance of the Services, subject to certain limitations approved by the Company’s Board of Directors or Compensation Committee from time to time.
The Shared Services Agreement has an initial term of three years, and thereafter renews automatically for successive one-year terms unless terminated in accordance with its terms. The Shared Services Agreement may be terminated by FGM or by the Company, by a vote of the Company’s independent directors, at the end of the initial or automatic renewal term upon 120 days’ notice, subject to payment by the Company of certain costs incurred by FGM to wind down the provision of Services and, in the case of a termination by the Company without cause, payment of a termination fee equal to the Shared Services Fee paid for the two quarters preceding termination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company paid $1.4 million to FGM under the Shared Services Agreement.
Share Repurchase Transaction
On September 15, 2020, the Company entered into a Share Repurchase and Cooperation Agreement (the “Share Repurchase Agreement”) with Hale Partnership Capital Management, LLC and certain of its affiliates (collectively, the “Hale Parties”), which, prior to the transaction, owned more than 18% of our outstanding common stock (the “Share Repurchase Transaction”).
Pursuant to the Share Repurchase Agreement, the Company agreed to purchase (exclusive of any fees or expenses) all of the 1,130,152 shares of the Company’s common stock, owned, of record or beneficially, by the Hale Parties, in exchange for an aggregate approximately $2.8 million in cash and 330,231 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of FedNat Holding Company previously owned by the Company (the “FedNat Shares”) having an estimated fair value of approximately $2.7 million on September 15, 2020. As acknowledged by the Hale Parties in the Share Repurchase Agreement, that certain Standstill Agreement, dated December 2, 2019, by and between FedNat Holding Company and the Company, imposes certain restrictions in respect of the FedNat Shares transferred by the Company to the Hale Parties. FedNat Holding Company is not party to, or a third-party beneficiary of, the Agreement.
The Share Purchase Agreement contains certain customary standstill provisions that, for a period of five years commencing September 15, 2020 (the “Standstill Period”), prohibit, among other things, the Hale Parties from (i) making certain announcements regarding the Company’s transactions, (ii) soliciting proxies, (iii) acquiring ownership of any securities of the Company, (iv) advising, encouraging or influencing any vote or disposition of any securities of the Company, (v) selling securities of the Company resulting in any third party owning more than 4.9% of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock (subject to certain exceptions set forth in the Share Purchase Agreement), (vi) taking actions to change or influence the Board of Directors of the Company, Company management or the direction of certain Company matters and (vii) exercising certain stockholder rights. The Company and the Hale Parties further agreed that they will not disparage each other and that they will not initiate any lawsuit, claim or proceeding with respect to any claims against the Company or any of the Hale Parties, as applicable, based on facts known as of the Effective Date, in each case applicable during the Standstill Period, and to a mutual release of claims.
Each of the Company and the Hale Parties has the right to terminate the Share Purchase Agreement prior to the end of the Standstill Period if (i) any of the Hale Parties, in the case of the Company, or (ii) the Company, in the case of the Hale Parties, commits a material breach of the Share Purchase Agreement and such breach is not cured within 15 days after notice is given to the breaching party.
As the total consideration paid in the Share Repurchase transaction exceeded the fair value of the treasury shares repurchased by the Company, the Company recorded a charge of approximately $0.2 million to general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing the estimated fair value of the rights conveyed to the Company pursuant to the standstill provisions in the agreement. The fair value of the 1,130,152 shares of Company common stock, or approximately $5.2 million, was recorded to treasury stock.
Formation of FG SPAC Partners, LP
On January 4, 2021, FG SPAC Partners, LP (“FGSP”) was formed as a Delaware limited partnership to co-sponsor newly formed SPACs with their founders or partners. The Company is the sole managing member of the general partner of FGSP and holds an approximate 49% limited partner interest in FGSP directly and through its subsidiaries. Certain of our directors and officers also hold limited partner interests in FGSP. Our Chief Executive Officer and Director, Larry G. Swets, holds a 10% limited partner interest through Itasca Financial LLC, an advisory and investment firm for which Mr. Swets is managing member. The Chairman of our Board of Directors, D. Kyle Cerminara also holds a limited partner interest in FGSP through Fundamental Global, LLC, a newly formed holding company for which Mr. Cerminara is the manager and a member.
On January 11, 2021, FGSP purchased 1,075,000 founder shares from Aldel, for total consideration of $4,674. Concurrent with Aldel’s initial public offering, FGSP will purchase 650,000 warrants at a price of $0.10 per warrant, each exercisable to purchase one share of Aldel’s Class A common stock at an exercise price of $15.00 per share (the “OTM Warrants”), for an aggregate purchase price of $65,000. In addition, the Company through its joint venture investment in Fundamental Global Asset Management, LLC and the FG Special Situations Fund, LP, will invest approximately $1.0 million in the risk capital of Aldel Investors, LLC. The Company’s limited partnership interests in FGSP potentially represent beneficial ownership of approximately 816,700 founder shares and approximately 321,000 OTM Warrants of Aldel. Our Chief Executive Officer and Director, Larry G. Swets, will serve as Senior Advisor to Aldel upon the closing of its offering and has received 25,000 common shares of Aldel. The Chairman of our Board of Directors, D. Kyle Cerminara will serve as director of Aldel upon the closing of its offering and has also received 25,000 shares of Aldel.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Shareholders’ Equity
Offering of 8.00% Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A
On February 28, 2018, we completed the underwritten public offering of 640,000 preferred shares designated as 8.00% Cumulative Preferred Stock, Series A, par value $25.00 per share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”). Also, on March 26, 2018, we issued an additional 60,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. Dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock are cumulative from the date of original issue and will be payable quarterly on the 15th day of March, June, September and December of each year, commencing on June 15, 2018, when, as and if declared by our Board of Directors or a duly authorized committee thereof. The first dividend record date for the Series A Preferred Stock was on June 1, 2018. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Board of Directors declared dividends totaling $1,400 and $1,108, respectively, representing all quarterly amounts due for the Preferred Stock. Dividends are payable out of amounts legally available therefor at a rate equal to 8.00% per annum per $25.00 of stated liquidation preference per share, or $2.00 per share of Preferred Stock per year.
The Series A Preferred Stock is not redeemable prior to February 28, 2023. On and after that date, the stock will be redeemable at our option, for cash, in whole or in part, at a redemption price of $25.00 per share, plus all accumulated and unpaid dividends to, but not including, the date of redemption. The Series A Preferred Stock has no stated maturity and will not be subject to any sinking fund or mandatory redemption. The stock will generally have no voting rights except as provided in the Certificate of Designations or as from time to time provided by law. The affirmative vote of the holders of at least two-thirds of the outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock and each other class or series of voting parity stock will be required at any time for us to authorize, create or issue any class or series of our capital stock ranking senior to the Series A Preferred Stock with respect to the payment of dividends or the distribution of assets on liquidation, dissolution or winding up, to amend any provision of our Certificate of Incorporation so as to materially and adversely affect any rights of the Series A Preferred Stock or to take certain other actions.
The shares of Series A Preferred Stock are listed on the Nasdaq Stock Market under the symbol “FGFPP”.
The table below presents the primary drivers behind the changes to total shareholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1) Refer to “Related Party Transactions” above for additional information regarding the Share Repurchase Transaction
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Investment Income
Net investment income (loss) decreased to $(17.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $5.6 million year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of unrealized holding losses on the shares of FedNat common stock which the Company received upon the closing of the Asset Sale. Furthermore, the Company recognized a realized loss of approximately $2.1 million on the sale of 330,231 shares of FedNat common stock in the Share Repurchase Transaction, as previously discussed under the heading “Related Party Transactions.” Net investment income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Other Income
Other income was $104,000 compared to $10,000 for the years ended December 3, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and is comprised of fees earned under the Investment Advisory and Transition Services Agreements between the Company and FedNat.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.5 million to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to professional fees incurred in the current year for various legal fees associated with the formulation and regulatory approval of FGRe, our Cayman Islands-based reinsurance subsidiary, and the general formulation and development of our new business strategy. Employee and facility costs also account for a portion of the increase, which includes $1.4 million paid to FGM under the Shares Services Agreement discussed under the heading “Related Party Transactions’ above. These costs have been included in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, while employee and facility costs have been presented as part of discontinued operations for year ended December 31, 2019. Finally, the Company incurred a charge of $0.2 million along with associated legal fees in the current year which were related to the Share Repurchase Transaction, as previously described under the heading “Related Party Transactions.”
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Our actual effective tax rate varies from the statutory federal income tax rates as shown in the following table.
As a result of the passage of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), the Company recorded a credit of $214,000 against its income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a provision in the CARES Act that allows for the five-year carryback of net operating losses. Prior to the passage of the CARES Act, these net operating losses were only available to offset future taxable income generated by the Company.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
As a result of the Share Repurchase Transaction, discussed under the heading “Related Party Transactions,” the Company has permanent non-deductible expenses of approximately $2.5 million which are comprised of the cost of purchasing the Company’s own stock as well as the legal fees associated with the transaction. These are shown at the tax effected rate of 21%, or $516,000 in the preceding table.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an unrealized loss of approximately $12.2 million on its investment of FedNat common stock, resulting in a deferred tax asset of approximately $2.5 million. The Company’s gross deferred tax assets are $3.9 million as of December 31, 2020; however the Company has recorded a valuation allowance against all of its deferred tax assets, resulting in a net deferred income tax asset of $0 as of December 31, 2020, due to the uncertain nature surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits in the future.
Discontinued Operations
As previously discussed, on December 2, 2019, we completed the sale of all of the issued and outstanding equity of our three former wholly owned subsidiaries, Maison, MMI and ClaimCor. Accordingly, the Company has classified the Maison Business as discontinued operations for all periods presented in this report as set forth in ASC 205-20 - Discontinued Operations.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the major classes of line items constituting pretax profit (loss) of discontinued operations to the after-tax profit (loss) of discontinued operations that are presented in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Net Income
Net income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as shown in the following table.
Subsequent Event
On March 5, 2021, FedNat Holding Company filed a preliminary prospectus supplement with the SEC indicating that, as of the date of that filing, FedNat is prohibited from paying dividends on their common stock under the terms of their indenture for their senior notes, as their debt-to-capital ratio currently exceeds 35%. As of March 15, 2021, the Company owns 1,442,871 shares of FedNat Holding Company common stock.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Dollar amounts included in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” are presented in thousands, except as otherwise specified.
The purpose of liquidity management is to ensure that there is sufficient cash to meet all financial commitments and obligations as they fall due. The liquidity requirements of the Company and its subsidiaries have been met primarily from the cash proceeds of the Asset Sale, by funds generated from operations, and from the proceeds from the sales of our common and preferred stock. Cash provided from these sources has historically been used for loss and loss adjustment expense payments as well as other operating expenses.
On August 20, 2019, the Company entered into a $7.0 million Loan Agreement and a related Commercial Note (collectively, the “Loan Agreement”) with Hancock Bank, a trade name for Whitney Bank (n/k/a Hancock Whitney Bank) (the “Lender”). The Loan Agreement provided for a non-revolving line of credit of $7.0 million.
On November 29, 2019, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Loan Agreement and a related Amended and Restated Commercial Note (collectively, the “Amended and Restated Loan Agreement”) with Lender, which increased the existing non-revolving line of credit by an additional $10.0 million (the “Line of Credit Increase”), resulting in an amended and restated non-revolving line of credit loan in the aggregate principal amount of up to $17.0 million. Immediately prior to the closing of the Asset Sale, the Company drew $7.0 million under the line of credit, which was repaid to the Lender as of the closing of the Asset Sale. Upon repayment, the line of credit was terminated. Borrowings under the Loan Agreement bore interest at a rate per annum equal to 5.25%.
Upon the closing of the Asset Sale, the Company received cash consideration from FedNat in the amount of $25.5 million as well as $18.7 million representing the repayment of surplus notes and accrued interest due from Maison to the Company. Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, at the closing, the Maison Business was required to have a consolidated net GAAP book value of at least $42.0 million and was also required to settle any balances between the Company and the Maison Business. Additionally, prior to the closing of the Asset Sale, Maison was a limited partner in two limited partnerships and also had a limited interest in a limited liability company (collectively, the “Funds”). Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, Maison assigned its interests in the Funds to the Company in exchange for the statutory carrying value of the Funds, paid in cash, at the closing of the Asset Sale. This resulted in net cash proceeds to the Company of approximately $24.8 million, as shown in the table below.
FG FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the Company’s consolidated cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s net cash used by operating activities was approximately $11.3 million. The major drivers of which were as follows:
● Our net loss of approximately $22.5 million for the year, offset by approximately $16.0 million for a non-cash charge related to the unrealized losses associated with our shares of FedNat common stock.
● A cash outflow of approximately $2.4 million representing cash placed in trust as collateral, pursuant to our Funds at Lloyd’s quota share agreement effective January 1, 2021.
● A cash outflow of approximately $4.0 million for our investment in the Class A and Class A-1 interests in the Sponsor of FGNA. As this investment was made by our investment company subsidiary, we are required to show these cash outflows as operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s net cash used by financing activities consist of:
● Payments of dividends in the amount of $1.4 million on our Series A Preferred Shares.
● The purchase of treasury shares associated with the Share Repurchase Agreement for approximately $2.5 million.