Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
This 10−K contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those set forth as a result of general economic conditions and changes in the assumptions used in making such forward-looking statements. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report. The analysis set forth below is provided pursuant to applicable Securities and Exchange Commission regulations and is not intended to serve as a basis for projections of future events.
Overview
Forge Innovation Development Corp. is a development stage company and was incorporated in the State of Nevada in January 2016. The Company’s primary objective is commercial and residential land development, including the purchase and sale of real estate, targeting properties primarily in Southern California. We also intend to manage properties we own, and properties owned by unaffiliated third parties. Our activities will include securing acquisition rights to properties, obtaining zoning and other entitlements for the properties, securing financing for purchase of the properties, improving the properties’ infrastructure and amenities and selling the properties to homeowner and commercial owners for restaurants, offices and small businesses. Our first property acquisition was 29 acres in the city of Desert Hot Springs in Southern California. Due to problems with permits and adjacent landowners, rather than getting involved in protracted negotiations, the Company sold the property to an independent third party for a profit.
On August 17, 2020, the Company established a wholly owned subsidiary, Forge Network Inc, in the State of California. Forge Network Inc is engaged in online retail under the website: http://www.ez2go.us. The website has been formally launched in January 2021.
Results of Operation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company generated $36,000 and $36,000 of revenues, respectively; the revenue was generated from property management service. The corresponding cost of revenue was $Nil. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred general and administrative expenses of $355,329 and $320,778, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses was mainly due to the increase in salary expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net loss was $320,129 and $283,388, respectively. The increase in net loss was mainly due to the increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to last year.
Equity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since inception of our business in 2016 and, as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $1,269,033. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $236,586 and a working capital of $117,751, compared to cash of $366,270 and a working capital of $420,183 on December 31, 2019. The decrease in the working capital was primarily due to cash used to pay for operating expenses.
Going Concern Assessment
The Company demonstrates adverse conditions that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. These adverse conditions are negative financial trends, specifically cash outflow from operating activities, operating losses, accumulated deficit and other adverse key financial ratios.
Management’s plan to alleviate the substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern include attempting to improve its business profitability, its ability to generate sufficient cash flow from its operations and execute the business plan of the Company in order to meet its operating needs on a timely basis. However, there can be no assurance that these plans and arrangements will be sufficient to fund the Company’s ongoing capital expenditures and other requirements.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event that the Company cannot continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The consolidated financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires making estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis of making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The critical accounting policies are discussed in further detail in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables us to provide useful and reliable financial information about our operating results and financial condition.