ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL
CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
FHN is a financial holding company headquartered in Memphis, Tennessee. FHN provides diversified financial services primarily through its principal subsidiary, First Horizon Bank. First Horizon Bank's principal divisions and subsidiaries operate under the brands of First Horizon Bank, IBERIABANK, First Horizon Advisors, and FHN Financial. FHN offers regional banking, mortgage lending, title insurance, specialized commercial lending, commercial leasing and equipment financing, brokerage, wealth management and capital market services through the First Horizon family of companies. FHN Financial, which operates partly through a division of First Horizon Bank and partly through subsidiaries, is an industry leader in fixed income sales, trading, and strategies for institutional clients in the U.S. and abroad. First Horizon Bank has over 490 banking offices in 12 states and FHN Financial has 29 offices in 18 states across the U.S. In addition, FHN has 29 title services offices in three states and 15 stand-alone mortgage lending offices in seven states.
The following discussion and analysis is intended to assist readers in understanding the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of FHN. It should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, as well as with the other information contained in this report.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Recent Events
Merger and Branch Purchase
On July 1, 2020, FHN and IBKC closed their merger of equals transaction. Under the merger agreement, each share of IBKC common stock was converted into 4.584 shares of FHN common stock. FHN issued 243 million shares of FHN common stock and three new series of preferred stock in a transaction valued at $2.5 billion. At the time of closing, IBKC operated 319 offices in 12 states, mostly in the southern U.S. In connection with this transaction, FHN recorded
preliminary purchase price allocations and recognized a purchase accounting gain of $533 million.
On July 17, 2020, First Horizon Bank completed its purchase of 30 branches from Truist Bank. As part of the transaction, FHN assumed $2.2 billion of branch deposits for a 3.40% deposit premium and purchased $423 million of branch loans. The acquired branches are in communities in North Carolina (20 branches), Virginia (8 branches), and Georgia (2 branches).
In relation to these transactions, FHN's operating results include the operating results of the acquired assets and assumed liabilities subsequent to the respective transaction dates. Refer to Note 2 - Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused and continues to cause significant, unprecedented disruption to the national economy as well as the local economies within FHN's footprint. FHN continues to closely monitor the pandemic and its effects on clients and the financial markets in which FHN conducts business. The impact of the pandemic on 2020 results is discussed throughout the Results of Operations section of this MD&A. Further detail on FHN's response to the pandemic is discussed in the Market Uncertainties and Prospective Trends section included in this MD&A.
Adoption of CECL
Effective January 1, 2020, FHN adopted ASU 2016-13, "Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments," (CECL) which resulted in a $107 million increase to the ALLL and a $24 million increase to the reserve for unfunded lending commitments, resulting in a $96 million decrease in retained earnings (net of taxes). See Note 1- Significant Accounting Policies for additional information.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Other Recent Transactions
In April 2020, First Horizon Bank issued $450 million of 5.75% Subordinated Notes due May 1, 2030. Interest payments are due semi-annually on May 1 and November 1, commencing November 1, 2020. The sale of the notes resulted in net proceeds to FHN of approximately $447 million. The notes qualify as Tier 2 capital for the Bank as well as FHN, up to certain regulatory limits for minority capital instruments.
In May 2020, FHN issued $450 million of 3.55% Senior Notes due May 26, 2023 and $350 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due May 26, 2025. Interest payments are due semi-annually on May 26 and November 26, commencing November 26, 2020. The sale of these notes resulted in net proceeds to FHN of approximately $795 million.
In May 2020, FHN issued 1,500 shares having an aggregate liquidation preference of $150 million of Series E Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock for net proceeds of approximately $144 million. Dividends on the Series E Preferred Stock, if declared, accrue and are payable quarterly, in arrears, at a rate of 6.50% per annum. For the issuance, FHN issued depositary shares, each of which represents a fractional ownership interest in a share of FHN’s preferred stock. The Series E Preferred Stock qualifies as Tier 1 Capital for FHN.
2020 Financial Performance Summary
FHN reported net income available to common shareholders of $822 million, or $1.89 per diluted share, compared to net income of $435 million, or $1.38 per diluted share in 2019 driven by the impact of the July 1, 2020 IBKC merger. FHN's results of operations for 2020 produced a return on average assets of 1.33% and a return on average common equity of 13.66% compared to 1.08% and 9.60% for 2019.
Total revenue of $3.2 billion increased $1.3 billion from 2019. Net interest income was $1.7 billion, an increase of $452 million compared to the prior year.
The increase in net interest income was driven by an increase in average interest-earning assets as a result of the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition. Results also reflect the benefit of deposit pricing discipline and PPP lending, which helped to partially offset the impact of lower interest rates. Noninterest income of $1.5 billion increased $838 million compared to 2019 driven by the impact of the IBKC merger, which included a $533 million preliminary purchase accounting gain. Results also reflect increases in fixed income and mortgage banking and title income that helped to partially offset a reduction in traditional banking fees.
Noninterest expense totaled $1.7 billion, a 39% increase from 2019, largely as a result of the IBKC merger. Results also reflect an increase in charitable contributions, partially offset by lower restructuring and rebranding expenses.
Provision for credit losses of $503 million increased from $45 million in 2019 driven by the adoption of CECL and the deterioration in the overall macro-economic outlook tied to the COVID-19 pandemic. Results also reflect the impact of the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition, including provision related to acquired non-PCD loans.
Total assets at December 31, 2020 were $84.2 billion, an increase of $40.9 billion compared to December 31, 2019. The IBKC merger and the Truist branch acquisition contributed $36.0 billion in total assets, including $26.3 billion in loans and leases. Refer to Note 2 - Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional details related to the opening balances from these transactions.
Total deposits at December 31, 2020 of $70.0 billion increased $37.6 billion from 2019 driven by the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition which contributed $30.4 billion in total deposits.
FHN maintained strong capital measures. The Tier 1 risk-based capital and total risk-based capital ratios at December 31, 2020 were 10.74% and 12.57%, respectively, compared to 10.15% and 11.22% at December 31, 2019, respectively. The CET1 ratio was 9.68% at December 31, 2020 compared to 9.20% in the prior year.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Table 1 - Key Performance Indicators
(a)Represents a non-GAAP measure which is reconciled in the non-GAAP to GAAP reconciliation in Table 28.
(b)Calculated using net income divided by average assets.
(c)Calculated using net income available to common shareholders divided by average common equity.
(d)Calculated using net income available to common shareholders divided by average tangible common equity.
(e)Net interest margin is computed using total net interest income adjusted to an FTE basis assuming a statutory federal income tax rate of 21% and, where applicable, state income taxes.
(f)Ratio is fee income excluding securities gains (losses) to total revenue excluding securities gains (losses).
(g)Ratio is noninterest expense to total revenue excluding securities gains (losses).
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - 2020 compared to 2019
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is FHN's largest source of revenue and is the difference between the interest earned on interest-earning assets (generally loans, leases and investment securities) and the interest expense incurred in connection with interest-bearing liabilities (generally deposits and borrowed funds). The level of net interest income is primarily a function of the difference between the effective yield on average interest-earning assets and the effective cost of interest-bearing liabilities. These factors are influenced by the pricing and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities which, in turn, are impacted by external factors such as local economic conditions, competition for loans and deposits, the monetary policy of the FRB and market interest rates.
Net interest income of $1.7 billion in 2020 increased 37% from 2019 driven by the impact of the IBKC
merger and Truist Branch acquisition which helped to more than offset the impact of the challenging interest rate environment.
FHN's net interest margin decreased 42 basis points from 2019 to 2.86% in 2020, while the net interest spread decreased 22 basis points to 2.68% over the same period. Net interest margin and net interest spread were unfavorably impacted by a 113 basis point decrease in earning asset yields as the impact of lower short-term interest rates was partially offset by the benefit of purchase accounting accretion and PPP lending. A lower yield on earning assets was partially offset by a 91 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities driven by disciplined deposit pricing.
The activity levels and related funding for FHN’s fixed income activities affect the net interest margin. Generally, fixed income activities compress the margin, especially where there are elevated levels of trading inventory, because of the strategy to reduce market risk by economically hedging a portion of its inventory on the balance sheet.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table presents the major components of net interest income and net interest margin:
Table 2 -Average Balances, Net Interest Income and Yields/Rates
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
(a) Calculated using total net interest income adjusted for FTE assuming a statutory federal income tax rate of 21%, and where applicable, state income taxes.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table presents the change in interest income and interest expense due to changes in both average volume and average rate.
Table 3 - Analysis of Changes in Net Interest Income
(a) The changes in interest due to both rate and volume have been allocated to change due to rate and change due to volume in proportion to the absolute and amounts of the changes in each.
(b) Variances are computed on a line-by-line basis and are non-additive.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Provision for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses includes the provision for loan and lease losses and the provision for unfunded lending commitments. The provision for credit losses is the expense necessary to maintain the ALLL and the accrual for unfunded lending commitments at levels appropriate to absorb management’s estimate of credit losses expected over the life of the loan and lease portfolio and the portfolio of unfunded loan commitments.
Provision for credit losses increased to $503 million in 2020, compared to $45 million in 2019 driven by the
adoption of CECL and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Results also reflect the impact of the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition including $147 million related to non-PCD loans. For additional information about general asset quality trends refer to the Asset Quality section in this MD&A.
Noninterest Income
The following table reflects noninterest income for the past three years:
Table 4-Noninterest Income
NM - Not meaningful
Noninterest income totaled $1.5 billion in 2020, $654 million in 2019, and $723 million in 2018, or 47%, 35%, and 37% of total revenue, respectively. The increase in noninterest income in 2020 was driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and included a preliminary purchase accounting gain of $533 million. Results also reflected the benefit of strong fixed income revenue during the year and higher mortgage banking and title income from the addition of IBKC.
The major component of fixed income revenue is generated from the purchase and sale of fixed income securities as both principal and agent. Other
noninterest revenues within this line item consist principally of fees from derivative sales, portfolio advisory services and loan sales. Securities inventory positions are procured for distribution to clients by the sales staff. Fixed income increased 52%, or $144 million, to $423 million in 2020. Fixed income product revenue increased 63%, or $143 million, largely driven by favorable market conditions including market volatility and increased depository liquidity, while revenue from other products increased 2%, or $1 million in 2020, largely driven by higher fees from derivative sales and portfolio advisory services, somewhat offset by lower fees from loan sales.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Table 5-Fixed Income
Fees from deposit transactions and cash management activities of $148 million in 2020 increased $16 million, or 12%, from 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition which partially offset pandemic-related impacts including lower transaction volume and fee waivers.
Mortgage banking and title income of $129 million in 2020 increased from $10 million in 2019 driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and higher activity due to the low interest rate environment.
Brokerage, management fees and commissions of $66 million increased from $55 million in 2019 driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and an increase in annuity income and advisory fees. Brokerage, management fees and commissions include fees for portfolio management, trade commissions, and annuity and mutual funds sales.
Trust services and investment management income of $39 million increased $9 million from 2019, driven by the IBKC merger.
Bankcard income of $37 million in 2020 increased $9 million from 2019, driven by the impact of the IBKC merger.
Noninterest Expense
The following table reflects noninterest expense for the past three years:
Table 6-Noninterest Expense
NM - Not meaningful
Total noninterest expense of $1.7 billion increased $485 million driven by the impact of the IBKC merger
and Truist branch acquisition mitigated in part by a reduction in noninterest expense as a result of both
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
the COVID-19 shutdown and expense discipline, including the benefit of merger cost saves.
Personnel expense of $1.0 billion increased $338 million from 2019 driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition. Results also reflect an increase tied to higher revenue-based compensation due to increased revenues in fixed income and mortgage banking, a one-time bonus to certain employees, and COVID-related vacation carryover accrual costs. A decrease in restructuring costs from 2019 to 2020 partially offset these changes.
Net occupancy expense of $116 million in 2020 increased 45% from 2019 driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and the Truist branch acquisition.
Computer software expense was $85 million in 2020, a 39% increase compared to $61 million in 2019, primarily the result of the inclusion of IBKC computer software and service expenses in the second half of 2020, and to a lesser extent, merger- and integration-related expenses.
Legal and professional fees increased $12 million, or 17%, to $84 million in 2020, primarily the result of an increase in merger and integration-related expenses and the inclusion of IBKC, partially offset by lower restructuring costs associated with efficiency initiatives recognized in 2019.
Operations services expense increased $10 million, or 22%, to $56 million in 2020, primarily from the inclusion of IBKC expenses in the second half of 2020.
Contributions increased $30 million in 2020, primarily due to a $20 million contribution to the Louisiana First Horizon Foundation in connection with the IBKC merger and a $15 million donation of Paycheck Protection Plan fees to the First Horizon Foundation to assist low- and moderate-income communities.
Equipment expense increased $8 million, or 24%, in 2020 driven by the impact of the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition.
Amortization of intangible assets of $40 million in 2020 increased $15 million compared to 2019 primarily due to the intangible assets created in the IBKC merger.
Income Taxes
FHN recorded income tax expense of $76 million in 2020 compared to $134 million in 2019, resulting in
an effective tax rate of 8.2% and 22.8% respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate from 2019 to 2020 was primarily the result of the preliminary purchase accounting gain from the IBKC merger, which is not taxable.
FHN’s effective tax rate is favorably affected by recurring items such as bank-owned life insurance, tax-exempt income, and tax credits and other tax benefits from tax credit investments. The effective rate is unfavorably affected by the non-deductibility of a portion of FHN's FDIC premium, executive compensation and merger expenses. The effective tax rate also may be affected by items that may occur in any given period but are not consistent from period to period, such as changes in unrecognized tax benefits.
A deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability is recognized for the tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities. The tax consequence is calculated by applying enacted statutory tax rates, applicable to future years, to these temporary differences. FHN’s net DTA was less than $1 million and $69 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, FHN had deferred tax asset balances related to federal and state income tax carryforwards of $47 million and $9 million, which will expire at various dates. Refer to Note 15 - Income Taxes for additional information.
FHN’s gross DTA after valuation allowance was $471 million and $250 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Based on current analysis, FHN believes that its ability to realize the remaining DTA is more likely than not. FHN monitors its DTA and the need for a valuation allowance on a quarterly basis. A significant adverse change in FHN’s taxable earnings outlook could result in the need for a valuation allowance.
FHN and its eligible subsidiaries are included in a consolidated federal income tax return. FHN files separate returns for subsidiaries that are not eligible to be included in a consolidated federal income tax return. Based on the laws of the applicable states where it conducts business operations, FHN either files consolidated, combined, or separate returns. With few exceptions, FHN tax returns are not currently under federal or state tax examination. In 2020, FHN finalized IRS examinations for the FHN federal consolidated tax returns for 2013 through 2015 and for the Capital Bank Financial Corporation federal consolidated tax returns for 2010 through 2012. IBKC's federal consolidated tax returns for
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
2017 and 2018 are currently under examination by the IRS. See Note 15 - Income Taxes for additional information.
Business Segment Results
During the fourth quarter of 2020, FHN reorganized its internal management structure and, accordingly, its segment reporting structure. Historically, FHN's primary business segments were Regional Banking, Fixed Income, Corporate, and Non-strategic. On July 1, 2020, FHN and IBKC closed their merger of equals transaction. This transaction prompted organizational changes to better integrate and execute the combined Company's strategic priorities across all lines of businesses. As a result, FHN revised its reportable segments as described below.
•Regional Banking segment offers financial products and services, including traditional lending and deposit taking, to consumer and commercial clients primarily in the southern U.S. and other selected markets. Regional Banking also provides investment, wealth management, financial planning, trust and asset management services for consumer clients.
•Specialty Banking segment consists of lines of business that deliver product offerings and services with specialized industry knowledge. Specialty Banking’s lines of business include asset-based lending, mortgage warehouse lending, commercial real estate, franchise finance, correspondent banking, equipment finance, mortgage, and title insurance. In addition to traditional lending and deposit taking, Specialty Banking also delivers treasury management solutions, loan syndications, international banking and SBA lending. Additionally, Specialty Banking has a line of business focused on fixed income securities sales, trading, underwriting, and strategies for institutional clients in the U.S. and abroad, as well as loan sales, portfolio advisory services, and derivative sales.
•Corporate segment consists primarily of corporate support functions including risk management, audit, accounting, finance, executive office, and corporate communications. Shared support services such as human resources, properties, technology, credit risk and bank operations are allocated to the activities of Regional Banking, Specialty Banking and Corporate. Additionally, the Corporate segment includes centralized management of capital and funding to support the business activities of the company including management of wholesale funding, liquidity, and capital
management and allocation. Finally, the Corporate segment also includes the revenue and expense associated with run-off businesses such as pre-2009 mortgage banking elements, run-off consumer and trust preferred loan portfolios, and other exited businesses.
Segment results for years prior to 2020 have been recast to adjust for the realignment of the segment reporting structure. See Note 20 - Business Segment Information for additional disclosures related to FHN's operating segments.
Regional Banking
Pre-tax income within the Regional Banking segment decreased $54 million, or 13%, in 2020 reflecting increases in the provision for credit losses and noninterest expense, somewhat offset by an increase in revenue.
Net interest income increased $534 million, or 69%, in 2020 driven by merger-related earning asset growth, deposit pricing discipline, and PPP lending, partially offset by the negative impact of the low rate environment.
Noninterest income increased $54 million, or 19%, largely attributable to increases in other fee income driven by the addition of IBKC.
Provision for credit losses increased to $392 million in 2020 from $24 million in 2019, primarily the result of the adoption of CECL, deterioration in the economic forecast attributable to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and provision related to acquired non-PCD loans.
Noninterest expense was $900 million in 2020, an increase of $274 million compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the addition of IBKC.
Specialty Banking
Pre-tax income in the Specialty Banking segment was $551 million in 2020 compared to $374 million in 2019. The improvement in results in 2020 was driven by higher revenue which outpaced an increase in expenses.
Net interest income increased $139 million, or 31%, in 2020 primarily driven by merger-related earning asset growth, partially offset by the negative impact of the low rate environment.
Noninterest income increased $258 million, or 81%, from 2019 primarily driven by strong fixed income
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
revenue from favorable market conditions and higher mortgage banking and title income as a result of the IBKC merger and increased activity due to the low rate environment.
Provision for credit losses increased to $117 million compared to $37 million in 2019 as a result of the same factors listed above for the Regional Banking segment.
Noninterest expense increased $140 million, or 40%, to $491 million in 2020, largely attributable to the addition of IBKC in the second half of the year. Personnel expense contributed $128 million of this increase, a result of increased headcount from the merger and branch acquisition as well as higher incentive compensation.
Corporate
Pre-tax income for the Corporate segment was $24 million for 2020 compared to a pre-tax loss of $200 million for 2019, primarily driven by the preliminary purchase accounting gain from the IBKC merger.
Net interest expense was $228 million in 2020 compared to $7 million in 2019. Net interest expense was unfavorably impacted by the funds transfer pricing methodology, with the offset in the Regional Banking segment.
Noninterest income was $573 million, up from $47 million in 2019, primarily from the preliminary purchase accounting gain related to the IBKC merger.
Noninterest expense increased to $327 million in 2020 from $256 million in 2019, primarily from a $116 million increase in merger and integration-related charges and expenses associated with the inclusion
of IBKC, somewhat offset by $40 million of restructuring, repositioning, and efficiency initiative costs recognized in 2019.
Restructuring, Repositioning, and Efficiency Initiatives
Beginning in first quarter 2019, FHN initiated a company-wide review of business practices with the goal of optimizing its expense base to improve profitability and create capacity to reinvest savings into technology and revenue production activities. The net charges for restructuring, repositioning, and efficiency initiatives were $40 million in 2019, primarily associated with professional fees, asset impairments, and severance and other employee costs. These charges were insignificant in 2020. Due to the broad nature of the actions being taken, many components of expense are expected to benefit from the efficiency initiatives. See Note 25 - Restructuring, Repositioning, and Efficiency for additional information.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - 2019 compared with 2018
For a description of FHN's results of operations for 2019, see the "Income Statement Review - 2019 compared to 2018; 2018 compared to 2017" section of Item 7 in our 2019 Form 10-K.
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
Investment Securities
The following table presents the carrying value of securities by category as of December 31 for the years indicated:
Table 7 - Composition of Securities Portfolio
(a) Includes securities issued by government sponsored entities which are not backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. Government.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
FHN’s investment portfolio consists principally of debt securities including government agency issued mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations, all of which are classified as AFS. The securities portfolio provides a source of income and liquidity and is an important tool used to balance the interest rate risk of the loan and deposit portfolios.The securities portfolio is periodically evaluated in light of established ALM objectives, changing market conditions that could affect the profitability of the portfolio, the regulatory environment, and the level of interest rate risk to
which FHN is exposed. These evaluations may result in steps taken to adjust the overall balance sheet positioning.
Investment securities were $8.0 billion and $4.4 billion on December 31, 2020 and 2019, representing 10% of total assets for both periods. The increase in investment securities was due primarily to the IBKC merger which contributed $3.5 billion in securities. See Note 3 - Investment Securities in Item 8 for additional detail.
The following table presents an analysis of the amortized cost, remaining contractual maturities, and weighted-average yields by contractual maturity for the debt securities portfolio.
Table 8-Contractual Maturities of Investment Securities
(a) Represents government agency-issued mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations which, when adjusted for early pay downs, have an estimated average life of 3.5 years.
(b) Weighted average yields were calculated using amortized cost on a fully-taxable equivalent basis, assuming a 25% tax rate where applicable.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Loans and Leases
The following table provides detail regarding FHN's loans and leases:
Table 9- Loans and Leases
(a) 2020 includes the impact of balances related to the IBKC merger on July 1, 2020 and Truist Bank branch acquisition on July 17, 2020.
(b) Includes equipment financing loans and leases.
(c) 2018 include $16 million of restricted and secured real estate loans. There were no such restricted and secured loans at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Total loans and leases were $58.2 billion on December 31, 2020, up from $31.1 billion on December 31, 2019, driven primarily by acquired IBKC and Truist Bank loans, as well as the origination of PPP loans.
C&I loans are the largest component of the loan and lease portfolio, comprising 57% of total loans and leases in 2020 and 65% in 2019. C&I loans increased 65%, or $13.1 billion, from 2019 largely driven by acquired loans and PPP loan originations, as well as strong loan growth within the mortgage warehouse lending portfolio of Specialty Banking and commercial portfolios of both Regional Banking and Specialty
Banking. Growth in other specialty lending areas within Specialty Banking, such as energy and healthcare, also meaningfully contributed to the overall growth in C&I loans from 2019. Commercial real estate loans increased 183% to $12.3 billion in 2020, also primarily driven by acquired IBKC loans.
Total consumer loans increased 93%, or $6.2 billion, from the end of 2019, largely a result of the growth of real estate installment loans and home equity lines of credit within the Regional Banking segment, driven by acquired IBKC loans, offset by the continued wind-down of portfolios within the Corporate segment.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table provides a detail of contractual maturities on December 31, 2020.
Table 10-Contractual Maturities of Loans and Leases
Because of various factors, the contractual maturities of consumer loans are not indicative of the actual lives of such loans. A significant component of FHN’s loan portfolio consists of consumer real estate loans, a majority of which are home equity lines of credit and home equity installment loans. These loans have an initial period where the borrower is only required to pay the periodic interest. After the interest-only period, the loan will require the payment of both principal and interest over the remaining term. Numerous factors can contribute to the actual life of a home equity line or installment loan. As a result, the actual average life of home equity lines and loans is difficult to predict and changes in any of these factors could result in changes in projections of average lives.
Loans Held for Sale
FHN obtained IBKC's mortgage banking operations which included origination and servicing of residential first lien mortgages which primarily consist of fixed rate single-family residential mortgage loans originated by IBKC and committed to be sold in the
secondary market. The legacy FHN loans HFS portfolio consists of small business, other consumer loans, the mortgage warehouse, USDA, student, and home equity loans. The average balance of loans HFS increased to $835 million in 2020 from $578 million in 2019. On December 31, 2020, loans HFS were $1.0 billion, a $428 million increase compared to December 31, 2019. The increase in loans HFS was primarily driven by the additional volume of mortgage loans originated from the IBKC merger. Held-for-sale consumer mortgage loans secured by residential real estate in process of foreclosure totaled $2 million and $7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Deposits
Total deposits were $70.0 billion at December 31, 2020, up $37.6 billion from $32.4 billion for year-end 2019, driven by $28.2 billion in acquired IBKC deposits and $2.2 billion in acquired Truist deposits. In addition, deposit balances were impacted by significant client deposit inflows beginning in March 2020 as brokerage clients exited equity markets to
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
move into cash positions given the market volatility associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, municipalities received federal stimulus payments, and PPP funding began. As short-term rates have come down, particularly in the latter half of the year, bank deposits provide institutional clients with overnight liquidity at a competitive, and often superior, rate to other short-term cash management options. Additionally, there has been a notable shift from
interest-bearing deposits to noninterest-bearing deposits within many of FHN's institutional relationships. The following table summarizes FHN's deposits for 2020, 2019, and 2018. See Table 2 - Average Balances, Net Interest Income and Yields/Rates in this Report for information on average deposits including average rates paid.
Table 11- Deposits
Table 12 - Total Uninsured Deposits
Table 13 - Uninsured Time Deposits by Maturity
Short-Term Borrowings
Short-term borrowings include federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, trading liabilities, and other short-term borrowings. Total short-term borrowings were $2.6 billion on December 31, 2020, a $1.5 billion decrease from December 31, 2019 attributable to decreases in other short-term borrowings and trading liabilities partially offset by increases in federal funds purchased and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
The balance of other short-term borrowings fluctuates largely based on the level of FHLB borrowing as a result of loan demand, deposit levels and balance sheet funding strategies. The decrease in other short-term borrowings in 2020 was primarily attributable to a decrease in FHLB advances as FHN was able to use client deposits to support balance sheet funding.Trading liabilities fluctuate based on various factors, including levels of trading securities and hedging strategies. Federal funds purchased fluctuate depending on the amount of excess funding of FHN's correspondent bank clients. Balances of securities sold under agreements to resell fluctuate based on cost attractiveness relative to FHLB borrowing levels and the ability to pledge securities toward such
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
transactions. See Note 10 - Short-Term Borrowings for additional information.
Term Borrowings
Term borrowings include senior and subordinated borrowings with original maturities greater than one year. Total term borrowings were $1.7 billion on December 31, 2020, a $879 million increase from $791 million on December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of the issuance of $450 million of subordinated notes by First Horizon Bank, the issuance of $800 million of senior notes by FHN, and the acquisition of $120 million in junior subordinated debt from IBKC. These increases were offset by the redemption of $500 million in senior notes. See Note 11 - Term Borrowings for additional information.
CAPITAL
Management’s objectives are to provide capital sufficient to cover the risks inherent in FHN’s businesses, to maintain excess capital to well-capitalized standards, and to assure ready access to the capital markets. Total equity increased $3.2 billion to $8.3 billion on December 31, 2020 from $5.1 billion on December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to $2.5 billion in equity issued in connection with the IBKC merger. In addition, FHN issued 1,500 shares of Series E Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock in May 2020 for net proceeds of $144 million. Other significant changes included net income of $857 million and an increase in AOCI of $99 million, which were partially offset by $286 million in common and preferred stock dividends declared and a $96 million adjustment related to the adoption of CECL.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of Shareholders’ equity from the Consolidated Balance Sheets to Common Equity Tier 1, Tier 1 and Total Regulatory Capital as well as certain selected capital ratios:
Table 14-Regulatory Capital and Ratios
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
(a) The modified CECL transitional amount is calculated as defined in the final rule issued by the banking regulators on August 26, 2020 and includes the full amount of the impact to retained earnings from the initial adoption of CECL plus 25% of the change in the adjusted allowance for credit losses since FHN’s initial adoption of CECL through December 31, 2020.
(b) At December 31, 2020, the $93 million carrying value of the Series D preferred stock does not qualify as Tier 1 capital because the earliest redemption date is less than five years from the issuance date.
(c) Tangible common equity to tangible assets and Adjusted tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets are non-GAAP measures and are reconciled to total equity to total assets (GAAP) in the Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliation - Table 28.
Banking regulators define minimum capital ratios for bank holding companies and their bank subsidiaries. Based on the capital rules and definitions prescribed by the banking regulators, should any depository institution’s capital ratios decline below predetermined levels, it would become subject to a series of increasingly restrictive regulatory actions. The system categorizes a depository institution’s capital position into one of five categories ranging from well-capitalized to critically under-capitalized. For an institution the size of FHN to qualify as well-capitalized, Common Equity Tier 1, Tier 1 Capital, Total Capital, and Leverage capital ratios must be at least 6.50%, 8.00%, 10.00%, and 5.00%, respectively. Furthermore, beginning January 1, 2019, a capital conservation buffer of 50 basis points above these levels must be maintained on the Common Equity Tier 1, Tier 1 Capital and Total Capital ratios to avoid restrictions on dividends, share repurchases and certain discretionary bonuses. As of December 31, 2020, each of FHN and First Horizon Bank had sufficient capital to qualify as well-capitalized institutions and to meet the capital conservation buffer requirement. Capital ratios for both FHN and First Horizon Bank as of December 31, 2020 are calculated under the final rule issued by the banking regulators in late August 2020 to delay the
effects of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year transition period.
For both FHN and First Horizon Bank, the risk-based regulatory capital ratios increased in 2020 relative to 2019 primarily from the issuance of preferred and common equity in connection with the IBKC merger, offset by the intangible assets created in the IBKC merger and Truist Bank branch acquisition. Regulatory capital ratios were also favorably impacted by the impact of net income less dividends during 2020. For the Bank only, the risk-based regulatory capital ratios were impacted by a reduction of $115 million in its equity investment in its financial subsidiary, FHN Financial Securities Corp. In addition, the Tier 1 Capital ratio for FHN benefited from the issuance of $150 million of Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series E. The Total Capital ratios for both FHN and First Horizon Bank benefited from the Bank’s issuance of $450 million of Tier 2 qualifying subordinated notes. The Tier 1 leverage ratio declined for both FHN and First Horizon Bank as average assets for leverage in 2020 increased relative to 2019 primarily in connection with the IBKC merger. During 2021, capital ratios are expected to remain above well-capitalized standards plus the required capital conservation buffer.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Stress Testing
The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, along with an interagency regulatory statement effectively exempted both FHN and First Horizon Bank from Dodd-Frank Act stress testing requirements starting in 2018.
For 2020, FHN and First Horizon Bank completed a company run stress test using the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) Resubmission scenarios published in September 2020. Results of these tests indicate that both FHN and First Horizon Bank would be able to maintain capital well in excess of Basel III Adequately Capitalized standards under the hypothetical severe global recession of the 2020 CCAR Resubmission Severely Adverse scenario. A summary of those results was posted in the “News & Events-Stress Testing Results” section on FHN’s investor relations website on December 28, 2020. Neither FHN’s stress test posting, nor any other material found on FHN’s website generally, is part of this report or incorporated herein.
FHN anticipates that it will continue performing an annual enterprise-wide stress test as part of its capital and risk management process. Results of this test will be presented to executive management and the Board.
The disclosures in this “Stress Testing” section include forward-looking statements. Please refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” for additional information concerning the characteristics and limitations of statements of that type.
Common Stock Purchase Programs
Pursuant to Board authority, FHN may repurchase shares of its common stock from time to time and will evaluate the level of capital and take action designed
to generate or use capital, as appropriate, for the interests of the shareholders, subject to legal and regulatory restrictions. Two common stock purchase programs currently authorized are discussed below. FHN’s board has not authorized a preferred stock purchase program.
In January 2021, FHN's Board of Directors approved a new $500 million common share purchase program that will expire on January 31, 2023. The new program is not tied to any compensation plan, and replaces the general share repurchase program mentioned below, which was terminated by the Board. Purchases may be made in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions, including under Rule 10b5-1 plans as well as accelerated share repurchase and other structured transactions. The timing and exact amount of common share repurchases will be subject to various factors, including FHN's capital position, financial performance, capital impacts of strategic initiatives, market conditions and regulatory considerations.
Table 15a-Issuer Purchases of Common Stock - General Authority
On January 23, 2018, FHN announced a $250 million share purchase authority with an expiration date of January 31, 2020. On January 29, 2019, FHN announced a $250 million increase in that authority along with an extension of the expiration date to January 31, 2021. Purchases could be made in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions and were subject to various factors, including FHN's capital position, financial performance, capital impacts of strategic initiatives, market conditions, and regulatory considerations. As of December 31, 2020, $229 million in purchases had been made under this authority at an average price per share of $15.09 ($15.07 excluding commissions).
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
On January 27, 2021, FHN announced a $500 million share purchase authority with an expiration date of January 31, 2023. This new authority replaced the previous one. Purchases may be made in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions and are subject to various factors, including FHN's capital position, financial performance, capital impacts of strategic initiatives, market conditions, and regulatory considerations.
Table 15b-Issuer Purchase of Common Stock - Compensation Authority
A consolidated compensation plan share purchase program was announced on August 6, 2004. This program consolidated all of the previously authorized compensation plan share programs into a single share purchase program, as well as the renewal of the authorization to purchase shares for use in connection with two compensation plans for which the share purchase authority had expired. The total
amount authorized under this consolidated compensation plan share purchase program, inclusive of a program amendment on April 24, 2006, is 29.6 million shares calculated before adjusting for stock dividends distributed through January 1, 2011. The authorization has been reduced for that portion which relates to compensation plans for which no options remain outstanding. The shares may be purchased over the option exercise period of the various compensation plans on or before December 31, 2023. Purchases may be made in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions and are subject to various factors, including FHN's capital position, financial performance, capital impacts of strategic initiatives, market conditions, and regulatory considerations. As of December 31, 2020, the maximum number of shares that may be purchased under the program was 24 million shares. Management currently does not anticipate purchasing a material number of shares under this authority during 2021.
ASSET QUALITY
Loan and Lease Portfolio Composition
FHN groups its loans into portfolio segments based on internal classifications reflecting the manner in which the ALLL is established and how credit risk is measured, monitored, and reported. From time to time, and if conditions are such that certain subsegments are uniquely affected by economic or market conditions or are experiencing greater deterioration than other components of the loan portfolio, management may determine the ALLL at a more granular level. Commercial loans are composed of C&I loans and CRE loans. Consumer loans are composed of consumer real estate loans and credit card and other loans. In first quarter 2020, FHN consolidated its permanent mortgage portfolio into consumer real estate. Loans previously classified in permanent mortgage included primarily jumbo mortgages and one-time-close completed construction loans that were originated through pre-2009 mortgage businesses.
Underwriting Policies and Procedures
The following sections describe each portfolio as well as general underwriting procedures for each. As economic and real estate conditions develop, enhancements to underwriting and credit policies and procedures may be necessary or desirable. Loan policies and procedures for all portfolios are reviewed by credit risk working groups and management risk committees comprised of business line managers and credit administration professionals as well as by various other reviewing bodies within FHN. Policies and procedures are approved by key executives and/or senior managers leading the applicable credit risk working groups as well as by management risk committees.
The credit risk working groups and management risk committees strive to ensure that the approved policies and procedures address the associated risks and establish reasonable underwriting criteria that appropriately mitigate risk. Policies and procedures are reviewed, revised and re-issued periodically at
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
established review dates or earlier if changes in the economic environment, portfolio performance, the size of portfolio or industry concentrations, or regulatory guidance warrant an earlier review.
Commercial Loan and Lease Portfolios
FHN’s commercial loan approval process grants lending authority based upon job description, experience, and performance. The lending authority is delegated to the business line (Market Managers, Departmental Managers, Regional Presidents, Relationship Managers (RM) and Portfolio Managers (PM) and to Credit Risk Managers. While individual limits vary, the predominant amount of approval authority is vested with the Credit Risk Management function. Portfolio, industry, and borrower concentration limits for the various portfolios are established by executive management and approved by the Executive and Risk Committee of the Board.
FHN’s commercial lending process incorporates an RM and a PM for most commercial credits. This model is being implemented in the legacy IBKC markets. The RM is primarily responsible for communications with the borrower and maintaining the relationship, while the PM is responsible for assessing the credit quality of the borrower, beginning with the initial underwriting and continuing through the servicing period. Other specialists and the assigned RM/PM are organized into units called deal teams. Deal teams are constructed with specific job attributes that facilitate FHN’s ability to identify, mitigate, document, and manage ongoing risk. PMs and credit analysts provide enhanced analytical support during loan origination and servicing, including monitoring of the financial condition of the borrower and tracking compliance with loan agreements. Loan closing officers and the construction loan management unit specialize in loan documentation and the management of the construction lending process. FHN strives to identify problem assets early through comprehensive policies and guidelines, targeted portfolio reviews, more frequent servicing on lower rated borrowers, and an emphasis on frequent grading. For smaller commercial credits, generally $5 million or less, and income-producing CRE credits greater than $10 million to non-professional real estate developers and smaller professional real estate investors/developers, FHN utilizes a centralized underwriting unit in order to originate and grade small business loans more efficiently and consistently.
FHN may utilize availability of guarantors/sponsors to support commercial lending decisions during the credit underwriting process and when determining the
assignment of internal loan grades. Reliance on the guaranty as a viable secondary source of repayment is a function of an analysis proving capability to pay, factoring in, among other things, liquidity and direct/indirect cash flows. FHN also considers the volume and amount of guaranties provided for all global indebtedness and the likelihood of realization. FHN presumes a guarantor’s willingness to perform until there is any current or prior indication or future expectation that the guarantor may not willingly and voluntarily perform under the terms of the guaranty. In FHN’s risk grading approach, it is deemed that financial support becomes necessary generally at a point when the loan would otherwise be graded substandard, reflecting a well-defined weakness. At that point, provided willingness and capacity to support are appropriately demonstrated, a strong, legally enforceable guaranty can mitigate the risk of default or loss, justify a less severe rating, and consequently reduce the level of allowance or charge-off that might otherwise be deemed appropriate.
C&I
The C&I portfolio was $33.1 billion on December 31, 2020 and is comprised of loans used for general business purposes. Typical products include working capital lines of credit, term loan financing of owner-occupied real estate and fixed assets, direct financing and sales-type leases, and trade credit enhancement through letters of credit. The largest geographical concentrations of balances as of December 31, 2020, are in Tennessee (21%), Florida (12%), Texas (9%), Louisiana (8%), North Carolina (8%), California (7%), and Georgia (5%), with no other state representing more than 5% of the portfolio.
C&I loans are underwritten in accordance with a well-defined credit origination process. This process includes applying minimum underwriting standards as well as separation of origination and credit approval roles on transaction sizes over PM authorization limits. Underwriting typically includes due diligence of the borrower and the applicable industry of the borrower, analysis of the borrower’s available financial information, identification and analysis of the various sources of repayment and identification of the primary risk attributes. Stress testing the borrower’s financial capacity, adherence to loan documentation requirements, and assigning credit risk grades using internally developed scorecards are also used to help quantify the risk when appropriate. Underwriting parameters also include loan-to-value ratios which vary depending on collateral type, use of guaranties, loan agreement requirements, and other recommended terms such as equity requirements, amortization, and maturity. Approval decisions also consider various financial ratios and performance
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
measures of the borrowers, such as cash flow and balance sheet leverage, liquidity, coverage of fixed charges, and working capital. Additionally, approval decisions consider the capital structure of the borrower, sponsorship, and quality/value of collateral. Generally, guideline and policy exceptions are identified and mitigated during the approval process. Pricing of C&I loans is based upon the determined credit risk specific to the individual borrower. These loans typically have variable rates tied to the LIBOR or the prime rate of interest plus or minus the appropriate margin.
The following table provides the composition of the C&I portfolio by industry as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. For purposes of this disclosure, industries are determined based on the NAICS industry codes used by Federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the collection, analysis, and publication of statistical data related to the U.S. business economy.
Table 16-C&I Loan Portfolio by Industry
(a)Leasing, rental of real estate, equipment, and goods.
(b)Industries in this category each comprise less than 5% for 2020.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Industry Concentrations
Loan concentrations are considered to exist for a financial institution when there are loans to numerous borrowers engaged in similar activities that would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other conditions. 26% of FHN’s C&I loans are to mortgage companies or borrowers in the finance and insurance industry, and as a result could be affected by items that uniquely impact the financial services industry. Except “Loans to Mortgage Companies” and “Finance and Insurance”, as discussed below, on December 31, 2020, FHN did not have any other concentrations of C&I loans in any single industry of 10% or more of total loans.
Loans to Mortgage Companies
The balance of loans to mortgage companies was 16% of the C&I portfolio as of December 31, 2020, and 22% of the C&I portfolio as of December 31, 2019, and includes balances related to both home purchase and refinance activity. This portfolio class, which generally fluctuates with mortgage rates and seasonal factors, includes commercial lines of credit to qualified mortgage companies primarily for the temporary warehousing of eligible mortgage loans prior to the borrower’s sale of those mortgage loans to third party investors. Generally, lending to mortgage lenders increases when there is a decline in mortgage rates and decreases when rates rise. The increase in loans to mortgage companies year over year was due to higher client count, greater utilization levels and moderately larger credit lines. In 2020, approximately 40% of the loans funded were home purchases and 60% were refinance transactions.
Finance and Insurance
The finance and insurance component represents 10% of the C&I portfolio as of December 31, 2020 compared to 14% as the end of 2019 and includes TRUPs (i.e., long-term unsecured loans to bank and insurance-related businesses), loans to bank holding companies, and asset-based lending to consumer finance companies. As of December 31, 2020, asset-based lending to consumer finance companies represents approximately $1.2 billion of the finance and insurance component.
TRUPs lending was originally extended as a form of “bridge” financing to participants in the pooled trust preferred securitization program offered primarily to smaller banking (generally less than $15 billion in total assets) and insurance institutions through FHN’s fixed income business. Origination of TRUPs lending ceased in early 2008. Individual TRUPs are re-graded
at least quarterly as part of FHN’s commercial loan review process. The terms of these loans generally include a scheduled 30-year balloon payoff and include an option to defer interest for up to 20 consecutive quarters. As of December 31, 2020, no TRUP relationship was on interest deferral. As of December 31, 2020, the UPB of trust preferred loans totaled $228 million. Inclusive of an amortizing discount on TRUPs of $18 million, total reserves (ALLL plus the amortizing discount) for TRUPs and other bank-related loans were $28 million or 12% of outstanding UPB.
Commercial Real Estate
The CRE portfolio was $12.3 billion on December 31, 2020, a $7.9 billion, or 183%, increase compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was driven primarily by the inclusion of IBKC CRE loans. The CRE portfolio includes both financings for commercial construction and nonconstruction loans.
The largest geographical concentrations of balances as of December 31, 2020, are in Florida (28%), North Carolina (12%), Louisiana (11%), Texas (11%), Tennessee (9%), and Georgia (8%) with no other state representing more than 5% of the portfolio. This portfolio contains loans and draws on lines and letters of credit to commercial real estate developers for the construction and mini-permanent financing of income-producing real estate. Subcategories of income CRE consist of multi-family (27%), office (22%), retail (19%), hospitality (11%), industrial (10%), land/land development (2%), and other (9%).
Residential CRE loans include loans to residential builders and developers for the purpose of constructing single-family homes, condominiums, and town homes, and on a limited basis, for developing residential subdivisions. After the fulfillment of existing commitments over the near term, the residential CRE class will be in a wind-down state with the expectation of full runoff in the foreseeable future.
Income-producing CRE loans are underwritten in accordance with credit policies and underwriting guidelines that are reviewed at least annually and revised as necessary based on market conditions. Loans are underwritten based upon project type, size, location, sponsorship, and other market-specific data. Generally, minimum requirements for equity, debt service coverage ratios, and level of pre-leasing activity are established based on perceived risk in each subcategory. Loan-to-value (value is defined as the lower of cost or market) limits are set below regulatory prescribed ceilings and generally range
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
between 50% and 80% depending on underlying product set. Term and amortization requirements are set based on prudent standards for interim real estate lending. Equity requirements are established based on the quality and liquidity of the primary source of repayment. For example, more equity would be required for a speculative construction project or land loan than for a property fully leased to a credit tenant or a roster of tenants. Typically, a borrower must have at least 15% of cost invested in a project before FHN will fund loan dollars. Income properties are required to achieve a debt service coverage ratio greater than or equal to 125% at inception or stabilization of the project based on loan amortization and a minimum underwriting interest rate. Some product types that possess a greater risk profile require a higher level of equity, as well as a higher debt service coverage ratio threshold. A proprietary minimum underwriting interest rate is used to calculate compliance with underwriting standards. Generally, specific levels of pre-leasing must be met for construction loans on income properties. A global cash flow analysis is performed at the sponsor level. The majority of the portfolio is on a floating rate basis tied to appropriate spreads over LIBOR.
The credit administration and ongoing monitoring consists of multiple internal control processes. Construction loans are closed and administered by a centralized control unit. Underwriters and credit approval personnel stress the borrower’s/project’s financial capacity utilizing numerous attributes such as interest rates, vacancy, and discount rates. Key information is captured from the various portfolios and then stressed at the aggregate level. Results are utilized to assist with the assessment of the adequacy of the ALLL and to steer portfolio management strategies.
Consumer Loan Portfolios
Consumer Real Estate
The consumer real estate portfolio was $11.7 billion on December 31, 2020 and is primarily composed of home equity lines and installment loans.
The largest geographical concentrations of balances as of December 31, 2020 are in Florida (31%), Tennessee (25%), Louisiana (10%), North Carolina (9%), and Texas (5%), with no other state representing more than 5% of the portfolio.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 86% of the consumer real estate portfolio was in a first lien
position. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted average FICO score at origination of this portfolio was 753 and the refreshed FICO scores averaged 763, no significant change from FICO scores of 755 and 753, respectively, as of December 31, 2019.
Generally, performance of this portfolio is affected by life events that affect borrowers’ finances, the level of unemployment, and home prices.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, FHN had held-to-maturity consumer mortgage loans secured by real estate totaling $36 million and $19 million, respectively, that were in the process of foreclosure.
Home equity lines of credit comprise $2.4 billion of the consumer real estate portfolio as of December 31, 2020. FHN’s HELOCs typically have a 5 or 10 year draw period followed by a 10 or 20 year repayment period, respectively. During the draw period, a borrower is able to draw on the line and is only required to make interest payments. The line is frozen if a borrower becomes past due on payments. Once the draw period has concluded, the line is closed and the borrower is required to make both principal and interest payments monthly until the loan matures. The principal payment generally is fully amortizing, but payment amounts will adjust when variable rates reset to reflect changes in the prime rate.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 86% of FHN's HELOCs were in the draw period compared to 76% at the end of the prior year. Based on when draw periods are scheduled to end per the line agreement, it is expected that $455 million, or 21%, of HELOCs currently in the draw period will enter the repayment period during the next 60 months. Generally, delinquencies for HELOCs that have entered the repayment period are initially higher than HELOCs still in the draw period because of the increased minimum payment requirement; however, after some seasoning, performance of these loans usually begins to stabilize. The home equity lines of the consumer real estate portfolio are monitored closely for those nearing the end of the draw period and borrowers are initially contacted at least 6 months before the repayment period begins to remind the client of the terms of their agreement and to inform them of options.
The following table shows the HELOCs currently in the draw period and expected timing of conversion to the repayment period.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Table 17-HELOC Draw To Repayment Schedule
Underwriting
For the majority of loans in this portfolio, underwriting decisions are made through a centralized loan underwriting center. To obtain a consumer real estate loan, the loan applicant(s) in most cases must first meet a minimum qualifying FICO score. Minimum FICO score requirements are established by management for both loans secured by real estate as well as non-real estate loans. Management also establishes maximum loan amounts, loan-to-value ratios, and debt-to-income ratios for each consumer real estate product. Applicants must have the financial capacity (or available income) to service the debt by not exceeding a calculated debt-to-income ratio. The amount of the loan is limited to a percentage of the lesser of the current appraised value or sales price of the collateral. Identified guideline and policy exceptions require established mitigating factors that have been approved for use by Credit Risk Management.
HELOC interest rates are variable and adjust with movements in the index rate stated in the loan agreement. Such loans can have elevated risks of default, particularly in a rising interest rate environment, potentially stressing borrower capacity to repay the loan at the higher interest rate. FHN’s current underwriting practice requires HELOC borrowers to qualify based on a sensitized interest rate (above the current note rate), fully amortized payment methodology. FHN’s underwriting guidelines require borrowers to qualify at an interest rate that is 200 basis points above the note rate. This mitigates risk to FHN in the event of a sharp rise in interest rates over a relatively short time horizon.
HELOC Portfolio Risk Management
FHN performs continuous HELOC account reviews in order to identify higher-risk home equity lines and initiate preventative and corrective actions. The reviews consider a number of account activity patterns and characteristics such as the number of times delinquent within recent periods, changes in credit bureau score since origination, score degradation, performance of the first lien, and account utilization. In accordance with FHN’s interpretation of regulatory guidance, FHN may block future draws on accounts in order to mitigate risk of loss to FHN.
Credit Card and Other
Driven by acquired IBKC loans, FHN's credit card and other portfolio increased $632 million from the prior year-end to $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2020, and primarily includes consumer-related credits, including home equity and other personal consumer loans, credit card receivables, and automobile loans.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, FHN adopted the provisions of ASU 2016-13, "Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments," and related ASUs. Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies for additional information about the standard and its impact on FHN.
Management’s policy is to maintain the ALLL at a level sufficient to recognize current expected credit losses on the amortized cost basis of the loan portfolio. The total allowance for loan and lease losses increased to $963 million on December 31,
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
2020, or 1.65% of total loans and leases, an increase of $763 million or 101 basis points from the end of 2019. The ALLL as of December 31, 2020 and the increase in the ALLL from 2019 reflects the adoption of ASU 2016-13, the steep decline in the economic forecast attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, an initial allowance on acquired PCD loans of $287 million, and $147 million recognized on acquired non-PCD loans from the IBKC merger and Truist branch acquisition.
The provision for loan and lease losses is the charge to (or release of) earnings necessary to maintain the ALLL at a sufficient level reflecting management’s estimate of current expected losses on the amortized cost basis of the loan portfolio. Provision expense was $489 million in 2020 compared to $47 million in 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to a $147 million provision for non-PCD assets acquired in the IBKC merger and Truist Bank branch acquisition, as well as from the decline in the economic forecast attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Asset quality trends may be impacted by the economic uncertainty attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The C&I portfolio reflects a broad mix of categories with the heaviest concentration in loans to mortgage companies which carry minimal credit risk. The C&I portfolio as of December 31, 2020 includes $4.1 billion of loans made under the Paycheck Protection Program of the SBA. PPP loans are fully government guaranteed with the SBA. Due to the government guarantee and forgiveness provisions, PPP loans are considered to have no credit risk. The CRE portfolio metrics could be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic due to travel and occupancy restrictions set by state and local governments affecting CRE- Hospitality and CRE-Retail. The consumer portfolio could be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic if consumer unemployment continues to remain elevated and clients are unable to continue making loan payments. The consumer portfolio, however, is high quality with no subprime exposure and minimal exposure to other traditional categories of high-risk lending.
Net Charge-offs
Net charge-offs were $120 million in 2020 compared to $27 million in 2019. Net charge-offs in 2020 exclude loans that were immediately charged-off (with an associated reduction in the allowance) that relate to acquired IBKC loans that had been written off prior to acquisition (whether full or partial), or which met FHN's charge-off policy at the time of acquisition. See Note 5 - Allowance for Credit Losses for additional information.
Net charge-offs in the C&I portfolio were $120 million, an increase of $93 million from 2019, driven by higher energy charge-offs in the current year. Net charge-offs in the commercial real estate portfolio were minimal. In the consumer portfolio, net recoveries for both the current and prior year were minimal, as net recoveries in the consumer real estate portfolio of $10 million were offset by net charge-offs in the credit card and other portfolio of $9 million.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Table 18-Analysis of Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses and Charge-offs
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
NM - not meaningful
(a)The increase in the ALLL in 2020 is attributable to the adoption of ASU 2016-13, the allowance recorded on acquired non-PCD loans, and the decline in the economic forecast attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
(b)The increase in period-end and average loans and leases in 2020 is primarily the result of $26.3 billion in acquired loans and leases.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming loans are loans placed on nonaccrual if it becomes evident that full collection of principal and interest is at risk, if impairment has been recognized as a partial charge-off of principal balance due to insufficient collateral value and past due status, or (on a case-by-case basis), if FHN continues to receive payments but there are other borrower-specific issues. Included in nonaccruals are loans that FHN continues to receive payments, including residential real estate loans where the borrower has been discharged of personal obligation through bankruptcy. Nonperforming loans, along with OREO (excluding OREO from government insured mortgages), represent nonperforming assets.
Driven by acquired NPAs, total NPAs (including NPLs HFS) increased $224 million to $406 million on December 31, 2020. The nonperforming assets ratio
(nonperforming assets excluding NPLs HFS to total period-end loans plus OREO and other assets) was 0.69% as of December 31, 2020, a 12 basis point increase compared to 0.57% as of December 31, 2019. The increase in nonperforming loans was driven primarily by the C&I and consumer real estate portfolios.
The ratio of the ALLL to NPLs was 2.49 times as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1.24 times as of December 31, 2019. Certain nonperforming loans in both the commercial and consumer portfolios are deemed collateral-dependent and are charged down to an estimate of collateral value less costs to sell. Because the estimated loss has been recognized through a partial charge-off, typically an ALLL is not recorded.
Table 19-Nonaccrual/Nonperforming Loans, Foreclosed Assets, and Other Disclosures (a) (b)
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
(a)Balances for 2019 and 2018 do not include PCI loans even though the client may be contractually past due. PCI loans were recorded at fair value upon acquisition and accrete interest income over the remaining life of the loan. PCI loans were transitioned to PCD status upon adoption of CECL.
(b)Unless otherwise noted, increases in balances from 2019 to 2020 were primarily driven by acquired nonperforming assets. The 2019 increase over 2018 was driven by three relationships transferring to nonaccrual.
(c)Under the original terms of the loans, estimated interest income would have been approximately $18 million, $11 million, and $9 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(d)Excludes loans and leases that are 90 or more days past due and still accruing interest.
(e)Foreclosed real estate from GNMA loans totaled $2 million, $2 million, and $3 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
(f)Balances do not include government-insured foreclosed real estate. Balances for 2019 and 2018 also do not include PCI loans. PCI loans were transitioned to PCD status upon adoption of CECL.
(g)Excludes TDRs that are classified as held for sale, nearly all of which are accounted for under the fair value option.
(h)Amounts also included in nonperforming loans above.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Nonperforming C&I loans increased $70 million from December 31, 2019, to $144 million on December 31, 2020, while the NPL ratio increased 6 basis points to 0.43% of C&I loans, primarily driven by acquired NPLs from IBKC. The 30+ delinquency ratio was 0.05% of total loans as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019. Net charge-offs were $120 million in 2020, $93 million higher than in 2019, primarily driven by losses in the energy portfolio.
In the CRE portfolio, nonperforming loans were up $56 million from December 31, 2019. Nonperforming loans as a percentage of total CRE loans increased 44 basis points from 2019 to 0.48% as of December 31, 2020. Accruing delinquencies as a percentage of period-end loans increased 17 basis points to 0.19% as of December 31, 2020 as total accruing delinquencies increased $22 million. Net charge-offs were minimal in both 2020 and 2019.
Overall, performance of the consumer real estate portfolio remained stable in 2020 despite slight deterioration in some metrics compared to prior year. While NPLs were up 17 basis points from the prior year, 30+ delinquencies were down 12 basis points from December 31, 2019. Driven by acquired loans, nonperforming loans increased $96 million from the end of 2019 to $182 million on December 31, 2020. Loans delinquent 30 or more days and still accruing increased $26 million to $69 million as of December 31, 2020. The portfolio realized net recoveries of $10 million in 2020 compared to net recoveries of $12 million in 2019.
Similar to the consumer real estate portfolio, asset quality in the credit card and other consumer loan portfolio remained stable in 2020. Despite an uptick in the NPL%, 30+ delinquencies decreased to 0.87% of total loans as of December 31, 2020.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table provides nonperforming assets by business segment:
Table 20-Nonperforming Assets by Segment
Certain previously reported amounts have been reclassified to agree with current presentation.
(a)Excludes loans and leases that are 90 or more days past due and still accruing interest.
(b)Excludes loans classified as held for sale.
(c)Excludes foreclosed real estate and receivables related to government insured mortgages of $5 million, $10 million, $3 million during 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
(d)Ratio is non-performing assets related to the loan and lease portfolio to total loans plus foreclosed real estate and other assets.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table provides an activity rollforward of OREO balances for December 31, 2020 and 2019. The balance of OREO, exclusive of inventory from government insured mortgages, decreased $1 million to $15 million as of December 31, 2020, as acquired OREO from IBKC was offset by disposals during the year.
Table 21-Rollforward of OREO
(a)Excludes OREO and receivables related to government insured mortgages of $5 million and $10 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Past Due Loans and Potential Problem Assets
Past due loans are loans contractually past due as to interest or principal payments, but which have not yet been put on nonaccrual status. In accordance with revised Interagency Guidance issued in 2020, FHN is not required to designate loans with deferrals granted in response to COVID-19 as past due because of such deferrals. If a borrower defers payment, this may result in no contractual payments being past due, and as such, loans would not be considered past due during the period of deferral, and as a result, are excluded from the table and discussion that follows. For additional information on borrower deferrals, see Lending Assistance for Borrowers in the Market Uncertainties and Prospective Trends section of this Report.
Loans in the portfolio that are 90 days or more past due and still accruing were $17 million on December 31, 2020, a decrease of $5 million compared to December 31, 2019. Loans 30 to 89 days past due increased $64 million from year-end 2019 to $100 million on December 31, 2020. The
increase was driven by acquired loans, most notably in the CRE and consumer real estate portfolios.
Potential problem assets represent those assets where information about possible credit problems of borrowers has caused management to have serious doubts about the borrower’s ability to comply with present repayment terms and includes loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing. This definition is believed to be substantially consistent with the standards established by the Federal banking regulators for loans classified as substandard. At year-end 2020, potential problem assets in the loan portfolio increased $371 million from December 31, 2019 and $20 million from September 30, 2020 to $718 million on December 31, 2020. The increase year-over-year in potential problem assets was due to acquired loans in 2020 and a net increase in classified commercial loans within the C&I portfolio. The current expectation of losses from potential problem assets has been included in management’s analysis for assessing the adequacy of the allowance for loan and lease losses.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Table 22-Accruing Delinquencies and Other Credit Disclosures
(a)Excludes loans classified as held for sale.
(b)Amounts are not included in nonperforming/nonaccrual loans.
(c)Guaranteed loans include FHA, VA, and GNMA loans repurchased through the GNMA buyout program.
(d)Includes past due loans.
Troubled Debt Restructuring and Loan Modifications
As part of FHN’s ongoing risk management practices, FHN attempts to work with borrowers when appropriate to extend or modify loan terms to better align with their current ability to repay. Extensions and modifications to loans are made in accordance with internal policies and guidelines which conform to regulatory guidance. Each occurrence is unique to the borrower and is evaluated separately. In a situation where an economic concession has been granted to a borrower that is experiencing financial difficulty, FHN identifies and reports that loan as a TDR.
For loan modifications that were made during the year ended December 31, 2020 that met the TDR relief provisions outlined in either the CARES Act, as extended by the CAA, or revised Interagency Guidance, FHN has excluded these modifications from consideration as a TDR, and has excluded loans with these qualifying modifications from designation as a TDR in the information and discussion that follows. See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies
and Note 4 - Loans and Leases for further discussion regarding TDRs and loan modifications.
Commercial Loan Modifications
As part of FHN’s credit risk management governance processes, the Loan Rehab and Recovery Department (LRRD) is responsible for managing most commercial relationships with borrowers whose financial condition has deteriorated to such an extent that the credits are being considered for impairment, classified as substandard or worse, placed on nonaccrual status, foreclosed or in process of foreclosure, or in active or contemplated litigation. LRRD has the authority and responsibility to enter into workout and/or rehabilitation agreements with troubled commercial borrowers in order to mitigate and/or minimize the amount of credit losses recognized from these problem assets. While every circumstance is different, LRRD will generally use forbearance agreements (generally 6-12 months) as an element of commercial loan workouts, which might include reduced interest rates, reduced payments, release of guarantor, or entering into short sale agreements.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The individual impairment assessments completed on commercial loans in accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification Topic related to Troubled Debt Restructurings (“ASC 310-40”) include loans classified as TDRs as well as loans that may have been modified yet not classified as TDRs by management. For example, a modification of loan terms that management would generally not consider to be a TDR could be a temporary extension of maturity to allow a borrower to complete an asset sale whereby the proceeds of such transaction are to be paid to satisfy the outstanding debt. Additionally, a modification that extends the term of a loan but does not involve reduction of principal or accrued interest, in which the interest rate is adjusted to reflect current market rates for similarly situated borrowers, is not considered a TDR. Nevertheless, each assessment will take into account any modified terms and will be comprehensive to ensure appropriate impairment assessment. If individual impairment is identified, management will either hold specific reserves on the amount of impairment, or, if the loan is collateral dependent, write down the carrying amount of the asset to the net realizable value of the collateral.
Consumer Loan Modifications
FHN does not currently participate in any of the loan modification programs sponsored by the U.S. government but does generally structure modified consumer loans using the parameters of the former Home Affordable Modification Program. Generally, a majority of loans modified under any such proprietary programs are classified as TDRs.
Within the HELOC and RE installment loans classes of the consumer portfolio segment, TDRs are typically modified by reducing the interest rate (in increments of 25 basis points to a minimum of 1% for up to 5 years) and a possible maturity date extension to reach an affordable housing debt-to-income ratio. After 5 years, the interest rate generally returns to the original interest rate prior to modification; for certain modifications, the modified interest rate increases 2% per year until the original interest rate prior to modification is achieved. Permanent mortgage TDRs are typically modified by reducing the interest rate (in increments of 25 basis points to a minimum of 2% for up to 5 years) and a possible maturity date extension to reach an affordable housing debt-to-income ratio. After 5 years, the interest rate steps up 1 percent every year until it reaches the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Weekly Survey Rate cap. Contractual maturities may be extended to 40 years on permanent mortgages and to 30 years for consumer real estate loans. Within the credit card class of the consumer portfolio segment, TDRs are typically modified through either a short-term credit card hardship program or a longer-term credit card
workout program. In the credit card hardship program, borrowers may be granted rate and payment reductions for 6 months to 1 year. In the credit card workout program, clients are granted a rate reduction to 0% and term extensions for up to 5 years to pay off the remaining balance.
Following classification as a TDR, modified loans within the consumer portfolio, which were previously evaluated for impairment on a collective basis determined by their smaller balances and homogenous nature, become subject to the impairment guidance in ASC 310-10-35, which requires individual evaluation of the debt for impairment. However, as applicable accounting guidance allows, FHN may aggregate certain smaller-balance homogeneous TDRs and use historical statistics, such as aggregated charge-off amounts and average amounts recovered, along with a composite effective interest rate to measure impairment when such impaired loans have risk characteristics in common.
On December 31, 2020 and 2019, FHN had $307 million and $206 million portfolio loans classified as TDRs, respectively. For TDRs in the loan portfolio, FHN had loan loss reserves of $12 million and $20 million, or 4% and 10% of TDR balances, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Additionally, FHN had $42 million and $51 million of HFS loans classified as TDRs at year-end 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total held-to-maturity TDRs increased $101 million, with the increase attributable to the addition of IBKC TDRs in the current year, primarily in the commercial portfolio.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table provides a summary of TDRs for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. In accordance with regulatory guidance, loans that were modified during the year ended December 31, 2020 whose modifications met criteria outlined in either the CARES Act or revised interagency statement were not accounted for as a TDR and have been excluded from the table below.
Table 23 -Troubled Debt Restructurings
(a)In 2020, the permanent mortgage portfolio was combined into the consumer real estate portfolio. All prior periods have been revised for comparability.
(b)Balances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, include $11 million and $13 million, respectively, of discharged bankruptcies.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
RISK MANAGEMENT
FHN derives revenue from providing services and, in many cases, assuming and managing risk for profit which exposes FHN to business strategy and reputational, interest rate, liquidity, market, capital adequacy, operational, compliance, and credit risks that require ongoing oversight and management. FHN has an enterprise-wide approach to risk governance, measurement, management, and reporting including an economic capital allocation process that is tied to risk profiles used to measure risk-adjusted returns. Through an enterprise-wide risk governance structure and a statement of risk tolerance approved by the Board, management continually evaluates the balance of risk/return and earnings volatility with shareholder value.
FHN’s enterprise-wide risk governance structure begins with the Board. The Board, working with the Executive & Risk Committee of the Board, establishes FHN’s risk tolerance by approving policies and limits that provide standards for the nature and the level of risk FHN is willing to assume. The Board regularly receives reports on management’s performance against FHN’s risk tolerance primarily through the Board’s Executive & Risk and Audit Committees.
To further support the risk governance provided by the Board, FHN has established accountabilities, control processes, procedures, and a management governance structure designed to align risk management with risk-taking throughout FHN. The control procedures are aligned with FHN’s four components of risk governance: (1) Specific Risk Committees; (2) the Risk Management Organization; (3) Business Unit Risk Management; and (4) Independent Assurance Functions.
1.Specific Risk Committees: The Board has delegated authority to the Chief Executive Officer to manage Business Strategy and Reputation Risk, and the general business affairs of FHN under the Board’s oversight. The CEO utilizes the executive management team and the Management Risk Committee to carry out these duties and to analyze existing and emerging strategic and reputation risks and determines the appropriate course of action. The Management Risk Committee is comprised of the CEO and certain officers designated by the CEO. The Management Risk Committee is supported by a set of specific risk committees focused on unique risk types (e.g. liquidity,
credit, operational, etc). These risk committees provide a mechanism that assembles the necessary expertise and perspectives of the management team to discuss emerging risk issues, monitor FHN’s risk-taking activities, and evaluate specific transactions and exposures. These committees also monitor the direction and trend of risks relative to business strategies and market conditions and direct management to respond to risk issues.
2.The Risk Management Organization: FHN’s risk management organization, led by the Chief Risk Officer and Chief Credit Officer, provides objective oversight of risk-taking activities. The risk management organization translates FHN’s overall risk tolerance into approved limits and formal policies and is supported by corporate staff functions, including the Corporate Secretary, Legal, Finance, Human Resources, and Technology. Risk management also works with business units and functional experts to establish appropriate operating standards and monitor business practices in relation to those standards. Additionally, risk management proactively works with business units and senior management to focus management on key risks in FHN and emerging trends that may change FHN’s risk profile. The Chief Risk Officer has overall responsibility and accountability for enterprise risk management and aggregate risk reporting.
3.Business Unit Risk Management: FHN’s business units are responsible for identifying, acknowledging, quantifying, mitigating, and managing all risks arising within their respective units. They determine and execute their business strategies, which puts them closest to the changing nature of risks and they are best able to take the needed actions to manage and mitigate those risks. The business units are supported by the risk management organization that helps identify and consider risks when making business decisions. Management processes, structure, and policies are designed to help ensure compliance with laws and regulations as well as provide
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
organizational clarity for authority, decision-making, and accountability. The risk governance structure supports and promotes the escalation of material items to executive management and the Board.
4.Independent Assurance Functions: Internal Audit, Credit Assurance Services, and Model Validation provide an independent and objective assessment of the design and execution of FHN’s internal control system, including management processes, risk governance, and policies and procedures. These groups’ activities are designed to provide reasonable assurance that risks are appropriately identified and communicated; resources are safeguarded; significant financial, managerial, and operating information is complete, accurate, and reliable; and employee actions are in compliance with FHN’s policies and applicable laws and regulations. Internal Audit and CAS report to the Chief Audit Executive, who is appointed by and reports to the Audit Committee of the Board. Internal Audit reports quarterly to the Audit Committee of the Board, while CAS reports quarterly to the Executive & Risk Committee of the Board. Model Validation reports to the Chief Risk Officer and reports annually to the Audit Committee of the Board.
MARKET RISK MANAGEMENT
Market risk is the risk that changes in market conditions will adversely impact the value of assets or liabilities, or otherwise negatively impact FHN’s earnings. Market risk is inherent in the financial instruments associated with FHN’s operations, primarily trading activities within FHN Financial, but also through non-trading activities which are primarily affected by interest rate risk that is managed by the ALCO within FHN.
FHN is exposed to market risk related to the trading securities inventory and loans held for sale maintained by FHN Financial in connection with its fixed income distribution activities. Various types of securities inventory positions are procured for distribution to clients by the sales staff. When these securities settle on a delayed basis, they are considered forward contracts. Refer to the "Determination of Fair Value - Trading securities and trading liabilities" section of Note 24 - Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities, which section is incorporated into this MD&A by this reference.
FHN’s market risk appetite is approved by the Executive & Risk Committee of the Board of Directors and executed through management policies and procedures of ALCO and the FHN Financial Risk Committee. These policies contain various market risk limits including, for example, VaR limits for the trading securities inventory, and individual position limits and sector limits for products with credit risk, among others. Risk measures are computed and reviewed on a daily basis to ensure compliance with market risk management policies.
Value-at-Risk and Stress Testing
VaR is a statistical risk measure used to estimate the potential loss in value from adverse market movements over an assumed fixed holding period within a stated confidence level. FHN employs a model to compute daily VaR measures for its trading securities inventory. FHN computes VaR using historical simulation with a 1-year lookback period at a 99 percent confidence level and 1-day and 10-day time horizons. Additionally, FHN computes a Stressed VaR measure. The SVaR computation uses the same model but with model inputs reflecting historical data from a continuous 12-month period that reflects a period of significant financial stress appropriate for our trading securities portfolio.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
A summary of FHN's VaR and SVaR measures for 1-day and 10-day time horizons is as follows:
Table 24-VaR and SVaR Measures
2020 VaR and SVaR increased due to extreme volatility as a result of economic uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
FHN’s overall VaR measure includes both interest rate risk and credit spread risk. Separate measures of these component risks are as follows:
Table 25-Schedule of Risks Included in VaR
The potential risk of loss reflected by FHN’s VaR measures assumes the trading securities inventory is static. Because FHN Financial procures fixed income securities for purposes of distribution to clients, its trading securities inventory turns over regularly. Additionally, FHNF traders actively manage the trading securities inventory continuously throughout each trading day. Accordingly, FHN’s trading securities inventory is highly dynamic, rather than static. As a result, it would be rare for FHNF to incur a negative revenue day in its fixed income activities of the level indicated by its VaR measurements.
In addition to being used in FHN’s daily market risk management process, the VaR and SVaR measures are also used by FHN in computing its regulatory market risk capital requirements in accordance with the Market Risk Capital rules. For additional
information regarding FHN's capital adequacy refer to the "Capital" section of this MD&A.
FHN also performs stress tests on its trading securities portfolio to calculate the potential loss under various assumed market scenarios. Key assumed stresses used in those tests are:
Down 25 bps - assumes an instantaneous downward move in interest rates of 25 basis points at all points on the interest rate yield curve.
Up 25 bps - assumes an instantaneous upward move in interest rates of 25 basis points at all points on the interest rate yield curve.
Curve flattening - assumes an instantaneous flattening of the interest rate yield curve through an
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
increase in short-term rates and a decrease in long-term rates. The 2-year point on the Treasury yield curve is assumed to increase 15 basis points and the 10-year point on the Treasury yield curve is assumed to decrease 15 basis points. Shifts in other points on the yield curve are predicted based on their correlation to the 2-year and 10-year points.
Curve steepening - assumes an instantaneous steepening of the interest rate yield curve through a decrease in short-term rates and an increase in long-term rates. The 2-year point on the Treasury yield curve is assumed to decrease 15 basis points and the 10-year point on the Treasury yield curve is assumed to increase 15 basis points. Shifts in other points on the yield curve are predicted based on their correlation to the 2-year and 10-year points.
Credit spread widening - assumes an instantaneous increase in credit spreads (the difference between yields on Treasury securities and non-Treasury securities) of 25 basis points.
Model Validation
Trading risk management personnel within FHN Financial have primary responsibility for model risk management with respect to the model used by FHN to compute its VaR measures and perform stress testing on the trading inventory. Among other procedures, these personnel monitor model results and perform periodic backtesting as part of an ongoing process of validating the accuracy of the model. These model risk management activities are subject to annual review by FHN’s Model Validation Group, an independent assurance group charged with oversight responsibility for FHN’s model risk management.
INTEREST RATE RISK MANAGEMENT
Interest rate risk is the risk to earnings or capital arising from movement in interest rates. ALCO is responsible for overseeing the management of existing and emerging interest rate risk in the company within risk tolerances established by the Board. FHN primarily manages interest rate risk by structuring the balance sheet to maintain a desired level of associated earnings and to protect the economic value of FHN’s capital.
Net interest income and the value of equity are affected by changes in the level of market interest rates because of the differing repricing characteristics of assets and liabilities, the exercise of prepayment options held by loan clients, the early withdrawal options held by deposit clients, and changes in the basis between and changing shapes of the various yield curves used to price assets and liabilities. To
isolate the repricing, basis, option, and yield curve components of overall interest rate risk, FHN employs Gap, Earnings at Risk, and Economic Value of Equity analyses generated by a balance sheet simulation model.
Net Interest Income Simulation Analysis
The information provided in this section, including the discussion regarding the outcomes of simulation analysis and rate shock analysis, is forward-looking. Actual results, if the assumed scenarios were to occur, could differ because of interest rate movements, the ability of management to execute its business plans, and other factors, including those presented in the Forward-Looking Statements section of this Report.
Management uses a simulation model to measure interest rate risk and to formulate strategies to improve balance sheet positioning, earnings, or both, within FHN’s interest rate risk, liquidity, and capital guidelines. Interest rate exposure is measured by forecasting 12 months of NII under various interest rate scenarios and comparing the percentage change in NII for each scenario to a base case scenario where interest rates remain unchanged. Assumptions are made regarding future balance sheet composition, interest rate movements, and loan and deposit pricing. In addition, assumptions are made about the magnitude of asset prepayments and earlier than anticipated deposit withdrawals. The results of these scenarios help FHN develop strategies for managing exposure to interest rate risk. While management believes the assumptions used and scenarios selected in its simulations are reasonable, simulation modeling provides only an estimate, not a precise calculation, of exposure to any given change in interest rates.
Based on a static balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, NII exposures over the next 12 months assuming rate shocks of plus 25 basis points, 50 basis points, 100 basis points, and 200 basis points are estimated to have favorable variances of 2.0%, 3.8%, 7.5%, and 12.6%, respectively compared to base NII. A steepening yield curve scenario where long-term rates increase by 50 basis points and short-term rates are static, results in a favorable NII variance of 1.0%. A flattening yield curve scenario where long-term rates decrease by 50 basis points and short-term rates are static, results in an unfavorable NII variance of 1.1%. Rate shocks of minus 25 basis points and 50 basis points result in unfavorable NII variances of 1.9% and 2.1%, assuming the absence of negative rates. These hypothetical scenarios are used to create a risk
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
measurement framework, and do not necessarily represent management’s current view of future interest rates or market developments.
FHN’s net interest income has been, and likely will continue to be, impacted by the disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic and the low rate environment. The increase in the unemployment rate, client loan deferral requests, the impact of government assistance programs, and other developments have influenced net interest income results. FHN is monitoring current economic trends and potential exposures closely.
Fair Value Shock Analysis
Interest rate risk and the slope of the yield curve also affect the fair value of FHN's trading inventory that is reflected in noninterest income.
Generally, low or declining interest rates with a positively sloped yield curve tend to increase income through higher demand for fixed income products. Additionally, the fair value of FHN's trading inventory can fluctuate as a result of differences between current interest rates and the interest rates of fixed income securities in the trading inventory.
Derivatives
In the normal course of business, FHN utilizes various financial instruments (including derivative contracts and credit-related agreements) to manage the risk of loss arising from adverse changes in the fair value of certain financial instruments generally caused by changes in interest rates including FHN's securities inventory, certain term borrowings, and certain loans. Additionally, FHN may enter into derivative contracts in order to meet clients' needs. However, such derivative contracts are typically offset with a derivative contract entered into with an upstream counterparty in order to mitigate risk associated with changes in interest rates.
The simulation models and related hedging strategies discussed above exclude the dynamics related to how fee income and noninterest expense may be affected by actual changes in interest rates or expectations of changes. See Note 22 - Derivatives for additional discussion of these instruments.
CAPITAL RISK MANAGEMENT AND ADEQUACY
The capital management objectives of FHN are to provide capital sufficient to cover the risks inherent in FHN’s businesses, to maintain excess capital to well-capitalized standards and Board policy, and to assure ready access to the capital markets. The Capital & Stress Testing Committee, chaired by the Senior Vice
President and Corporate Treasurer, reports to ALCO and is responsible for capital management oversight and provides a forum for addressing management issues related to capital adequacy. This committee reviews sources and uses of capital, key capital ratios, segment economic capital allocation methodologies, coordinates the annual enterprise-wide stress testing process, and other factors in monitoring and managing current capital levels, as well as potential future sources and uses of capital. The Capital & Stress Testing Committee also recommends capital management policies, which are submitted for approval to ALCO and the Executive & Risk Committee and the Board as necessary.
OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Operational risk is the risk of loss from inadequate or failed internal processes, people, or systems or from external events including data or network security breaches of FHN or of third parties affecting FHN or its clients. This risk is inherent in all businesses. Operational risk is divided into the following risk areas, which have been established at the corporate level to address these risks across the entire organization:
•Business Continuity Planning
•Records Management
•Compliance/Legal
•Program Governance
•Fiduciary
•Financial Crimes (including Bank Secrecy Act, know your customer, security, and fraud)
•Financial (including disclosure controls and procedures)
•Information Technology (including cybersecurity)
•Vendor
Management, measurement, and reporting of operational risk are overseen by the Operational Risk, Fiduciary, Financial Governance, FHN Financial Risk, and Investment Rationalization Board Committees. Key representatives from the business segments, operating units, and supporting units are represented on these committees as appropriate. These governance committees manage the individual operational risk types across FHN by setting standards, monitoring activity, initiating actions, and reporting exposures and results. Key Committee activities and decisions are reported to the appropriate governance committee or included in the Enterprise Risk Report, a quarterly analysis of risk within the organization that is provided to the Executive and Risk Committee. Emphasis is dedicated to refinement of processes and tools to aid
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
in measuring and managing material operational risks and providing for a culture of awareness and accountability.
COMPLIANCE RISK MANAGEMENT
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, or loss to reputation as a result of failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, self-regulatory organization standards, and codes of conduct applicable to FHN’s activities. Management, measurement, and reporting of compliance risk are overseen by the Operational Risk Committee. Key executives from the business segments, legal, risk management, and service functions are represented on the Committee. Summary reports of Committee activities and decisions are provided to the appropriate governance committees. Reports include the status of regulatory activities, internal compliance program initiatives, compliance testing results and evaluation of emerging compliance risk areas.
CREDIT RISK MANAGEMENT
Credit risk is the risk of loss due to adverse changes in a borrower’s or counterparty’s ability to meet its financial obligations under agreed upon terms. FHN is subject to credit risk in lending, trading, investing, liquidity/funding, and asset management activities although lending activities have the most exposure to credit risk. The nature and amount of credit risk depends on the types of transactions, the structure of those transactions, collateral received, the use of guarantors and the parties involved.
FHN assesses and manages credit risk through a series of policies, processes, measurement systems, and controls. The Credit Risk Management Committee is responsible for overseeing the management of existing and emerging credit risks in the company within the broad risk tolerances established by the Board. The CRMC reports through the Management Risk Committee. The Credit Risk Management function, led by the Chief Credit Officer, provides strategic and tactical credit leadership by maintaining policies, overseeing credit approval, assessing new credit products, strategies and processes, and managing portfolio composition and performance.
While the Credit Risk function oversees FHN’s credit risk management, there is significant coordination between the business lines and the Credit Risk function in order to manage FHN’s credit risk and maintain strong asset quality. The Credit Risk function recommends portfolio, industry/sector, and individual client limits to the Executive & Risk Committee of the
Board for approval. Adherence to these approved limits is vigorously monitored by Credit Risk which provides recommendations to slow or cease lending to the business lines as commitments near established lending limits. Credit Risk also ensures subject matter experts are providing oversight, support and credit approvals, particularly in the specialty lending areas where industry-specific knowledge is required. Management emphasizes general portfolio servicing such that emerging risks are able to be spotted early enough to correct potential deficiencies, prevent further credit deterioration, and mitigate credit losses.
The Credit Risk Management function assesses the asset quality trends and results, as well as lending processes, adherence to underwriting guidelines (portfolio-specific underwriting guidelines are discussed further in the Asset Quality Trends section), and utilizes this information to inform management regarding the current state of credit quality and as a factor of the estimation process for determining the allowance for loan losses. The CRMC reviews on a periodic basis various reports issued by assurance functions which provide an independent assessment of the adequacy of loan servicing, grading accuracy, and other key functions. Additionally, CRMC is presented with and discusses various portfolios, lending activity and lending-related projects.
All of the above activities are subject to independent review by FHN’s Credit Assurance Services Group. CAS reports to the Chief Audit Executive, who is appointed by and reports to the Audit Committee of the Board, and provides quarterly reports to the Executive & Risk Committee of the Board. CAS is charged with providing the Executive & Risk Committee of the Board and executive management with independent, objective, and timely assessments of FHN’s portfolio quality, credit policies, and credit risk management processes.
LIQUIDITY RISK MANAGEMENT
ALCO is also responsible for liquidity management: the funding of assets with liabilities of appropriate duration, while mitigating the risk of unexpected cash needs. ALCO and the Board of Directors have adopted a Liquidity Policy. The objective of the Liquidity Policy is to ensure that FHN meets its cash and collateral obligations promptly, in a cost-effective manner and with the highest degree of reliability. The maintenance of adequate levels of asset and liability liquidity should provide FHN with the ability to meet both expected and unexpected cash and collateral needs. Key liquidity ratios, asset liquidity levels and the amount available from funding sources are reported to ALCO on a regular basis. FHN’s Liquidity
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Policy establishes liquidity limits that are deemed appropriate for FHN’s risk profile.
In accordance with the Liquidity Policy, ALCO manages FHN’s exposure to liquidity risk through a dynamic, real time forecasting methodology. Base liquidity forecasts are reviewed by ALCO and are updated as financial conditions dictate. In addition to the baseline liquidity reports, robust stress testing of assumptions and funds availability are periodically reviewed. FHN maintains a contingency funding plan that may be executed, should unexpected difficulties arise in accessing funding that affects FHN, the industry as a whole, or both. Subject to market conditions and compliance with applicable regulatory requirements from time to time, funds are available from a number of sources including the available-for-sale securities portfolio, dealer and commercial client repurchase agreements, access to the overnight and term Federal Funds markets, incremental borrowing capacity at the FHLB ($14.7 billion was available at December 31, 2020), brokered deposits, loan sales, syndications, and access to the Federal Reserve Bank.
Core deposits are a significant source of funding and have historically been a stable source of liquidity for banks. Generally, core deposits represent funding from a financial institution's client base which provide inexpensive, predictable pricing. The FDIC insures these deposits to the extent authorized by law. Generally, these limits are $250 thousand per account owner for interest bearing and non-interest bearing accounts. The ratio of total loans, excluding loans HFS and restricted real estate loans, to core deposits was 97% on December 31, 2020 compared to 98% on December 31, 2019.
FHN may also use unsecured short-term borrowings as a source of liquidity. Federal funds purchased from correspondent bank clients are considered to be substantially more stable than funds purchased in the national broker markets for federal funds due to the long, historical, and reciprocal nature of banking services provided by FHN to these correspondent banks. The remainder of FHN’s wholesale short-term borrowings consists of securities sold under agreements to repurchase transactions accounted for as secured borrowings with business clients or broker dealer counterparties.
Both FHN and First Horizon Bank may access the debt markets in order to provide funding through the issuance of senior or subordinated unsecured debt subject to market conditions and compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. In May 2020, FHN issued $800 million of senior notes. In April 2020, First Horizon Bank issued $450 million of subordinated notes. These subordinated notes qualify
as Tier 2 capital for First Horizon Bank as well as FHN, up to certain regulatory limits for minority interest capital instruments.
Both FHN and First Horizon Bank have the ability to generate liquidity by issuing preferred equity, and (for FHN) by issuing common equity, subject to market conditions and compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. As of December 31, 2020, FHN had outstanding $470 million in non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, which includes $145 million issued in May 2020. As of December 31, 2020, First Horizon Bank and subsidiaries had outstanding preferred shares of $295 million, which are reflected as noncontrolling interest on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Parent company liquidity is primarily provided by cash flows stemming from dividends and interest payments collected from subsidiaries. These sources of cash represent the primary sources of funds to pay cash dividends to shareholders and principal and interest to debt holders of FHN. The amount paid to the parent company through First Horizon Bank common dividends is managed as part of FHN’s overall cash management process, subject to applicable regulatory restrictions. Certain regulatory restrictions exist regarding the ability of First Horizon Bank to transfer funds to FHN in the form of cash, common dividends, loans, or advances. At any given time, the pertinent portions of those regulatory restrictions allow First Horizon Bank to declare preferred or common dividends without prior regulatory approval in an aggregate amount equal to First Horizon Bank’s retained net income for the two most recent completed years plus the current year to date. For any period, First Horizon Bank’s ‘retained net income’ generally is equal to First Horizon Bank’s regulatory net income reduced by the preferred and common dividends declared by First Horizon Bank. Applying the dividend restrictions imposed under applicable federal and state rules as outlined above, the Bank’s total amount available for dividends was $897 million as of January 1, 2021. Consequently, on that date the Bank could pay common dividends up to that amount to its sole common stockholder, FHN, or to its preferred shareholders without prior regulatory approval. Additionally, a capital conservation buffer must be maintained (as described in the Capital section of this Report) to avoid restrictions on dividends.
First Horizon Bank declared and paid common dividends to the parent company in the amount of $180 million in 2020 and $345 million in 2019. In January 2021, First Horizon Bank declared and paid a common dividend to the parent company in the amount of $183 million. First Horizon Bank declared
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
and paid preferred dividends in each quarter of 2020 and 2019 and declared preferred dividends in the first quarter of 2021 which are payable in April 2021.
Payment of a dividend to shareholders of FHN is dependent on several factors which are considered by the Board. These factors include FHN’s current and prospective capital, liquidity, and other needs, applicable regulatory restrictions, and also availability of funds to FHN through a dividend from First Horizon Bank. FHN also must meet capital conservation buffer requirements to avoid restrictions on dividends. Additionally, banking regulators generally require insured banks and bank holding companies to pay cash dividends only out of current operating earnings. Consequently, the decision of whether FHN will pay future dividends and the amount of dividends will be affected by current operating results. FHN paid a cash dividend of $0.15 per common share on January 4, 2021. FHN paid cash dividends of $1,550 per Series A preferred share and $1,625 per Series E preferred share on January 11, 2021 and $331.25 per Series B preferred share and $165 per Series C preferred share on February 1, 2021. In addition, in January 2021, the Board approved cash dividends per share in the following amounts:
CREDIT RATINGS
FHN is currently able to fund a majority of the balance sheet through core deposits, which are generally not as sensitive to FHN’s credit ratings as other types of funding. However, maintaining adequate credit ratings on debt issues and preferred stock is critical to liquidity should FHN need to access funding from other sources, including from long-term debt issuances and certain brokered deposits, at an attractive rate. The availability and cost of funds other than core deposits is also dependent upon marketplace perceptions of the financial soundness of FHN, which include such factors as capital levels, asset quality, and reputation. The availability of core deposit funding is stabilized by federal deposit insurance, which can be removed only in extraordinary circumstances, but may also be influenced to some extent by the same factors that affect other funding sources. FHN’s credit ratings are also referenced in various respects in agreements
with certain derivative counterparties as discussed in Note 22 - Derivatives.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
The following table provides FHN’s most recent credit ratings:
Table 26 - Credit Ratings
A rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities and is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time and should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
(a) Last change in ratings was on May 14, 2015; ratings/outlook affirmed on November 5, 2019.
(b) Last change in ratings was on May 6, 2020 and outlook was affirmed.
(c) Ratings are preliminary/implied.
REPURCHASE OBLIGATIONS, OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS, AND OTHER CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
Repurchase Accrual Methodology
Prior to September 2008, FHN originated loans through its pre-2009 mortgage business, primarily first lien home loans, with the intention of selling them. As discussed in Note 17 - Contingencies and Other Disclosures, FHN's principal remaining exposures for those activities relate to (i) indemnification claims by underwriters, loan purchasers, and other parties which assert that FHN-originated loans caused or contributed to losses which FHN is legally obliged to indemnify, and (ii) indemnification or other claims related to FHN's servicing of pre-2009 mortgage loans.
FHN’s approach for determining the adequacy of the repurchase and foreclosure reserve has evolved, sometimes substantially, based on changes in information available. Repurchase/make-whole rates vary based on purchaser, vintage, and claim type. For those loans repurchased or covered by a make-whole payment, cumulative average loss severities range between 50 and 60 percent of the UPB.
Repurchase Accrual Approach
In determining potential loss content, claims are analyzed by purchaser, vintage, and claim type. FHN
considers various inputs including claim rate estimates, historical average repurchase and loss severity rates, mortgage insurance cancellations, and mortgage insurance curtailment requests. Inputs are applied to claims in the active pipeline, as well as to historical average inflows to estimate loss content related to potential future inflows. Management also evaluates the nature of claims from purchasers and/or servicers of loans sold to determine if qualitative adjustments are appropriate.
Repurchase and Foreclosure Liability
The repurchase and foreclosure liability is comprised of accruals to cover estimated loss content in the active pipeline (consisting of mortgage loan repurchase, make-whole, foreclosure/servicing demands and certain related exposures), estimated future inflows, and estimated loss content related to certain known claims not currently included in the active pipeline. The liability contemplates repurchase/make-whole and damages obligations and estimates for probable incurred losses associated with loan populations excluded from the settlements with the GSEs, as well as other whole loans sold, mortgage insurance cancellations rescissions, and loans included in bulk servicing sales effected prior to the settlements with the GSEs. FHN compares the estimated probable incurred losses determined under the applicable loss estimation approaches for the respective periods with current reserve levels. Changes in the estimated required liability levels are
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
recorded as necessary through the repurchase and foreclosure provision. The repurchase and foreclosure liability increased to $16 million on December 31, 2020 from $15 million on December 31, 2019.
Other Contractual Obligations
Pension obligations are funded by FHN to provide current and future benefits to participants in FHN’s noncontributory, defined benefit pension plan. On December 31, 2020, the annual measurement date, pension obligations (representing the present value of estimated future benefit payments), including obligations of the unfunded plans, were $893 million with $896 million of assets (measured at current fair value) in the qualified plan’s trust to fund the qualified plan’s obligations. The discount rate for 2020 of 2.63% for the qualified pension plan and 2.24% for the nonqualified supplemental executive retirement plan was determined by using a hypothetical AA yield curve represented by a series of annualized individual discount rates from one-half to thirty years. The discount rates for the pension and nonqualified supplemental executive retirement plans are selected based on data specific to FHN’s plans and participant populations. See Note 18 - Pension, Savings, and Other Employee Benefits for additional information. As of December 31, 2020, the plan assets exceeded the projected benefit obligation and the accumulated benefit obligation for the qualified pension plan. Decisions to contribute to the plan are based upon pension funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act, the maximum amount deductible under the Internal Revenue Code, the actual
performance of plan assets, and trends in the regulatory environment. FHN made no contributions to the qualified pension plan in 2020 and 2019 and made an insignificant contribution to the qualified pension plan in 2018. Management does not currently anticipate that FHN will make a contribution to the qualified pension plan in 2021.
The nonqualified pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans, excluding the retiree medical plan, are unfunded. Benefit payments under the non-qualified plans were $5 million in 2020. FHN anticipates 2021 benefit payments to be $5 million.
FHN has various other financial obligations which may require future cash payments. The following table sets forth contractual obligations representing required and potential cash outflows as of December 31, 2020. Purchase obligations represent obligations under agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on FHN and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. In addition, FHN enters into commitments to extend credit to borrowers, including loan commitments, standby letters of credit, and commercial letters of credit.
These commitments do not necessarily represent future cash requirements in that these commitments often expire without being drawn upon and are not included in the table.
Table 27-Contractual Obligations as of December 31, 2020
(a)Excludes a $70 million liability for unrecognized tax benefits as the timing of payment cannot be reasonably estimated.
(b)Amounts do not include interest.
(c)See Note 9 - Deposits for further details.
(d)See Note 11 - Term Borrowings for further details.
(e)See Note 6 - Premises, Equipment and Leases for further details.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
MARKET UNCERTAINTIES AND PROSPECTIVE TRENDS
FHN’s future results could be affected both positively and negatively by several known trends. Key among those are changes in the U.S. and global economy and outlook, government actions affecting interest rates, and the availability and administration of stimulus relief for the economy. Additional impacts include how the pandemic affects FHN’s clients, as well as political uncertainty, potential changes in federal policies and the potential impact to our clients, and FHN’s strategic initiatives.
The global COVID-19 pandemic has led to periods of significant volatility in financial commodities (including oil and gas) and other markets, and has adversely affected FHN’s and its clients' ability to conduct normal business, and could harm FHN’s business and future results of operations.
In March 2020, the Federal Reserve lowered short-term interest rates twice and started a “quantitative easing” program intended to lower longer-term interest rates and foster access to credit. The effective yields of 10-year and 30-year U.S. Treasury securities achieved record low rates and the U.S. Congress enacted relief legislation which, among other things, was intended to provide emergency credit to businesses at risk for failure from government and public actions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and to mitigate the severity of an economic recession. These changes in interest rates and the volatility in the market negatively impacted FHN’s net interest margin. Amortization of net processing fees related to government relief programs, including the Paycheck Protection Program, has offset a portion of the net interest margin decline.
The economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have significantly altered business in the U.S. and globally leading to partial or full business closures, individuals being furloughed or laid off, significant increases in unemployment, and workers being partially or wholly ordered to work from home. Disruption to FHN’s clients due to governmental and societal responses to COVID-19 have adversely affected FHN’s loan and deposit fee income, created downward loan migration and a corresponding increase in provision for credit losses. In addition, loan charge-offs may increase over time, especially if economic disruption related to the COVID-19 pandemic continues for an extended period of time. Furthermore, government programs under the CARES Act and other guidance intended to provide relief to clients through temporary modifications and
deferrals, may in some instances mask or postpone reporting of credit problems and potential defaults. In these circumstances, current credit quality indicators may not be reflective of the underlying health of FHN's portfolios.
It is difficult to predict the impact of these still-changing circumstances on FHN's businesses in the future, although we expect the overall impact to be less in 2021 than in 2020. The full extent of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and other events beyond our control will depend on uncertain future developments, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of new COVID strains, the effectiveness of vaccines on existing and new strains, and further actions governments may take to slow the spread of the virus, treat the ill, distribute the vaccines, and assist affected businesses.
FHN Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
The pandemic has resulted in modest operational disruptions for FHN. Clients’ physical access to banking centers has been restricted off and on in many markets, and many non-client-facing associates have worked largely on a remote basis. FHN has also implemented additional sick time and child care assistance for associates.
FHN is actively monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on clients and FHN’s credit quality. FHN continues to reach out to clients to discuss challenges and solutions, provide line draws and new extensions to existing clients, provide support for small businesses through the PPP (discussed in more detail below) and other stimulus programs, as well as provide lending and deposit assistance through deferrals and waived fees. Additionally, in certain sectors, FHN has reduced or stopped new lending.
Paycheck Protection Program
In 2020, Congress created the foundation for the PPP, under which qualifying businesses may receive loans from private lenders, such as FHN, that are fully guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. These loans potentially are partly or fully forgivable, depending upon the borrower’s use of the funds and maintenance of employment levels; to the extent forgiven, the borrower is relieved from payment, while the lender still is paid from the program. Congress revised the initial PPP multiple times during 2020 and created a second round of PPP lending with the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 which was signed into law in December 2020. Lenders making PPP loans are paid a fee by the Small Business
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Administration. Gross lender fees range from 1% to 5% of the loan amount. Agents may be utilized to assist in the preparation of PPP applications, with the costs of the agent potentially being paid from the gross lender fee. Additionally, originating banks have certain internal costs of originating PPP loans.
At December 31, 2020, FHN had 32,510 PPP loans with an aggregate principal of $4.1 billion. For these loans, FHN anticipates being paid net lender fees of approximately $37 million in relation to the PPP loans held at year-end. FHN has decided to hold its PPP loans for investment. Therefore, the amount of SBA fees net of total direct origination costs are deferred as a discount to the recorded carrying value of the PPP loans. This discount is being amortized prospectively to interest income. SBA loan forgiveness payments are considered prepayments of the related loans. Under existing accounting principles, amortization of net origination fees can reflect expected prepayment activity if prepayments are determined to be probable and both the timing and volume can be reasonably estimated. Based on the current terms of the PPP loans, including the expected end of the payment deferral period, FHN estimates that substantially all of the prepayment-eligible portions of existing PPP loans will be prepaid by the end of 2021 as these loans are forgiven. These estimated prepayments result in a similar amount of the net fees being recognized in interest income.
Since PPP loans carry a full SBA guarantee, they do not have any credit risk and will not affect the amount of provision and ALLL recorded. FHN has assigned a risk weight of zero to PPP loans for regulatory capital purposes.
Lending Assistance for Borrowers
Other client support initiatives include incremental lending assistance for borrowers through delayed payment programs and fee waivers. The following table provides the UPB of loans related to deferrals granted to FHN’s clients that have been processed through December 31, 2020.
Commercial deferrals processed in our different lines of business were comprised primarily of professional commercial real estate (44% or $132 million), general commercial (40% or $119 million), and private client (12% or $36 million).
LIBOR Reform
In 2017, the Chief Executive of the United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR), announced that it intends to halt persuading or compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after 2021. As a result, LIBOR as currently operated may not continue after 2021. FHN is not currently able to predict the impact that the transition from LIBOR will have on FHN; however, because FHN has instruments with floating rate terms based on LIBOR, FHN may experience increases in interest, dividends, and other costs relative to these instruments subsequent to 2021. Additionally, the transition from LIBOR could impact or change FHN’s hedge accounting practices. FHN has initiated efforts to 1) develop an inventory of affected loans, securities, and derivatives, 2) evaluate and assess modifications as needed to address loans outstanding at the time of LIBOR discontinuance, 3) obtain an understanding of the potential effects for applicable securities and derivatives, 4) assess revisions to systems, processes, and pricing needed to implement alternative reference rates, and (5) update fallback language for all new loans that reference LIBOR. In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, “Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting,” which provides several optional expedients and exceptions to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform. The scope of ASU 2020-04 was expanded with the January 2021 issuance of ASU 2021-01, "Scope". Refer to the Accounting Changes Issued but Not Currently Effective section of Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies for additional information.
Additionally, the IRS has released guidance that is intended to facilitate the transition of existing
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
contracts from LIBOR to new reference rates without triggering modification accounting or taxable exchange treatment for those contracts. This guidance specifies what must be met in order to qualify for the beneficial transition approach and FHN is considering this guidance in its transition plans.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
Management’s policy is to maintain the ALLL at a level sufficient to absorb expected credit losses in the loan and lease portfolio. Management performs periodic and systematic detailed reviews of its loan and lease portfolio to identify trends and to assess the overall collectability of the portfolio. Management believes the accounting estimate related to the ALLL is a “critical accounting estimate” as: (1) changes in it can materially affect the provision for loan and lease losses and net income, (2) it requires management to predict borrowers’ likelihood or capacity to repay, including evaluation of inherently uncertain future economic conditions, (3) prepayment activity must be projected to estimate the life of loans that often are shorter than contractual terms, (4) it requires estimation of a reasonable and supportable forecast period for credit losses for loan portfolio segments before reversion to historical loss levels over the remaining life of a loan and (5) expected future recoveries of amounts previously charged off must be estimated. Accordingly, this is a highly subjective process and requires significant judgment since it is difficult to evaluate current and future economic conditions in relation to an overall credit cycle and estimate the timing and extent of loss events that are expected to occur prior to end of a loan’s estimated life. The ALLL is increased by the provision for loan and lease losses and recoveries and is decreased by charged-off loans and leases. Principal loan amounts are charged off against the ALLL in the period in which the loan or any portion of the loan is deemed to be uncollectible. A management committee comprised of representatives from Risk Management, Finance, Credit, and Treasury performs a quarterly review of the assumptions used in FHN’s ALLL analytical models, makes qualitative assessments of the loan and lease portfolio, and determines if qualitative adjustments should be recommended to be added to the modeled results. On a quarterly basis, as a part of Enterprise Risk reporting and discussion, management addresses the credit reserve adequacy and credit losses with the Executive and Risk Committee of FHN’s Board of Directors.
FHN believes that the critical assumptions underlying the accounting estimates made by management include: (1) the commercial loan portfolio has been properly risk graded based on information about borrowers in specific industries and specific issues with respect to single borrowers; (2) borrower specific information made available to FHN is current and accurate; (3) the loan portfolio has been segmented properly and individual loans have similar credit risk characteristics and will behave similarly; (4) the lives for loan portfolio pools have been estimated properly, including consideration of expected prepayments; (5) the economic forecasts utilized in the modeling of expected credit losses are reflective of future economic conditions; (6) entity-specific historical loss information has been properly assessed for all loan portfolio segments as the initial basis for estimating expected credit losses; (7) the reasonable and supportable periods for loan portfolio segments have been properly determined; (8) the reversion methodologies and timeframes for migration from the reasonable and supportable period to the use of historical loss rates are reasonable; (9) expected recoveries of prior charge off amounts have been properly estimated; and (10) qualitative adjustments to modeled loss results reasonably reflect expected future credit losses as of the date of the financial statements.
While management uses the best information available to establish the ALLL, future adjustments to the ALLL and methodology may be necessary if economic or other conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the estimates. Such adjustments to original estimates, as necessary, are made in the period in which these factors and other relevant considerations indicate that loss levels vary from previous estimates.
See Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5 - Allowance for Credit Losses for detail regarding FHN’s processes, models, and methodology for determining the ALLL.
Business Combinations
Pursuant to applicable accounting guidance FHN generally recognizes assets acquired, including identified intangible assets, and the liabilities assumed in acquisitions at their fair values as of the acquisition date, with the related transaction costs expensed in the period incurred. Specified items such as net investment in leases as lessor, acquired operating lease assets and liabilities as lessee, employee benefit plans and income-tax related balances are recognized in accordance with accounting guidance that results in measurements that may differ from fair value. Determining the fair
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
value of assets acquired, including identified intangible assets, and liabilities assumed follows the fair value hierarchy described in Note 24 - Fair Value of Assets & Liabilities. This often involves estimates based on internal or third-party valuations which include appraisals, discounted cash flow analysis or other valuation techniques that may include estimates of attrition, inflation, asset growth rates, discount rates, credit risk, multiples of earnings or other relevant factors. The determination of fair value may require management to make point-in-time estimates about discount rates, future expected cash flows, market conditions and other future events that can be volatile in nature and challenging to assess. While FHN uses the best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement.The credit allowance for PCD assets is recognized within business combination accounting. The credit allowance for non-PCD assets is recognized as provision expense in the same reporting period as the business combination. Estimated credit losses for acquired loans and leases are determined using methodologies that are described in Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies.
Premiums and discounts on acquired AFS debt securities and loans and leases held for investment are amortized to interest income over their estimated remaining lives, which may include prepayment estimates in certain circumstances. Premiums and discounts on acquired debt are amortized to interest expense over their remaining lives. In addition, the determination of the useful lives over which identified finite-life intangible assets will be amortized is subjective. Intangible assets are generally amortized using an accelerated methodology that reflects the cash flow projections utilized in the applicable valuation.
Income Taxes
FHN is subject to the income tax laws of the U.S. and the states and jurisdictions in which it operates. FHN accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, "Income Taxes". Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of the consolidated income tax expense. FHN income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid.
Income tax expense consists of both current and deferred taxes. Current income tax expense is an estimate of taxes to be paid or refunded for the current period and includes income tax expense related to uncertain tax positions. A DTA or a DTL is recognized for the tax consequences of temporary
differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities. Deferred taxes can be affected by changes in tax rates applicable to future years, either as a result of statutory changes or business changes that may change the jurisdictions in which taxes are paid. Additionally, DTAs are subject to a “more likely than not” test to determine whether the full amount of the DTAs should be realized in the financial statements. FHN evaluates the likelihood of realization of the DTA based on both positive and negative evidence available at the time, including (as appropriate) scheduled reversals of DTLs, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and recent financial performance. Realization is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income prior to the expiration of the carryforwards attributable to or generated with respect to the DTA. In projecting future taxable income, FHN incorporates assumptions including the amount of future state and federal pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates used to manage the underlying business. If the “more likely than not” test is not met, a valuation allowance must be established against the DTA.
The income tax laws of the jurisdictions in which FHN operate are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and the relevant government taxing authorities. In establishing a provision for income tax expense, FHN must make judgments and interpretations about the application of these inherently complex tax laws. Interpretations may be subjected to review during examination by taxing authorities and disputes may arise over the respective tax positions. FHN attempts to resolve disputes that may arise during the tax examination and audit process. However, certain disputes may ultimately be resolved through the federal and state court systems.
FHN monitors relevant tax authorities and revises estimates of accrued income taxes on a quarterly basis. Changes in estimates may occur due to changes in income tax laws and their interpretation by the courts and regulatory authorities. Revisions of estimates may also result from income tax planning and from the resolution of income tax controversies. Such revisions in estimates may be material to operating results for any given period.
See also Note 15 - Income Taxes for additional information.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
Contingent Liabilities
A liability is contingent if the amount or outcome is not presently known, but may become known in the future as a result of the occurrence of some uncertain future event. FHN estimates its contingent liabilities based on management’s estimates about the probability of outcomes and their ability to estimate the range of exposure. Accounting standards require that a liability be recorded if management determines that it is probable that a loss has occurred and the loss can be reasonably estimated. In addition, it must be probable that the loss will be confirmed by some future event. As part of the estimation process, management is required to make assumptions about matters that are by their nature highly uncertain.
The assessment of contingent liabilities, including legal contingencies, involves the use of critical estimates, assumptions, and judgments. Management’s estimates are based on their belief that future events will validate the current assumptions regarding the ultimate outcome of these exposures. However, there can be no assurance that future events, such as court decisions or decisions of arbitrators, will not differ from management’s assessments. Whenever practicable, management consults with third-party experts (e.g., attorneys, accountants, claims administrators, etc.) to assist with the gathering and evaluation of information related to contingent liabilities. Based on internally and/or externally prepared evaluations, management makes a determination whether the potential exposure requires accrual in the financial statements.
See Note 17 - Contingencies and Other Disclosures for additional information.
ACCOUNTING CHANGES WITH EXTENDED TRANSITION PERIODS
Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies for a detail of accounting standards that have been issued but are not currently effective, which section is incorporated into this MD&A by this reference.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
NON-GAAP INFORMATION
Certain measures are included in the narrative and tables in this MD&A that are “non-GAAP”, meaning they are not presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and also are not codified in U.S. banking regulations currently applicable to FHN. Although other entities may use calculation methods that differ from those used by FHN for non-GAAP measures, FHN’s management believes such measures are relevant to understanding the capital position or financial results of FHN. Non-GAAP measures are reported to FHN’s management and Board of Directors through various internal reports.
Presentation of regulatory measures, even those which are not GAAP, provide a meaningful base for comparability to other financial institutions subject to the same regulations as FHN, as demonstrated by their use by banking regulators in reviewing capital adequacy of financial institutions. Although not GAAP
terms, these regulatory measures are not considered “non-GAAP” under U.S. financial reporting rules as long as their presentation conforms to regulatory standards. Regulatory measures used in this MD&A include: common equity tier 1 capital, generally defined as common equity less goodwill, other intangibles, and certain other required regulatory deductions; tier 1 capital, generally defined as the sum of core capital (including common equity and instruments that cannot be redeemed at the option of the holder) adjusted for certain items under risk based capital regulations; and risk-weighted assets, which is a measure of total on- and off-balance sheet assets adjusted for credit and market risk, used to determine regulatory capital ratios.
The non-GAAP measures presented in this filing are return on average tangible common equity, tangible common equity to tangible assets and adjusted tangible common equity to risk-weighted assets.
The following table provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP items presented in this MD&A to the most comparable GAAP presentation:
Table 28-Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliation
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT
(a)Included in Total equity on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(b)Includes Goodwill and other intangible assets, net of amortization.
(c)Defined by and calculated in conformity with bank regulations applicable to FHN.
FIRST HORIZON CORPORATION
2020 FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT