ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are pioneering the discovery and development of a new class of medicines targeting genetically determined dependencies within the chromatin regulatory system, an untapped opportunity for therapeutic intervention. Our proprietary Gene Traffic Control platform gives us an integrated, mechanistic understanding of how the various components of the chromatin regulatory system interact, allowing us to identify, validate and potentially drug targets within the system. Breakdowns in the chromatin regulatory system are associated with over 50 percent of all cancers. Addressing these breakdowns could potentially provide therapies for over 2.5 million patients. Consequently, we are initially focused in oncology. We are developing FHD-286, a selective, allosteric ATPase inhibitor and are currently initiating separate Phase 1 studies in metastatic uveal melanoma and relapsed and/or refractory acute myeloid leukemia, or AML. The investigational new drug applications for metastatic uveal melanoma and relapsed and/or refractory AML were accepted by the FDA in late December and early January, respectively. We are developing FHD-609, a targeted protein degrader, to treat synovial sarcoma, for which we plan to submit an investigational new drug application, or IND, in the second quarter of 2021. Our vision is to use our Gene Traffic Control platform to discover and develop drugs in oncology and other therapeutic areas, including virology, autoimmune disease and neurology.
Since our inception in October 2015, we have focused substantially all of our resources on building our Gene Traffic Control platform, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, conducting discovery and research activities, protecting our trade secrets, filing patent applications, identifying potential product candidates, undertaking preclinical studies and clinical trial start-up activities, establishing arrangements with third parties for the manufacture of initial quantities of our product candidates and component materials. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
On October 27, 2020, we completed our initial public offering, or IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold 7,500,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $107.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. On November 19, 2020, we issued and sold an additional 951,837 shares of common stock at the IPO price of $16.00 per share pursuant to the underwriters’ partial exercise of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock, resulting in additional net proceeds of $14.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. Prior to our IPO, we have funded our operations with proceeds from sales of preferred stock, term loans and an upfront payment of $15.0 million we received in July 2020 under our collaboration agreement with Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., or Merck.
We have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we reported net losses of $68.8 million and $51.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $162.9 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Our ability to generate any product revenue or product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more product candidates we may develop.
We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if and as we:
•
advance our FHD-286 and FHD-609 product candidates and continue our preclinical development of product candidates from our current research programs;
•
identify additional research programs and additional product candidates;
•
initiate preclinical testing for any new product candidates we identify and develop;
•
obtain, maintain, expand, enforce, defend and protect our trade secrets and intellectual property portfolio and provide reimbursement of third-party expenses related to our patent portfolio;
•
hire additional research and development personnel;
•
add operational, legal, compliance, financial and management information systems and personnel to support our research, product development and operations as a public company;
•
expand the capabilities of our platform;
•
acquire or in-license product candidates, intellectual property and technologies;
•
operate as a public company;
•
seek marketing approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials; and
•
ultimately establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully commercialize one of our product candidates, after completing clinical development and obtaining regulatory approval. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, and distribution. Further, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through our collaboration agreement with Merck and a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and collaborations or licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back our development or commercialization plans for one or more of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
COVID-19
In March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization, and to date the COVID-19 pandemic continues to present a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world. The length of time and full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, subject to change and are difficult to predict. While we continue to conduct our research and development activities, the COVID-19 pandemic may cause disruptions that affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, ongoing and future clinical trials or to procure items that are essential for our research and development activities.
We plan to continue to closely monitor the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business operations. In an effort to provide a safe work environment for our employees, we have, among other things, increased the cadence of sanitization of our office and lab facilities, implemented various social distancing measures in our office and labs including replacing in-person meetings with virtual interactions, and are providing personal protective equipment for our employees present in our office and lab facilities. We expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other business partners in light of the pandemic.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Collaboration Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or licenses with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, milestone payments under our existing collaboration agreement or payments from other license agreements that we may enter into with third parties.
In July 2020, we entered into a strategic research collaboration and license agreement, or the Collaboration Agreement, with Merck, pursuant to which we will apply our proprietary Gene Traffic Control platform to discover and develop novel therapeutics. Under the Collaboration Agreement, we granted Merck exclusive global rights to develop and commercialize drugs that target dysregulation of a single transcription factor. Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, we received a nonrefundable upfront payment of $15.0 million from Merck, and are eligible to receive up to $245.0 million upon achievement of specified research, development and regulatory milestones by any product candidate generated by the collaboration, and up to $165.0 million upon achievement of specified sales-based milestones per approved product from the collaboration, if any, as well as royalties on sales of any approved product from the collaboration. We cannot provide assurance as to the timing of future milestone or royalty payments or that we will receive any of these payments at all.
We record revenue over the research term as we satisfy our performance obligation under the Collaboration Agreement. Accordingly, the upfront payment of $15.0 million is being recognized as revenue using the cost-to-cost method, which we believe best depicts the transfer of control to the customer over time. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of actual costs incurred to the total estimated costs expected upon satisfying the identified single performance obligation. We expect revenue to fluctuate as the achievement of milestones becomes probable and as our efforts to satisfy our performance obligation vary from period to period. In estimating the total costs to satisfy our performance obligation pursuant to the Collaboration Agreement, we are required to make significant estimates including an estimate of the number of transcription factor substitutions and the expected time and expected costs to fulfill the performance obligation. The cumulative effect of revisions to the total estimated costs to complete our performance obligation will be recorded in the period in which the changes are identified, and amounts can be reasonably estimated. While such revisions will have no impact on our cash flows, a significant change in these assumptions and estimates could have a material impact on the timing and amount of revenue recognized in future periods. As of December 31, 2020, we recorded $14.6 million of the upfront payment as deferred revenue and recognized $0.4 million of revenue under the Collaboration Agreement.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses are comprised of research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and progressing our programs, which include:
•
personnel-related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
expenses incurred in connection with our research programs and preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contractors and contract research organizations, or CROs;
•
the cost of manufacturing drug substance and drug product for use in our research and preclinical studies and clinical trials under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contractors and contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CDMOs;
•
laboratory supplies and research materials;
•
facilities, depreciation and amortization and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance; and
•
payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We track our direct external research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis. These consist of costs that include fees, reimbursed materials, and other costs paid to consultants, contractors, CDMOs, and CROs in connection with our preclinical, clinical and manufacturing activities. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies, and facilities expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and our platform and, as such, are not separately classified.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially as we advance our programs into clinical development and expand our discovery, research and preclinical activities in the near term and in the future. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any product candidates we may develop. A change in the outcome of any number of variables with respect to product candidates we may develop could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any product candidates we may develop.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, for employees engaged in executive, legal, finance and accounting and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations and accounting and audit services as well as direct and allocated facility-related costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our programs and platform. We also anticipate that we will continue to incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, director and officer insurance costs and investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense associated with outstanding borrowings under our loan agreements as well as the amortization of debt discount associated with such agreements.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash balances. Other income (expense) consists of sublease income and miscellaneous expense unrelated to our core operations.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred or for the research and development tax credits earned in each period, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $147.3 million and $132.3 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future taxable income. The federal net operating loss carryforwards include $12.5 million which expire at various dates beginning in 2035 and $134.8 million which carryforward indefinitely but in some circumstances may be limited to offset 80% of annual taxable income. The state net operating loss carryforwards expire at various dates beginning in 2036. As of December 31, 2020, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $3.4 million and $2.0 million, respectively, which may be available to reduce future tax liabilities and expire at various dates beginning in 2036 and 2031, respectively. Due to our history of cumulative net losses since inception and uncertainties surrounding our ability to generate future taxable income, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for our one collaboration arrangement, entered into in July 2020, under ASC Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers (ASC 606). Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer.
We assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations. The promised goods or services in our arrangements would likely consist of licenses, rights to our intellectual property, research and development services and related supporting activities. Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations.
We assess whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the performance obligations in the contract. This assessment involves subjective determinations and requires management to make judgments about the individual promised goods or services and whether such are separable from the other aspects of the contractual relationship. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (that is, the good or service is capable of being distinct) and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (that is, the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract). In assessing whether a promised good or service is distinct, we consider factors such as the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the customer and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. We also consider the intended benefit of the contract in assessing whether a promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. If a promised good or service is not distinct, an entity is required to combine that good or service with other promised goods or services until it identifies a bundle of goods or services that is distinct.
The transaction price is then determined and allocated to the identified performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices (“SSP”) on a relative SSP basis. SSP is determined at contract inception and is not updated to reflect changes between contract inception and when the performance obligations are satisfied. Determining the SSP for performance obligations requires significant judgment. In developing the SSP for a performance obligation, we consider applicable market conditions and relevant entity-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated costs. We validate the SSP for performance obligations by evaluating whether changes in the key assumptions used to determine the SSP will have a significant effect on the allocation of arrangement consideration between multiple performance obligations.
If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled to in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We determine the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. We include the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment.
If an arrangement includes development and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received.
For arrangements with licenses of intellectual property that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize royalty revenue and sales-based milestones at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied.
We record amounts as accounts receivable when the right to consideration is deemed unconditional. When consideration is received, or such consideration is unconditionally due, from a customer prior to transferring goods or services to the customer under the terms of a contract, a contract liability is recorded for deferred revenue.
In determining the transaction price, we adjust consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the timing of payments provides us with a significant benefit of financing. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between the transfer of the promised goods or services to the customer and the payment by the customer will be one year or less. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied, either at a point in time or over time, and if over time, recognition is based on the use of an output or input method.
Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of actual costs incurred to the total estimated costs expected upon satisfying the identified single performance obligation. In estimating the total costs to satisfy our performance obligation, we are required to make significant estimates including an estimate of the expected time and expected costs to fulfill the performance obligation. The cumulative effect of revisions to the total estimated costs to complete our performance obligation will be recorded in the period in which the changes are identified, and amounts can be reasonably estimated. While such revisions will have no impact on our cash flows, a significant change in these assumptions and estimates could have a material impact on the timing and amount of revenue recognized in future periods.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate certain accrued research and development expenses. This process involves estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include those related to fees paid to:
•
vendors in connection with discovery, preclinical and clinical development activities;
•
CROs in connection with preclinical studies and testing and clinical trials; and
•
CDMOs in connection with the process development and scale up activities and the production and manufacturing of materials.
We base the expense recorded related to contract research and manufacturing on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs and CDMOs that conduct services and produce and supply materials. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. While the majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; some require advance payments. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. We record these as prepaid expenses on our consolidated balance sheet.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure all stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for options or the difference between the purchase price, if any, and the fair value of our common stock for restricted stock awards. Compensation expense for awards with service-based vesting is generally recognized over the vesting period of the award using the straight-line method to record the expense. We use the graded-vesting method to record the expense of awards with both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions, commencing once achievement of the performance condition becomes probable. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the expected volatility of our common stock, the expected term of stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options and our expected dividend yield. We account for forfeitures of share-based awards as they occur.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $0.4 million was related to our Collaboration Agreement. The upfront payment of $15.0 million was initially recorded as deferred revenue and is being recognized as revenue under the cost-to-cost method.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses were $57.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $44.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in our FHD-286 program costs of $0.1 million was due to an increase in preclinical, manufacturing, and clinical trial start-up costs, partially offset by a decrease in research costs as we progressed towards an IND submission in December 2020. The increase in our FHD-609 program costs of $1.9 million was due to an increase in preclinical and manufacturing costs, partially offset by a decrease in research costs as we progressed our program candidate into IND-enabling studies. Platform and other early-stage research external costs, which include our selective BRM and selective ARID1B early-stage programs, increased by $0.2 million, primarily as a result of an increase in selective BRM costs as a result of our ongoing hit-to-lead efforts. Personnel-related costs increased by $4.6 million due primarily to increased headcount in our research and development function. The increase in facility-related expenses and other of $6.5 million was due to the increased costs of supporting a larger group of research and development personnel and their research efforts, including increased rent expense related to our new facility lease, which commenced in January 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
General and administrative expenses were $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in personnel-related costs of $2.3 million was a result of an increase in headcount in our general and administrative function to support our business. The increase in professional and consultant fees of $1.2 million was primarily due to higher costs associated with
operating as a public company. The increase in facility-related expenses and other of $1.1 million was due to the increased rent expense related to our new facility lease, which commenced in January 2020 as well as an increase due to directors and officers insurance.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to increased borrowings under our loan facility.
Interest income and other income (expense), net was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of sublease income of $1.0 million related to the sublease that began in July 2020 and $0.1 million of interest income. Interest income and other income (expense), net of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of $0.5 million of interest income. Interest income decreased from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the same period in 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates on invested balances.
We recorded a loss on debt extinguishment of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We used proceeds from a new loan and security agreement entered into in November 2020 to repay the balance of our prior loan outstanding at the time including a final payment fee.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in October 2015, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we support our continued research activities and development of our programs and platform. Through December 31, 2020, we have funded our operations with proceeds from our IPO in October 2020, sales of preferred stock, term loans and an upfront payment of $15.0 million we received in July 2020 under our Collaboration Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $185.8 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $31.3 million of cash, resulting from our net loss of $68.8 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $8.8 million and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $28.7 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a $15.1 million increase in operating lease liabilities resulting from our landlord incentives received, a $14.6 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from the upfront payment received in connection with our Collaboration Agreement and an increase of $3.7 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by an increase of $4.7 million in prepaid expenses and other assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $46.3 million of cash, resulting from our net loss of $51.1 million, partially offset by net non-cash charges of $3.6 million and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.2 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of a $3.3 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in operating lease liabilities and a $1.0 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities and prepaid expenses and other assets in all periods were generally due to growth in our business, the advancement of our research programs and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $108.9 million primarily due to the purchases of marketable securities of $93.0 million and the acquisition of property and equipment of $16.2 million. Property and equipment purchases for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily related to leasehold improvements for our new facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used by investing activities was $1.0 million due to the acquisition of property and equipment during the year.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $217.5 million, consisting primarily of proceeds from our IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $122.1 million, net proceeds from the sale of our Series B preferred stock of $89.9 million, net borrowings of $4.3 million and proceeds from the exercise of common stock options of $1.2 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $24.0 million, consisting of proceeds from the sale of our Series B preferred stock of $15.3 million, proceeds from borrowings under our loan and security agreement of $8.0 million and proceeds from the exercise of common stock options of $0.7 million.
Loan and Security Agreement with Oxford
On November 19, 2020, we entered into a new loan and security agreement, or the Oxford Loan, with Oxford Finance LLC, or Oxford, for an aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million (Oxford Term Loan A) and up to an additional $5.0 million (Oxford Term Loan B). The Term Loan bears interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the greater of (i) 8.0% and (ii) the sum of (a) thirty-day U.S. DOLLAR LIBOR rate reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue, plus (b) 7.84%. In addition, upon loan maturity or prepayment, we are reqired to make a final payment fee equal to 5.0% of the aggregate principal amount borrowed. We are required to make monthly interest only payments under the Oxford Loan on the first calendar day of each month beginning on January 1, 2021. Beginning on December 1, 2023, we are required to make consecutive equal monthly payments of principal, together with applicable interest, in arrears, based upon a repayment schedule equal to 24 months, with a final maturity date of November 1, 2025.
Our obligations under the Oxford Loan Agreement are secured by a security interest in all of our assets, other than our intellectual property. We are also subject to certain affirmative and negative covenants.
On November 19, 2020, we used the proceeds from the Oxford Loan Agreement to pay in full the outstanding amounts under the Loan and Security Agreement with Comerica.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and initiate clinical trials for our product candidates in development. We believe that the net proceeds from our IPO in October 2020, together with our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service payments into the third quarter of 2022. We have based these estimates as to how long we expect we will be able to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be inaccurate. We could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, in which case we would be required to obtain additional financing sooner than planned, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will be required to obtain further funding through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other sources.
If we are unable to raise sufficient capital as and when needed, we may be required to significantly curtail, delay or discontinue one or more of our research or development programs or the commercialization of any product candidate we may develop, or be unable to expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities. If we raise additional funds through collaborations or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to future revenue streams or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.