Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) includes the following: a business overview that provides a high-level summary of our strategies and initiatives, highlights from fiscal year 2021 and key performance metrics for our Software segment; a more detailed analysis of our results of operations; our capital resources and liquidity, which discusses key aspects of our statements of cash flows, changes in our balance sheets and our financial commitments; and a summary of our critical accounting policies and estimates we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ from those referred to herein due to a number of factors, including but not limited to risks described in Item 1A, Risk Factors, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
Strategies and Initiatives
In fiscal 2021, our B2B scoring solutions, including the flagship FICO® Score, continued to be the standard measure of consumer credit risk in the U.S. In January 2020 we introduced our most predictive scores, FICO® Score 10 and 10T. We also created the FICO® Resilience Index, a complement to FICO Scores that identifies consumers who are more resilient to economic stress relative to other consumers within the same FICO Score bands. We continued to develop scores that use alternative data to enhance conventional credit bureau data and generate scores for otherwise un-scorable consumers.
During fiscal 2021, we continued to advance our platform-first, cloud delivered strategy in our Software segment. This led us to exit less strategic areas of our business in order to facilitate incremental investment in higher value, more strategic areas. As part of this process, we divested the non-platform-based Collections and Recovery (“C&R”) business, sold all assets related to our cyber risk score operations, and sold certain assets related to our Software operations to an affiliated joint venture in China.
During fiscal 2020, we changed our business practice of selling term software licenses with separate license and maintenance components to a single software subscription contract with license and maintenance bundled. This transition was substantially completed by the end of the first quarter of our fiscal 2021. The timing of our revenue recognition on these subscription sales changed, resulting in less revenue recognized upfront and more revenue recognized over the term of these subscriptions. This change led to a negative impact of our revenue recognized from term software licenses in our fiscal 2021 but does not affect total revenue recognized over the life of a contract. In addition, this change does not negatively impact our cash flows.
We also continue to enhance stockholder value by returning cash to stockholders through our stock repurchase programs. In June 2021, following the divestiture of our C&R business, we entered into an accelerated share repurchase agreement (“ASR Agreement”) to repurchase $200.0 million of our common stock. In August 2021, we entered into a stock repurchase agreement with an institutional shareholder pursuant to which we repurchased $225.0 million of our common stock. We also repurchased shares in other open market transactions under our stock repurchase programs. During fiscal 2021, we repurchased 1.9 million shares at a total repurchase price of $882.2 million. As of September 30, 2021, we had $173.2 million remaining under our current stock repurchase program.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to conduct business with substantial modifications to employee travel and work locations and also the virtualization of sales and marketing events. We expect these modifications to remain in place throughout calendar year 2021, along with substantially modified interactions with customers and suppliers, among other adjustments. As certain offices reopened due to the lifting of local government restrictions and a small number of employees started returning to work locations on a limited basis during fiscal 2021, we have maintained a “Voluntary Work-From-Home Policy” providing our people with valued flexibility. While we have not experienced material disruptions to our operations from the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our operations and future financial performance, including demand for our offerings, impact to our customers and partners, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, and other factors identified in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Report.
Highlights from Fiscal Year 2021
•Total GAAP revenue was $1.32 billion during fiscal year 2021, a 2% increase from fiscal year 2020.
•Total revenue for our Scores segment was $654.1 million during fiscal year 2021, a 24% increase from fiscal year 2020.
•Annual Recurring Revenue for our Software segment as of September 30, 2021 was $524.0 million, a 6% increase from September 30, 2020, excluding divestitures.
•Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate for our Software segment during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 was 106%, excluding divestitures.
•Cash and cash equivalents was $195.4 million as of September 30, 2021, compared with $157.4 million as of September 30, 2020.
•Operating income, which included $100.1 million gains on product line asset sales and business divestiture, was $505.5 million during fiscal year 2021, a 71% increase from fiscal 2020.
•Net income was $392.1 million during fiscal year 2021, a 66% increase from fiscal 2020.
•Cash flow from operations was $423.8 during fiscal year 2021, compared with $364.9 million generated during the prior year.
•Total debt balance was $1.268 billion as of September 30, 2021, compared with $845 million as of September 30, 2020.
•$882.2 million was spent on share repurchases, compared with $235.2 million spent during the prior year.
Key performance metrics for Software segment
Annual Contract Value Bookings (“ACV Bookings”)
Management regards ACV Bookings as an important indicator of future revenues, but they are not comparable to, nor are they a substitute for, an analysis of, our revenues. We define ACV Bookings as the average annualized value of software contracts signed in the current reporting period that generate current and future on-premises and SaaS software revenue. We only include contracts with an initial term of at least 24 months and we exclude perpetual licenses and other revenues that are non-recurring in nature. For renewals of existing software subscription contracts, we count only incremental annual revenue expected over the current contract as ACV Bookings.
ACV Bookings is calculated by dividing the total expected contract value by the contract term in years. The expected contract value equals the fixed amount - including guaranteed minimums - stated in the contract, plus estimates of future usage-based fees. We develop estimates from discussions with our customers and examinations of historical data from similar products and customer arrangements. Differences between estimates and actual results occur due to variability in the estimated usage. This variability is primarily caused by the economic trends in our customers’ industries; individual performance of our customers relative to their competitors; and regulatory and other factors that affect the business environment in which our customers operate.
We disclose estimated revenue expected to be recognized in the future related to remaining performance obligations in Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. However, we believe ACV Bookings is a more meaningful measure of our business as it includes estimated revenues and future billings excluded from Note 12, such as usage-based fees and guaranteed minimums derived from our on-premises software licenses, among others.
The following table summarizes our ACV Bookings during the periods indicated:
(*) During fiscal 2021, we sold all assets related to our cyber risk score operations, sold certain assets related to our Software segment to an affiliated joint venture in China, and divested our C&R business. The amounts above exclude these divested product lines and businesses for all periods presented.
Annual Recurring Revenue (“ARR”)
Accounting Standards Codification 606 requires us to recognize a significant portion of revenue from our on-premises software subscriptions at the point in time when the software is first made available to the customer, or at the beginning of the subscription term, despite the fact that our contracts typically call for billing these amounts ratably over the life of the subscription. The remaining portion of our on-premises software subscription revenue including maintenance and usage-based fees are recognized over the life of the contract. This point-in-time recognition of a portion of our on-premises software subscription revenue creates significant variability in the revenue recognized period to period based on the timing of the subscription start date and the subscription term. Furthermore, this point-in-time revenue recognition can create a significant difference between the timing of our revenue recognition and the actual customer billing under the contract. We use ARR to measure the underlying performance of our subscription-based contracts and mitigate the impact of this variability. ARR is defined as the annualized revenue run-rate of on-premises and SaaS software agreements within a quarterly reporting period, and as such, is different from the timing and amount of revenue recognized. All components of our software licensing and subscription arrangements that are not expected to recur (primarily perpetual licenses) are excluded. We calculate ARR as the quarterly recurring revenue run-rate multiplied by four.
The following table summarizes our ARR at each of the dates presented:
(*) During fiscal 2021, we sold all assets related to our cyber risk score operations, sold certain assets related to our Software segment to an affiliated joint venture in China, and divested our C&R business. The amounts above exclude these divested product lines and businesses for all periods presented.
(**) The FICO platform software is a set of interoperable services which use software assets owned and/or governed by FICO for building solutions and which conform to FICO architectural standards based on key elements of Cloud Native Computing design principles. These standards encompass shared security context and pre-integration using FICO standard application programming interfaces for all services.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate (“DBNRR”)
We consider DBNRR to be an important measure of our success in retaining and growing revenue from our existing customers. To calculate DBNRR for any period, we compare the ARR at the end of the prior comparable quarter (base ARR) to the ARR from that same cohort of customers at the end of the current quarter (retained ARR); we then divide the retained ARR by the base ARR to arrive at the DBNRR. Our calculation includes the positive impact among this cohort of customers of selling additional products, price increases and increases in usage-based fees, and the negative impact of customer attrition, price decreases and decreases in usage-based fees during the period. However, the calculation does not include the positive impact from sales to any customers acquired during the period. Our DBNRR may increase or decrease from period to period as a result of various factors, including the timing of new sales and customer renewal rates.
The following table summarizes our DBNRR for each of the periods presented:
(*) During fiscal 2021, we sold all assets related to our cyber risk score operations, sold certain assets related to our Software segment to an affiliated joint venture in China, and divested our C&R business. The amounts above exclude these divested product lines and businesses for all periods presented.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We are organized into the following two reportable segments: Software and Scores. Although we sell solutions and services into a large number of end user product and industry markets, our reportable business segments reflect the primary method in which management organizes and evaluates internal financial information to make operating decisions and assess performance.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we reevaluated our operating segments to better align with how our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) evaluates performance and allocates resources, which resulted in a change from three operating segments, Applications, Decision Management Software and Scores, to two operating segments, Software and Scores, by merging Applications and Decision Management Software segments into the new Software segment. As a result, we modified the presentation of our segment financial information with retrospective application to all prior periods presented. In addition, effective beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we changed the classification of revenue from transactional and maintenance, professional services, and license to on-premises and SaaS software, professional services and scores on our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income, as well as our disclosures on disaggregation of revenue, to better align with our business strategy. Previously reported amounts have been adjusted to conform to the current presentation.
Segment revenues, operating income, and related financial information, including disaggregation of revenue, for the years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are set forth in Note 12 and Note 18 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Revenues
The following tables set forth certain summary information on a segment basis related to our revenues for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Scores
Scores segment revenues increased $125.6 million in fiscal 2021 from 2020 due to an increase of $64.6 million in our business-to-business scores revenue and $61.0 million in our business-to-consumer revenue. The increase in business-to-business scores revenue was primarily attributable to a higher unit price across several business-to-business offerings, as well as higher volumes. The increase in business-to-consumer revenue was attributable to an increase in both royalties derived from scores sold indirectly to consumers through consumer reporting agencies and direct sales generated from the myFICO.com website.
Scores segment revenues increased $107.4 million in fiscal 2020 from 2019 due to an increase of $79.8 million in our business-to-business scores revenue and $27.6 million in our business-to-consumer revenue. The increase in business-to-business scores was primarily attributable to an increase in mortgage volumes, a higher unit price across several business-to-business offerings, a large royalty true-up as well as a large annual license deal recognized during fiscal 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in unsecured originations volume. The increase in business-to-consumer revenue was attributable to an increase in both royalties derived from scores sold indirectly to consumers through consumer reporting agencies and direct sales generated from the myFICO.com website.
Revenues collectively generated by agreements with the three major consumer reporting agencies, TransUnion, Equifax and Experian, accounted for 38%, 33% and 29% of our total revenues in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with all three consumer reporting agencies contributing more than 10% of our total revenues in fiscal 2021, and Experian contributing more than 10% of our total revenues in fiscal 2020 and 2019. Revenues from these customers included amounts recorded in our Software segment.
Software
(1)Includes license portion of our on-premises subscription software and perpetual license, both of which are recognized when the software is made available to the customer, or at the start of the subscription.
(2)Includes maintenance portion and usage-based fees of our on-premises subscription software, maintenance revenue on perpetual licenses, as well as SaaS revenue.
Software segment revenues decreased $103.6 million in fiscal 2021 from 2020 due to a $66.7 million decrease in on-premises and SaaS software revenue and a $36.9 million decrease in services revenue. The decrease in on-premises and SaaS software revenue was attributable to a $68.6 million decrease in revenue recognized at a point in time, partially offset by a $1.9 million increase in revenue recognized over time. The decrease in point-in-time recognition was primarily attributable to the shift in the timing of revenue recognition on our term license subscription sales as a result of changing our business practice of selling term licenses with separate license and maintenance components to a single software subscription contract with license and maintenance bundled, as well as a decrease in the number and size of term license deals signed or renewed during fiscal 2021. The increase in over-time recognition was primarily attributable to an increase in SaaS subscription revenue, partially offset by the divestiture of our C&R business in June 2021. The decrease in services revenue was primarily due to our recent strategic shift to emphasize software over services, as well as the divestiture of our C&R business. In total, $21.7 million of the year-over-year decrease in our Software segment revenue was attributable to the divestiture of our C&R business.
Software segment revenues increased $27.1 million in fiscal 2020 from 2019 primarily attributable to a $27.6 million increase in on-premises and SaaS software revenue, comprised of a $16.4 million increase in license portion of our on-premises subscription software and perpetual license revenue recognized at a point in time, and a $11.3 million increase in revenue recognized over time, primarily attributable to an increase in SaaS subscription revenue.
Operating Expenses and Other Income, Net
The following tables set forth certain summary information related to our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of employee salaries, incentives, and benefits for personnel directly involved in delivering software products, operating SaaS infrastructure, and providing support, implementation and consulting services; allocated overhead, facilities and data center costs; software royalty fees; credit bureau data and processing services; third-party hosting fees related to our SaaS services; travel costs; and outside services.
The fiscal 2021 from 2020 decrease of $28.7 million in cost of revenues was primarily attributable to an $18.8 million decrease in personnel and labor costs, a $9.2 million decrease in allocated facilities and infrastructure costs and a $3.7 million decrease in travel costs, partially offset by an increase in direct materials costs. The decreases in personnel and labor costs, and in allocated facilities and infrastructure costs were both largely driven by our strategic cost initiative implemented in September 2020, in which we reduced our workforce, consolidated office space and abandoned certain property and equipment; as well as the divestiture of our C&R business in June 2021. The decrease in travel costs was primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in direct materials costs was primarily attributable to increased third-party data costs related to increased Scores revenue. Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues decreased to 25% during fiscal 2021 from 28% during fiscal 2020, primarily due to increased sales of our higher-margin Scores products.
The fiscal 2020 over 2019 increase of $24.3 million in cost of revenues was primarily attributable to an $11.1 million increase in allocated facilities and infrastructure costs, a $10.3 million increase in personnel and labor costs and a $7.6 million increase in direct materials cost, partially offset by a $4.9 million decrease in travel costs. The increase in facilities and infrastructure costs was primarily attributable to increased resource requirements due to expansion in our cloud infrastructure operations. The increase in personnel and labor costs was primarily attributable to an increase in our average headcount. The increase in direct materials cost was primarily attributable to an increase in license and Scores revenues that incur third-party royalties and data costs, as well as an increase in telecommunication cost. The decrease in travel costs was primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues was 28% during fiscal 2020, materially consistent with that incurred during fiscal 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses include personnel and related overhead costs incurred in the development of new products and services, including research of mathematical and statistical models and development of new versions of software products.
The fiscal 2021 over 2020 increase of $4.7 million in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel and labor costs, driven by increased average headcount and our continued investments in new product development. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenues was 13% during fiscal 2021, consistent with that during fiscal 2020.
The fiscal 2020 over 2019 increase of $17.0 million in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel and labor costs and an increase in allocated facilities and infrastructure costs, both driven by increased average headcount and our continued investments in new product development. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenues was 13% during fiscal 2020, consistent with that incurred during fiscal 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of employee salaries, incentives, commissions and benefits; travel costs; overhead costs; advertising and other promotional expenses; corporate facilities expenses; legal expenses; and business development expenses.
The fiscal 2021 from 2020 decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses of $24.6 million was primarily attributable to a $7.4 million decrease in travel costs, a $6.8 million decrease in marketing costs, a $5.0 million decrease in outside services, and a $4.6 million decrease in allocated facilities and infrastructure costs. The decrease in travel costs was a result of a decrease in travel activity due to COVID-19. The decrease in marketing costs was primarily driven by a company-wide marketing event during fiscal 2020. The decrease in outside services was attributable to a decrease in legal and consulting fees associated with several company initiatives during fiscal 2020. The decrease in allocated facilities and infrastructure costs was largely driven by our strategic cost initiative implemented in September 2020, in which we consolidated office space and abandoned certain property and equipment. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased to 30% during fiscal 2021 from 33% during fiscal 2020 primarily due to increased sales of our high-margin Scores products.
The fiscal 2020 over 2019 increase of $6.8 million was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel and labor costs as a result of increased average headcount, higher share-based compensation and higher non-capitalizable commission cost. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in marketing and travel costs as a result of a decrease in travel activity due to COVID-19. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased to 33% during fiscal 2020 from 35% during fiscal 2019 primarily due to increased sales of our high-margin Scores and software products.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets consists of expense related to intangible assets recorded in connection with our acquisitions. Our finite-lived intangible assets consist primarily of completed technology and customer contracts and relationships, which are being amortized using the straight-line method over periods ranging from four to fifteen years.
Amortization expense was $3.3 million, $5.0 million and $6.1 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we incurred charges of $8.0 million in employee separation costs due to the elimination of 160 positions throughout the Company. Cash payments for all the employee separation costs will be paid by the end of our fiscal 2022. There were no impairment charges incurred during fiscal 2021.
During fiscal 2020, we incurred net charges totaling $45.0 million consisting of $28.0 million in impairment loss on operating lease assets, $5.2 million in impairment loss on abandonment of property and equipment and $11.8 million in restructuring charges. The impairment losses were associated with closing certain non-core offices and reducing office space in other locations to better align with anticipated needs in light of post-pandemic workforce patterns. The restructuring charges related to employee separation costs as a result of eliminating 209 positions throughout the Company. Cash payments for all the employee separation costs were fully paid before the end of our fiscal 2021.
There were no restructuring and impairment charges incurred during fiscal 2019.
Gains on Product Line Asset Sales and Business Divestiture
The $100.1 million gain on product line asset sales and business divestiture during fiscal 2021 was attributable to a $92.8 million gain on the sale of the C&R business in June 2021, a $7.3 million gain on the sale of all assets related to our cyber risk score operations in October 2020, and the sale of certain assets related to our Software operations to an affiliated joint venture in China in December 2020.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense includes primarily interest on the senior notes issued in December 2019, May 2018, and July 2010 (which July 2010 senior notes were paid in full at maturity in July 2020), as well as interest and credit facility fees on the revolving line of credit. On our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income, interest expense is netted with interest income, which is derived primarily from the investment of funds in excess of our immediate operating requirements.
The fiscal 2021 from 2020 decrease in net interest expense of $2.1 million was primarily attributable to a lower average outstanding debt balance during fiscal 2021.
The fiscal 2020 over 2019 increase in net interest expense of $2.4 million was primarily attributable to a higher average outstanding debt balance during fiscal 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of realized investment gains/losses and unrealized gains/losses on certain investments classified as trading securities, exchange rate gains/losses resulting from re-measurement of foreign-currency-denominated receivable and cash balances held by our various reporting entities into their respective functional currencies at period-end market rates, net of the impact of offsetting foreign currency forward contracts, and other non-operating items.
The fiscal 2021 over 2020 increase in other income, net of $4.5 million was primarily attributable to an increase in net unrealized gains on our supplemental retirement and savings plan, as well as a decrease in foreign currency exchange losses.
The fiscal 2020 over 2019 increase in other income, net of $0.9 million was primarily attributable to an increase in net unrealized gains on our supplemental retirement and savings plan, partially offset by an increase in foreign currency exchange losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rates were 17.1%, 8.0% and 11.1% in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The increase in our income tax provision in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was due to an increase in pretax book income, of which a large amount was due to the gain on divestiture of C&R business, as well as a decrease in excess tax benefits related to share-based compensation.
The decrease in our income tax provision in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was due to the excess tax benefits related to share-based compensation.
As of September 30, 2021, we had approximately $141.5 million of unremitted earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries. The Company generates substantial cash flow in the U.S. and does not have a current need for the cash to be returned to the U.S. from the foreign entities. In the event these earnings are later remitted to the U.S., any estimated withholding tax and state income tax due upon remittance of those earnings is expected to be immaterial to the income tax provision.
Operating Income
The following tables set forth certain summary information on a segment basis related to our operating income for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Scores
Software
The fiscal 2021 over 2020 increase in operating income of $209.5 million was primarily attributable to a $100.1 million gain on product line asset sales and business divestiture during fiscal 2021, a $59.5 million decrease in segment operating expenses, a $37.1 million decrease in restructuring and impairment charges, a $22.0 million increase in segment revenues and a $7.8 million decrease in corporate expenses, partially offset by an $18.8 million increase in share-based compensation expense.
At the segment level, the $89.3 million increase in segment operating income was the result of a $106.4 million increase in our Scores segment operating income and a $7.8 million decrease in corporate expenses, partially offset by a $24.9 million decrease in our Software segment operating income.
The $106.4 million increase in our Scores segment operating income was attributable to a $125.6 million increase in segment revenue, partially offset by a $19.2 million increase in segment operating expenses. Segment operating income as a percentage of segment revenue for Scores was 86%, consistent with fiscal 2020.
The $24.9 million decrease in our Software segment operating income was attributable to a $103.6 million decrease in segment revenue, partially offset by a $78.7 million decrease in segment operating expenses. Segment operating income as a percentage of segment revenue for Software was 16%, materially consistent with fiscal 2020.
The fiscal 2020 over 2019 increase in operating income of $42.4 million was attributable to a $134.5 million increase in segment revenues and a $1.1 million decrease in amortization expense, partially offset by a $45.0 million increase in restructuring and impairment charges, a $37.5 million increase in segment operating expenses, and a $10.7 million increase in share-based compensation expense.
At the segment level, the $97.0 million increase in segment operating income was the result of a $93.0 million increase in our Scores segment operating income and a $4.0 million increase in our Software segment operating income.
The $93.0 million increase in our Scores segment operating income was attributable to a $107.4 million increase in segment revenue, partially offset by a $14.4 million increase in segment operating expenses. Segment operating income as a percentage of segment revenue for Scores was 86%, consistent with fiscal 2019.
The $4.0 million increase in our Software segment operating income was attributable to a $27.1 million increase in segment revenue, partially offset by a $23.1 million increase in segment operating expenses. Segment operating income as a percentage of segment revenue for Software was 17%, consistent with fiscal 2019.
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Outlook
As of September 30, 2021, we had $195.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, which included $158.8 million held by our foreign subsidiaries. Our cash position could be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe our cash and cash equivalents balances, as well as available borrowings from our $600 million revolving line of credit and anticipated cash flows from operating activities, will be sufficient to fund our working and other capital requirements for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. Under our current financing arrangements, we have no significant debt obligations maturing over the next twelve months. Our undistributed earnings outside the U.S. are deemed to be permanently reinvested in foreign jurisdictions. We currently do not foresee a need to repatriate cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries. If these funds are needed for our operations in the U.S., we may be required to accrue for state income or foreign withholding taxes on the distributed foreign earnings, which we expect to be immaterial.
In the normal course of business, we evaluate the merits of acquiring technology or businesses, or establishing strategic relationships with or investing in these businesses. We may elect to use available cash and cash equivalents to fund such activities in the future. In the event additional needs for cash arise, or if we refinance our existing debt, we may raise additional funds from a combination of sources, including the potential issuance of debt or equity securities. Additional financing might not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. If adequate funds were not available or were not available on acceptable terms, our ability to take advantage of unanticipated opportunities or respond to competitive pressures could be limited.
Summary of Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our primary method for funding operations and growth has been through cash flows generated from operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $423.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $364.9 million in fiscal 2020. The $58.9 million increase was primarily attributable to a $155.7 million increase in net income and a $28.6 million increase that resulted from timing of receipts and payments in our ordinary course of business, partially offset by a $125.4 million decrease in non-cash items, including a $100.1 million gain on product line asset sales and a business divestiture in fiscal 2021.
Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $364.9 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $260.4 million in fiscal 2019. The $104.5 million increase was attributable to a $44.3 million increase in net income, a $46.1 million increase in non-cash items, including a $28.0 million increase in impairment loss on operating lease assets as well as a $20.0 million increase in operating lease costs, and a $14.2 million increase that resulted from timing of receipts and payments in our ordinary course of business.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities totaled $137.9 million in fiscal 2021 compared to net cash used of $24.6 million in fiscal 2020. The $162.5 million change was primarily attributable to $147.4 million in cash proceeds from the product line asset sales and a business divestiture during fiscal 2021 and a $14.4 million decrease in purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $24.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $42.8 million in fiscal 2019. The $18.2 million decrease was primarily attributable to a $15.9 million decrease in net cash used for acquisitions and a $2.0 million decrease in net cash used for purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $523.6 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $289.4 million in fiscal 2020. The $234.2 million increase was primarily attributable to a $639.0 million increase in repurchases of common stock and a $350.0 million decrease in proceeds from issuance of senior notes, partially offset by a $419.0 million increase in proceeds from our revolving line of credit, a $254.0 million decrease in payments on our revolving line of credit, and an $85.0 million decrease in payments on senior notes.
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $289.4 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $200.0 million in fiscal 2019. The $89.4 million increase was primarily due to a $338.0 million increase in payments, net of proceeds, on our revolving line of credit and a $49.9 million increase in taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards, partially offset by a $293.0 million increase in proceeds, net of payments, from our senior notes.
Repurchases of Common Stock
In July 2020, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program following the completion of the previously authorized program. This program was open-ended and authorized repurchases of shares of our common stock up to an aggregate cost of $250.0 million in the open market or in negotiated transactions. In March 2021, our Board of Directors approved another stock repurchase program following the completion of the July 2020 program. This program was open-ended and authorized repurchases of shares of our common stock up to an aggregate cost of $500.0 million in the open market or in negotiated transactions. As part of the broader share repurchase program, we entered into an accelerated share repurchase agreement (“ASR Agreement”) with a financial institution in June 2021 to repurchase $200.0 million of our common stock. Pursuant to the ASR Agreement, we paid $200.0 million to the financial institution and received an initial delivery of 319,400 shares of common stock, which approximated 80% of the total number of expected shares to be repurchased under the ASR Agreement. In August 2021, we settled the ASR Agreement and received 70,127 additional shares. In total, 389,527 shares were repurchased under the ASR Agreement. In August 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program following the termination of the March 2021 program. This new program is open-ended and authorizes repurchases of shares of our common stock up to an aggregate cost of $500.0 million in the open market or in negotiated transactions. In August 2021, we entered into a stock repurchase agreement with an institutional shareholder, pursuant to which we repurchased 515,293 shares of our common stock for $225.0 million. As of September 30, 2021, we had $173.2 million remaining under our current stock repurchase program. During fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we expended $882.2 million, $235.2 million and $228.9 million, respectively, under these and previously authorized stock repurchase programs.
Revolving Line of Credit
On August 19, 2021, we amended our credit agreement with a syndicate of banks, increasing our borrowing capacity under the unsecured revolving line of credit to $600 million, and extended its maturity to August 19, 2026. Borrowings under the credit facility can be used for working capital and general corporate purposes and may also be used for the refinancing of existing debt, acquisitions, and the repurchase of our common stock. Interest on amounts borrowed under the credit facility is based on (i) an adjusted base rate, which is the greatest of (a) the prime rate and (b) the Federal Funds rate plus 0.500% and (c) the one-month LIBOR rate plus 1.000%, plus, in each case, an applicable margin, or (ii) an adjusted LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin for base rate borrowings ranges from 0% to 0.750% and for LIBOR borrowings ranges from 1.000% to 1.750% and is determined based on our consolidated leverage ratio. In addition, we must pay credit facility fees. The credit facility contains certain restrictive covenants including maintaining a maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 3.50, subject to a step up to 4.00 following certain permitted acquisitions; and a minimum interest coverage ratio of 3.00. The credit agreement also contains other covenants typical of unsecured facilities. As of September 30, 2021, we had $518.0 million in borrowings outstanding at a weighted-average interest rate of 1.212% and we were in compliance with all financial covenants under this credit facility.
On October 20, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our credit agreement that provides for an unsecured term loan that will mature on August 19, 2026 in the aggregate principal amount of $300 million, with an option for us to request additional incremental term loans from time to time, in each case subject to the terms and conditions of the credit agreement. The term loan is in addition to the $600 million revolving loan facility. The term loan is subject to the same pricing and covenants as the revolving line of credit. We are obligated to repay the term loan in consecutive quarterly installments equal to $3.75 million commencing March 31, 2022, subject to certain adjustments under the credit agreement.
Senior Notes
On May 8, 2018, we issued $400 million of senior notes in a private offering to qualified institutional investors (the “2018 Senior Notes”). The 2018 Senior Notes require interest payments semi-annually at a rate of 5.25% per annum and will mature on May 15, 2026. On December 6, 2019, we issued $350 million of senior notes in a private offering to qualified institutional investors (the “2019 Senior Notes,” and with the 2018 Senior Notes, the “Senior Notes”). The 2019 Senior Notes require interest payments semi-annually at a rate of 4.00% per annum and will mature on June 15, 2028. The indentures for the 2018 Senior Notes and the 2019 Senior Notes contain certain covenants typical of unsecured obligations. As of September 30, 2021, the carrying value of the Senior Notes was $750.0 million and we were in compliance with all financial covenants under these obligations, and we do not believe we are at material risk of not meeting these covenants due to COVID-19.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents a summary of our contractual obligations at September 30, 2021:
(1)Represents the unpaid principal amount of the Senior Notes.
(2)Represents interest payments on the Senior Notes.
(3)Represents unrecognized tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions. As we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the payments or the amount by which the liability will increase or decrease over time, the related balances have not been reflected in the section of the table showing payment by fiscal year.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. These accounting principles require management to make certain judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We periodically evaluate our estimates including those relating to revenue recognition, goodwill and other intangible assets resulting from business acquisitions, share-based compensation, income taxes and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable based on the specific circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Contracts with Customers
Our revenue is primarily derived from on-premises software and SaaS subscriptions, professional services and scoring services. For contracts with customers that contain various combinations of products and services, we evaluate whether the products or services are distinct - distinct products or services will be accounted for as separate performance obligations, while non-distinct products or services are combined with others to form a single performance obligation. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers.
Our on-premises software is primarily sold on a subscription basis, which includes a term-based license and post-contract support or maintenance, both of which generally represent distinct performance obligations and are accounted for separately. The transaction price is either a fixed fee, or a usage-based fee - sometimes subject to a guaranteed minimum. When the amount is fixed, including the guaranteed minimum in a usage-based fee, license revenue is recognized at the point in time when the software is made available to the customer. Maintenance revenue is recognized ratably over the contract period as customers simultaneously consume and receive benefits. Any usage-based fees not subject to a guaranteed minimum or earned in excess of the minimum amount are recognized when the subsequent usage occurs. We occasionally sell software arrangements consisting of on-premises perpetual licenses and maintenance. License revenue is recognized at a point in time when the software is made available to the customer and maintenance revenue is recognized ratably over the contract term.
Our SaaS products provide customers with access to and standard support for our software on a subscription basis, delivered through our own infrastructure or third-party cloud services. The SaaS transaction contracts typically include a guaranteed minimum fee per period that allows up to a certain level of usage and a consumption-based variable amount in excess of the minimum threshold; or a consumption-based variable fee not subject to a minimum threshold. The nature of our SaaS arrangements is to provide continuous access to our hosted solutions in the cloud, i.e., a stand-ready obligation that comprises a series of distinct service periods (e.g., a series of distinct daily, monthly or annual periods of service). We estimate the total variable consideration at contract inception - subject to any constraints that may apply - and update the estimates as new information becomes available and recognize the amount ratably over the SaaS service period, unless we determine it is appropriate to allocate the variable amount to each distinct service period and recognize revenue as each distinct service period is performed.
Our professional services include software implementation, consulting, model development and training. They are sold either standalone, or together with other products or services and generally represent distinct performance obligations. The transaction price can be a fixed amount or a variable amount based upon the time and materials expended. Revenue on fixed-price services is recognized using an input method based on labor hours expended which we believe provides a faithful depiction of the transfer of services. Revenue on services provided on a time and materials basis is recognized by applying the “right-to-invoice” practical expedient as the amount to which we have a right to invoice the customer corresponds directly with the value of our performance to the customer.
Our scoring services include both business-to-business and business-to-consumer offerings. Our business-to-business scoring services typically include a license that grants consumer reporting agencies the right to use our scoring solutions in exchange for a usage-based royalty. Revenue is generally recognized when the usage occurs. Business-to-consumer offerings provide consumers with access to their FICO® Scores and credit reports, as well as other value-add services. These are provided as either a one-time or ongoing subscription service renewed monthly or annually, all with a fixed consideration. The nature of the subscription service is a stand-ready obligation to generate credit reports, provide credit monitoring, and other services for our customers, which comprises a series of distinct service periods (e.g., a series of distinct daily, monthly or annual periods of service). Revenue from one-time or monthly subscription services is recognized during the period when service is performed. Revenue from annual subscription services is recognized ratably over the subscription period.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct and should be accounted for separately may require significant judgment. Specifically, when implementation service is included in the original software or SaaS offerings, judgment is required to determine if the implementation service significantly modifies or customizes the software or SaaS service in such a way that the risks of providing it and the customization service are inseparable. In rare instances, contracts may include significant modification or customization of the software of SaaS service and will result in the combination of software or SaaS service and implementation service as one performance obligation.
We determine the SSPs using data from our historical standalone sales, or, in instances where such information is not available (such as when we do not sell the product or service separately), we consider factors such as the stated contract prices, our overall pricing practices and objectives, go-to-market strategy, size and type of the transactions, and effects of the geographic area on pricing, among others. When the selling price of a product or service is highly variable, we may use the residual approach to determine the SSP of that product or service. Significant judgment may be required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation when it involves the consideration of many market conditions and entity-specific factors discussed above.
Significant judgment may be required to determine the timing of satisfaction of a performance obligation in certain professional services contracts with a fixed consideration, in which we measure progress using an input method based on labor hours expended. In order to estimate the total hours of the project, we make assumptions about labor utilization, efficiency of processes, the customer’s specification and IT environment, among others. For certain complex projects, due to the risks and uncertainties inherent with the estimation process and factors relating to the assumptions, actual progress may differ due to the change in estimated total hours. Adjustments to estimates are made in the period in which the facts requiring such revisions become known and, accordingly, recognized revenues are subject to revisions as the contract progresses to completion.
Capitalized Commission Costs
We capitalize incremental commission fees paid as a result of obtaining customer contracts. Capitalized commission costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over ten years - determined using a portfolio approach - based on the transfer of goods or services to which the assets relate, taking into consideration both the initial and future contracts as we do not typically pay a commission on a contract renewal. The amortization costs are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses of our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
We apply a practical expedient to recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the assets that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. These costs are recorded within selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Business Combinations
Accounting for our acquisitions requires us to recognize, separately from goodwill, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition-date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition-date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, including our estimates for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, pre-acquisition contingencies and contingent consideration, where applicable. If we cannot reasonably determine the fair value of a pre-acquisition contingency (non-income tax related) by the end of the measurement period, we will recognize an asset or a liability for such pre-acquisition contingency if: (i) it is probable that an asset existed or a liability had been incurred at the acquisition date and (ii) the amount of the asset or liability can be reasonably estimated. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Subsequent to the measurement period, changes in our estimates of such contingencies will affect earnings and could have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial position.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired include but are not limited to: (i) future expected cash flows from software license sales, support agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents; (ii) expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; and (iii) the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Historically, there have been no significant changes in our estimates or assumptions. To the extent a significant acquisition is made during a fiscal year, as appropriate we will expand the discussion to include specific assumptions and inputs used to determine the fair value of our acquired intangible assets.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances assumed in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date with any adjustments to our preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill provided that we are within the measurement period. Subsequent to the measurement period or our final determination of the tax allowance’s or contingency’s estimated value, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances will affect our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income and could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial position. Historically, there have been no significant changes in our valuation allowances or uncertain tax positions as it relates to business combinations. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in the future estimates.
Goodwill, Acquisition Intangibles and Other Long-Lived Assets - Impairment Assessment
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations. We assess goodwill for impairment for each of our reporting units on an annual basis during our fourth fiscal quarter using a July 1 measurement date unless circumstances require a more frequent measurement.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we reevaluated our operating segments to better align with how our CODM evaluates performance and allocates resources, which resulted in a change from three operating segments, Applications, Decision Management Software and Scores, to two operating segments, Software and Scores. As part of this reevaluation, we determined our operating segments continue to represent our reporting units. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may first perform an assessment qualitatively whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit's carrying amount exceeds its fair value, referred to as a “step zero” approach. If, based on the review of the qualitative factors, we determine it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we would bypass the two-step impairment test. Events and circumstances we consider in performing the “step zero” qualitative assessment include macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, internal cost factors, share price fluctuations, and the operational stability and overall financial performance of the reporting units. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount, we would perform the first step (“step one”) of the two-step impairment test and calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit by using discounted cash flow valuation models and by comparing our reporting units to guideline publicly-traded companies. These methods require estimates of our future revenues, profits, capital expenditures, working capital, and other relevant factors, as well as selecting appropriate guideline publicly-traded companies for each reporting unit. We estimate these amounts by evaluating historical trends, current budgets, operating plans, industry data, and other relevant factors. Alternatively, we may bypass the qualitative assessment described above for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing step one of the goodwill impairment test.
We performed a step one quantitative impairment test on the Software and Scores reporting units before and immediately following the change in reporting units. There was a substantial excess of fair value over carrying value for the reporting units and we determined goodwill was not impaired for any of our reporting units before or after the change for fiscal 2021. For fiscal 2019 and 2020, we performed a step zero qualitative analysis for our annual assessment of goodwill impairment. After evaluating and weighing all relevant events and circumstances, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of any of our reporting units was less their carrying amounts. Consequently, we did not perform a step one quantitative analysis and determined goodwill was not impaired for any of our reporting units for fiscal 2019 and 2020.
Our intangible assets that have finite useful lives and other long-lived assets are assessed for potential impairment when there is evidence that events and circumstances related to our financial performance and economic environment indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. When impairment indicators are identified, we test for impairment using undiscounted cash flows. If such tests indicate impairment, then we measure and record the impairment as the difference between the carrying value of the asset and the fair value of the asset. Significant management judgment is required in forecasting future operating results used in the preparation of the projected cash flows. Should different conditions prevail, material write downs of our intangible assets or other long-lived assets could occur. We review the estimated remaining useful lives of our acquired intangible assets at each reporting period. A reduction in our estimate of remaining useful lives, if any, could result in increased annual amortization expense in future periods. We did not recognize any impairment charges on intangible assets that have finite useful lives or other long-lived assets in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019.
As discussed above, while we believe that the assumptions and estimates utilized were appropriate based on the information available to management, different assumptions, judgments and estimates could materially affect our impairment assessments for our goodwill, acquired intangibles with finite lives and other long-lived assets. Historically, there have been no significant changes in our estimates or assumptions that would have had a material impact for our goodwill or intangible assets impairment assessment. We believe our projected operating results and cash flows would need to be significantly less favorable to have a material impact on our impairment assessment. However, based upon our historical experience with operations, we do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood of a significant change in our projections.
Share-Based Compensation
We measure share-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize it as expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the vesting or service period, as applicable, of the stock award (generally three to four years). We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to determine the fair value of our stock options and a Monte Carlo valuation model to determine the fair value of our market share units. Our valuation models and generally accepted valuation techniques require us to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the volatility of our stock price, expected dividend yield, employee turnover rates and employee stock option exercise behaviors. Historically, there have been no material changes in our estimates or assumptions. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions. See Note 16 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our share-based employee benefit plans.
Income Taxes
We estimate our income taxes based on the various jurisdictions where we conduct business, which involves significant judgment in determining our income tax provision. We estimate our current tax liability using currently enacted tax rates and laws and assess temporary differences that result from differing treatments of certain items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities recorded on our balance sheet using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We then assess the likelihood our deferred tax assets will be realized and to the extent we believe realization is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance. When we establish a valuation allowance or increase this allowance in an accounting period, we record a corresponding income tax expense in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. In assessing the need for the valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income in the jurisdictions we operate; our ability to carry back tax attributes to prior years; an analysis of our deferred tax assets and the periods over which they will be realizable; and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. An increase in the valuation allowance would have an adverse impact, which could be material, on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which we record the increase.
We recognize and measure benefits for uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. The first step is to evaluate the tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by determining if the technical merits of the tax position indicate it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. For tax positions more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, the second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Significant judgment is required to evaluate uncertain tax positions and they are evaluated on a quarterly basis. Our evaluations are based upon a number of factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, correspondence with tax authorities during the course of audits and effective settlement of audit issues. Changes in the recognition or measurement of uncertain tax positions could result in material increases or decreases in our income tax expense in the period in which we make the change, which could have a material impact on our effective tax rate and operating results.
A description of our accounting policies associated with tax-related contingencies and valuation allowances assumed as part of a business combination is provided under “Business Combinations” above.
Contingencies and Litigation
We are subject to various proceedings, lawsuits and claims relating to products and services, technology, labor, stockholder and other matters. We are required to assess the likelihood of any adverse outcomes and the potential range of probable losses in these matters. If the potential loss is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. If the potential loss is considered less than probable or the amount cannot be reasonably estimated, disclosure of the matter is considered. The amount of loss accrual or disclosure, if any, is determined after analysis of each matter, and is subject to adjustment if warranted by new developments or revised strategies. Due to uncertainties related to these matters, accruals or disclosures are based on the best information available at the time. Significant judgment is required in both the assessment of likelihood and in the determination of a range of potential losses. Revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our consolidated financial position or consolidated results of operations. Historically, there have been no material changes in our estimates or assumptions. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in the future estimates.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2018-15, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Internal-Use Software (“ASU 2018-15”). ASU 2018-15 aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. We adopted ASU 2018-15 in the first quarter of our fiscal 2021 and the adoption did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments and subsequent amendments to the initial guidance: ASU 2018-19, ASU 2019-04, ASU 2019-05 and ASU 2019-11 (collectively, “Topic 326”). Topic 326 requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held. We adopted Topic 326 in the first quarter of our fiscal 2021 and the adoption did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
We do not expect that any recently issued accounting pronouncements will have a significant effect on our financial statements.