ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Also see “Forward-Looking Statements” discussion.
Introduction and Overview
We are a national provider of comprehensive mechanical and electrical installation, renovation, maintenance, repair and replacement services within the mechanical and electrical services industries. We operate primarily in the commercial, industrial and institutional markets and perform most of our work in industrial, healthcare, education, office, technology, retail and government facilities. We operate our business in two business segments: mechanical and electrical.
Nature and Economics of Our Business
In our mechanical business segment, customers hire us to ensure HVAC systems deliver specified or generally expected heating, cooling, conditioning and circulation of air in a facility. This entails installing core system equipment such as packaged heating and air conditioning units, or in the case of larger facilities, separate core components such as chillers, boilers, air handlers, and cooling towers. We also typically install connecting and distribution elements such as piping and ducting.
In our electrical business segment, our principal business activity is electrical construction and engineering in the commercial and industrial field. We also perform electrical logistics services, electrical service work, and electrical construction and engineering services.
In both our mechanical and electrical business segments, our responsibilities usually require conforming the systems to pre-established engineering drawings and equipment and performance specifications, which we frequently participate in establishing. Our project management responsibilities include staging equipment and materials to project sites, deploying labor to perform the work, and coordinating with other service providers on the project, including any subcontractors we might use to deliver our portion of the work.
Approximately 87.0% of our revenue is earned on a project basis for installation services in newly constructed facilities or for replacement of systems in existing facilities. When competing for project business, we usually estimate the costs we will incur on a project, and then propose a bid to the customer that includes a contract price and other performance and payment terms. Our bid price and terms are intended to cover our estimated costs on the project and provide a profit margin to us commensurate with the value of the installed system to the customer, the risk that project costs or duration will vary from estimate, the schedule on which we will be paid, the opportunities for other work that we might forego by committing capacity to this project, and other costs that we incur to support our operations but which are not specific to the project. Typically, customers will seek pricing from competitors for a given project. While the criteria on which customers select a provider vary widely and include factors such as quality, technical expertise, on-time performance, post-project support and service, and company history and financial strength, we believe that price for value is the most influential factor for most customers in choosing a mechanical or electrical installation and service provider.
After a customer accepts our bid, we generally enter into a contract with the customer that specifies what we will deliver on the project, what our related responsibilities are, and how much and when we will be paid. Our overall price for the project is typically set at a fixed amount in the contract, although changes in project specifications or work conditions that result in unexpected additional work are usually subject to additional payment from the customer via what are commonly known as change orders. Project contracts typically provide for periodic billings to the customer as we meet progress milestones or incur cost on the project. Project contracts in our industry also frequently allow for a small portion of progress billings or contract price to be withheld by the customer until after we have completed the work. Amounts withheld under this practice are known as retention or retainage.
Labor, materials and overhead costs account for the majority of our cost of service. Labor management and utilization have the most impact on our project performance. Given the fixed price nature of much of our project work, if our initial estimate of project costs is wrong or we incur cost overruns that cannot be recovered in change orders, we can
experience reduced profits or even significant losses on fixed price project work. We also perform some project work on a cost-plus or a time and materials basis, under which we are paid our costs incurred plus an agreed-upon profit margin, and such projects are sometimes subject to a guaranteed maximum cost. These margins are frequently less than fixed-price contract margins because there is less risk of unrecoverable cost overruns in cost-plus or time and materials work.
As of December 31, 2020, we had 5,687 projects in process. Our average project takes six to nine months to complete, with an average contract price of approximately $871,000. Our projects generally require working capital funding of equipment and labor costs. Customer payments on periodic billings generally do not recover these costs until late in the job. Our average project duration together with typical retention terms as discussed above generally allow us to complete the realization of revenue and earnings in cash within one year. We have what we consider to be a well-diversified distribution of revenue across end-use sectors that we believe reduces our exposure to negative developments in any given sector. Because of the integral nature of our services to most buildings, we have the legal right in almost all cases to attach liens to buildings or related funding sources when we have not been fully paid for installing systems, except with respect to some government buildings. The service work that we do, which is discussed further below, usually does not give rise to lien rights.
We also perform larger projects. Taken together, projects with contract prices of $1 million or more totaled $4.3 billion of aggregate contract value as of December 31, 2020, or approximately 85%, out of a total contract value for all projects in progress of $5.0 billion. Generally, projects closer in size to $1 million will be completed in one year or less. It is unusual for us to work on a project that exceeds two years in length.
A stratification of projects in progress as of December 31, 2020, by contract price, is as follows:
In addition to project work, approximately 13.0% of our revenue represents maintenance and repair service on already installed HVAC, electrical, and controls systems. This kind of work usually takes from a few hours to a few days to perform. Prices to the customer are based on the equipment and materials used in the service as well as technician labor time. We usually bill the customer for service work when it is complete, typically with payment terms of up to thirty days. We also provide maintenance and repair service under ongoing contracts. Under these contracts, we are paid regular monthly or quarterly amounts and provide specified service based on customer requirements. These agreements typically are for one or more years and frequently contain thirty- to sixty-day cancellation notice periods.
A relatively small portion of our revenue comes from national and regional account customers. These customers typically have multiple sites and contract with us to perform maintenance and repair service. These contracts may also provide for us to perform new or replacement systems installation. We operate a national call center to dispatch technicians to sites requiring service. We perform the majority of this work with our own employees, with the balance being subcontracted to third parties that meet our performance qualifications.
Profile and Management of Our Operations
We manage our 37 operating units based on a variety of factors. Financial measures we emphasize include profitability and use of capital as indicated by cash flow and by other measures of working capital principally involving project cost, billings and receivables. We also monitor selling, general, administrative and indirect project support expense, backlog, workforce size and mix, growth in revenue and profits, variation of actual project cost from original estimate, and overall financial performance in comparison to budget and updated forecasts. Operational factors we emphasize include project selection, estimating, pricing, management and execution practices, labor utilization, safety,
training, and the make-up of both existing backlog as well as new business being pursued, in terms of project size, technical application, facility type, end-use customers and industries and location of the work.
Most of our operations compete on a local or regional basis. Attracting and retaining effective operating unit managers is an important factor in our business, particularly in view of the relative uniqueness of each market and operation, the importance of relationships with customers and other market participants, such as architects and consulting engineers, and the high degree of competition and low barriers to entry in most of our markets. Accordingly, we devote considerable attention to operating unit management quality, stability, and contingency planning, including related considerations of compensation and non-competition protection where applicable.
Economic and Industry Factors
As a mechanical and electrical services provider, we operate in the broader nonresidential construction services industry and are affected by trends in this sector. While we do not have operations in all major cities of the United States, we believe our national presence is sufficiently large that we experience trends in demand for and pricing of our services that are consistent with trends in the national nonresidential construction sector. As a result, we monitor the views of major construction sector forecasters along with macroeconomic factors they believe drive the sector, including trends in gross domestic product, interest rates, business investment, employment, demographics and the fiscal condition of federal, state and local governments.
Spending decisions for building construction, renovation and system replacement are generally made on a project basis, usually with some degree of discretion as to when and if projects proceed. With larger amounts of capital, time, and discretion involved, spending decisions are affected to a significant degree by uncertainty, particularly concerns about economic and financial conditions and trends. We have experienced periods of time when economic weakness caused a significant slowdown in decisions to proceed with installation and replacement project work.
Operating Environment and Management Emphasis
Nonresidential building construction and renovation activity, as reported by the federal government, declined steeply over the four-year period from 2009 to 2012, and 2013 and 2014 activity levels were relatively stable at the low levels of the preceding years. During the five-year period from 2015 to 2019, there was an increase in overall activity levels, and then in early 2020 the advent of a global pandemic led to some delays in service and construction, including the potential for delayed project starts and air pockets as the year ended.
We have a credit facility in place, with terms we believe are favorable, that does not expire until January 2025. As of December 31, 2020, we had $330.5 million of credit available to borrow under our credit facility. We have strong surety relationships to support our bonding needs, and we believe our relationships with the surety markets are strong and benefit from our operating history and financial position. We have generated positive free cash flow in each of the last twenty-two calendar years and will continue our emphasis in this area. We believe that the relative size and strength of our Balance Sheet and surety relationships as compared to most companies in our industry represent competitive advantages for us.
As discussed at greater length in “Results of Operations” below, we expect price competition to continue as our customers and local and regional industry participants compete for customers. We will continue to invest in our service business, to pursue the more active sectors in our markets, and to emphasize our regional and national account business.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our critical accounting policies are based upon the significance of the accounting policy to our overall financial statement presentation, as well as the complexity of the accounting policy and our use of estimates and subjective assessments. Our most critical accounting policy is revenue recognition. We recognize revenue over time for all of our services as we perform them because (i) control continuously transfers to that customer as work progresses, and (ii) we have the right to bill the customer as costs are incurred. The customer typically controls the work in process as evidenced either by contractual termination clauses or by our rights to payment for work performed to date plus a reasonable profit to deliver products or services that do not have an alternative use to the Company.
For the reasons listed above, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is
based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. We generally use the cost to cost measure of progress for our contracts, as it best depicts the transfer of assets to the customer that occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. Under the cost to cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenue, including estimated fees or profits, is recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. Costs to fulfill include labor, materials and subcontractors’ costs, other direct costs and an allocation of indirect costs.
For a small portion of our business in which our services are delivered in the form of service maintenance agreements for existing systems to be repaired and maintained, as opposed to constructed, our performance obligation is to maintain the customer’s mechanical system for a specific period of time. Similar to jobs, we recognize revenue over time; however, for service maintenance agreements in which the full cost to provide services may not be known, we generally use an input method to recognize revenue, which is based on the amount of time we have provided our services out of the total time we have been contracted to perform those services.
As discussed elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, our business has two service functions: (i) installation, which we account for under the percentage of completion method, and (ii) maintenance, repair and replacement, which we account for as the services are performed, or in the case of replacement, under the percentage of completion method. In addition, we identified other critical accounting policies related to our allowance for credit losses, accounting for leases, the recording of our self-insurance liabilities, valuation of deferred tax assets, accounting for acquisitions and the recoverability of goodwill and identifiable intangible assets. These accounting policies, as well as others, are described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Percentage of Completion Method of Accounting
Approximately 87.0% of our revenue was earned on a project basis and recognized through the percentage of completion method of accounting during 2020. Under this method, contract revenue recognizable at any time during the life of a contract is determined by multiplying expected total contract revenue by the percentage of contract costs incurred at any time to total estimated contract costs. More specifically, as part of the negotiation and bidding process to obtain installation contracts, we estimate our contract costs, which include all direct materials, labor and subcontract costs and indirect costs related to contract performance, such as indirect labor, supplies, tools, repairs and depreciation costs. These contract costs are included in our results of operations under the caption “Cost of Services.” Then, as we perform under those contracts, we measure costs incurred, compare them to total estimated costs to complete the contract and recognize a corresponding proportion of contract revenue. Labor costs are considered to be incurred as the work is performed. Subcontractor labor is recognized as the work is performed. Non-labor project costs consist of purchased equipment, prefabricated materials and other materials. Purchased equipment on our projects is substantially produced to job specifications and is a value-added element to our work. The costs are considered to be incurred when title is transferred to us, which typically is upon delivery to the work site. Prefabricated materials, such as ductwork and piping, are generally performed at our shops and recognized as contract costs when fabricated for the unique specifications of the job. Other materials costs are generally recorded when delivered to the work site. This measurement and comparison process requires updates to the estimate of total costs to complete the contract, and these updates may include subjective assessments and judgments.
We generally do not incur significant incremental costs related to obtaining or fulfilling a contract prior to the start of a project. On rare occasions, when significant pre-contract costs are incurred, they are capitalized and amortized on a percentage of completion basis over the life of the contract. We do not currently have any capitalized obtainment or fulfillment costs on our Balance Sheet and did not incur any impairment loss on such costs in the current year.
Project contracts typically provide for a schedule of billings or invoices to the customer based on our job-to-date percentage of completion of specific tasks inherent in the fulfillment of our performance obligation(s). The schedules for such billings usually do not precisely match the schedule on which costs are incurred. As a result, contract revenue recognized in our Statement of Operations can and usually does differ from amounts that can be billed or invoiced to the customer at any point during the contract. Amounts by which cumulative contract revenue recognized on a contract as of a given date exceed cumulative billings and unbilled receivables to the customer under the contract are reflected as a current asset in our Balance Sheet under the caption “Costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings.” Amounts by which cumulative billings to the customer under a contract as of a given date exceed cumulative contract revenue recognized on the contract are reflected as a current liability in our Balance Sheet under the caption “Billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings.”
The percentage of completion method of accounting is also affected by changes in job performance, job conditions, and final contract settlements. These factors may result in revisions to estimated costs and, therefore, revenue. Such revisions are frequently based on further estimates and subjective assessments. The effects of these revisions are recognized in the period in which revisions are determined. When such revisions lead to a conclusion that a loss will be recognized on a contract, the full amount of the estimated ultimate loss is recognized in the period such conclusion is reached, regardless of the percentage of completion of the contract.
Revisions to project costs and conditions can give rise to change orders under which there is an agreement between the customer and us that the customer pays an additional or reduced contract price. Revisions can also result in claims we might make against the customer to recover project variances that have not been satisfactorily addressed through change orders with the customer. Except in certain circumstances, we do not recognize revenue or margin based on change orders or claims until they have been agreed upon with the customer. The amount of revenue associated with unapproved change orders and claims was immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Variations from estimated project costs could have a significant impact on our operating results, depending on project size, and the recoverability of the variation via additional customer payments.
Accounting for Allowance for Credit Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, we adopted the requirements of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326).” For additional information on the new standard and the impact on our results of operations, refer to our Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We are required to estimate and record the expected credit losses over the contractual life of our financial assets measured at amortized cost, including billed and unbilled accounts receivable, other receivables and costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings. Accounts receivable include amounts from work completed in which we have billed or have an unconditional right to bill our customers. Our trade receivables are contractually due in less than a year.
We estimate our credit losses using a loss-rate method for each of our identified portfolio segments. Our portfolio segments are construction, service and other. While our construction and service financial assets are often with the same subset of customers and industries, our construction financial assets will generally have a lower loss-rate than service financial assets due to lien rights, which we are more likely to have on construction jobs. These lien rights result in lower credit loss expenses on average compared to receivables that do not have lien rights. Financial assets classified as Other include receivables that are not related to our core revenue producing activities, such as receivables related to our acquisition activity from former owners, our vendor rebate program or receivables for estimated losses in excess of our insurance deductible, which are accrued with a corresponding accrued insurance liability.
Loss rates for our portfolios are based on numerous factors, including our history of credit loss expense by portfolio, the financial strength of our customers and counterparties in each portfolio, the aging of our receivables, our expectation of likelihood of payment, macroeconomic trends in the U.S. and the current and forecasted non-residential construction market trends in the U.S.
In addition to the loss-rate calculations discussed above, we also record allowance for credit losses for specific receivables that are deemed to have a higher risk profile than the rest of the respective pool of receivables, such as concerns about a specific customer going bankrupt and no longer being able to pay the receivables due to us. These estimates are evaluated and adjusted as needed when additional information is received.
Accounting for Leases
We lease certain facilities, vehicles and equipment under noncancelable operating leases. The most significant portion of these noncancelable operating leases are for the facilities occupied by our corporate office and our operating locations. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Balance Sheet. We account for lease components separately from the non-lease components. We have certain leases with variable payments based on an index as well as some short-term leases on equipment and facilities. Lease right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we generally use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments.
The lease terms generally range from three to ten years. Some leases include one or more options to renew, which may be exercised to extend the lease term. We include the exercise of lease renewal options in the lease term when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise the option and such exercise is at our sole discretion. A majority of the Company’s real property leases are with individuals or entities with whom we have no other business relationship. However, in certain instances the Company enters into real property leases with current or former employees.
If we decide to cancel or terminate a lease before the end of its term, we would typically owe the lessor the remaining lease payments under the term of the lease. Our lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants. On rare occasions, we rent or sublease certain real estate assets that we no longer use to third parties.
Accounting for Self-Insurance Liabilities
We are substantially self-insured for workers’ compensation, employer’s liability, auto liability, general liability and employee group health claims in view of the relatively high per-incident deductibles we absorb under our insurance arrangements for these risks. Losses are estimated and accrued based upon known facts, historical trends and industry averages. Estimated losses in excess of our deductible, which have not already been paid, are included in our accrual with a corresponding receivable from our insurance carrier. Loss estimates associated with the larger and longer-developing risks-workers’ compensation, auto liability and general liability-are reviewed by a third-party actuary quarterly.
We believe these accruals are adequate. However, insurance liabilities are difficult to estimate due to unknown factors, including the severity of an injury, the determination of our liability in proportion to other parties, timely reporting of occurrences, ongoing treatment or loss mitigation, general trends in litigation recovery outcomes and the effectiveness of safety and risk management programs. Therefore, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and estimates used for recording the liabilities, adjustments may be required and would be recorded in the period that such experience becomes known.
Accounting for Deferred Tax Assets
We regularly evaluate valuation allowances established for deferred tax assets for which future realization is uncertain. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we must consider whether it is more-likely-than-not some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in determining whether a valuation allowance is required. Such evidence includes the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, taxable income in prior carryback years and tax planning strategies in making this assessment, and judgment is required in considering the relative weight of negative and positive evidence.
Acquisitions
We recognize assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations, including contingent assets and liabilities, based on fair value estimates as of the date of acquisition.
Contingent Consideration-In certain acquisitions, we agree to pay additional amounts to sellers contingent upon achievement by the acquired businesses of certain predetermined profitability targets. We have recognized liabilities for these contingent obligations based on their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition with any differences between the acquisition date fair value and the ultimate settlement of the obligations being recognized in income from operations.
Contingent Assets and Liabilities-Assets and liabilities arising from contingencies are recognized at their acquisition date fair value when their respective fair values can be determined. If the fair values of such contingencies cannot be determined, they are recognized at the acquisition date if the contingencies are probable and an amount can be reasonably estimated. Acquisition date fair value estimates are revised as necessary if, and when, additional information regarding these contingencies becomes available to further define and quantify assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Recoverability of Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets
Goodwill is the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets of acquired businesses. We assess goodwill for impairment each year, and more frequently if circumstances suggest an impairment may have occurred.
When the carrying value of a given reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recorded for this difference, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. The requirements for assessing whether goodwill has been impaired involve market-based information. This information, and its use in assessing goodwill, entails some degree of subjective assessment.
We perform our annual impairment testing as of October 1, and any impairment charges resulting from this process are reported in the fourth quarter. We segregate our operations into reporting units based on the degree of operating and financial independence of each unit and our related management of them. We perform our annual goodwill impairment testing at the reporting unit level. We perform a goodwill impairment review for each of our operating units, as we have determined that each of our operating units are reporting units.
In the evaluation of goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of one of our reporting units is greater than its carrying value. If, after completing such assessment, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, then there is no need to perform any further testing. If we conclude otherwise, or if we elect to perform a quantitative assessment, then we calculate the fair value of the reporting unit and compare the fair value with the carrying value of the reporting unit.
We estimate the fair value of the reporting unit based on a market approach and an income approach, which utilizes discounted future cash flows. Assumptions critical to the fair value estimates under the discounted cash flow model include discount rates, cash flow projections, projected long-term growth rates and the determination of terminal values. The market approach utilizes market multiples of invested capital from comparable publicly traded companies (“public company approach”). The market multiples from invested capital include revenue, book equity plus debt and earnings before interest, provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”).
There are significant inherent uncertainties and management judgment involved in estimating the fair value of each reporting unit. While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and assumptions to estimate the fair value of our reporting units, it is possible that a material change could occur. If actual results are not consistent with our current estimates and assumptions, or the current economic outlook worsens, goodwill impairment charges may be recorded in future periods.
We amortize identifiable intangible assets with finite lives over their useful lives. Changes in strategy and/or market condition may result in adjustments to recorded intangible asset balances or their useful lives.
Results of Operations (in thousands):
2020 Compared to 2019
We had 35 operating locations as of December 31, 2019. In the second quarter of 2020, we completed the acquisition of TAS Energy Inc. (“TAS”), which reports as a separate operating location. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed the acquisition of TEC Industrial Construction and Maintenance (“T E C”), which reports as a separate operating location. As of December 31, 2020, we had 37 operating locations. Acquisitions are included in our results of operations from the respective acquisition date. The same-store comparison from 2020 to 2019, as described below, excludes T E C, which was acquired December 31, 2020, eleven months of results for our electrical contractor in North Carolina, which was acquired February 1, 2020 and reports together with our existing North Carolina operation, nine months of results for TAS, which was acquired April 1, 2020 and three months of results for Walker, which was acquired April 1, 2019. An operating location is included in the same-store comparison on the first day it has comparable prior year operating data, except for immaterial acquisitions that were absorbed and integrated, or “tucked-in,” with existing operations.
Revenue-Revenue increased $241.4 million, or 9.2%, to $2.86 billion in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase included an 11.6% increase related to the TAS, North Carolina electrical contractor and Walker acquisitions and a 2.4% decrease in revenue related to same-store activity.
The following table presents our operating segment revenue (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenue for our mechanical services segment increased $161.5 million, or 7.2%, to $2.41 billion in 2020 compared to 2019. Of this increase, $106.4 million was attributable to the TAS acquisition. The same-store revenue increase included an increase in the education sector at one of our Virginia operations ($22.1 million), in the office building and healthcare sectors at one of our Tennessee operations ($19.2 million) and in the education sector at our Wisconsin operation ($14.8 million). This increase was offset by the sale of the majority of the assets and ongoing business of our California operation in the third quarter of 2019 ($14.1 million).
Revenue for our electrical services segment increased $79.9 million to $443.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase related to the acquisition of Walker in April 2019 as well as the acquisition of the electrical
contractor in North Carolina in February 2020. These increases were partially offset by a $118.0 million decrease in same-store revenue, primarily resulting from expected decreases driven by a higher volume of large jobs in the prior period at our Walker operation and the impact of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”).
Backlog reflects revenue still to be recognized under contracted or committed installation and replacement project work. Project work generally lasts less than one year. Service agreement revenue, service work and short duration projects, which are generally billed as performed, do not flow through backlog. Accordingly, backlog represents only a portion of our revenue for any given future period, and it represents revenue that is likely to be reflected in our operating results over the next six to twelve months. As a result, we believe the predictive value of backlog information is limited to indications of general revenue direction over the near term and should not be interpreted as indicative of ongoing revenue performance over several quarters.
Backlog as of December 31, 2020 was $1.51 billion, a 5.8% increase from September 30, 2020 backlog of $1.43 billion and a 5.6% decrease from December 31, 2019 backlog of $1.60 billion. The sequential backlog increase included the T E C acquisition ($72.8 million or 5.1%). Same-store backlog increased 0.7%, primarily due to increased project bookings at TAS ($124.3 million), offset by completion of project work at our Colorado operation ($23.9 million), one of our Indiana operations ($19.4 million) and our Walker operation ($13.5 million). The year-over-year backlog decrease included a same-store backlog decrease of 23.4%, which was broad-based and was primarily as a result of completion of project work at our Walker operation ($116.3 million), our Colorado operation ($33.7 million) and one of our Florida operations ($29.7 million). This decrease was partially offset by the acquisition of the North Carolina electrical contractor ($47.4 million), the TAS acquisition ($164.3 million) and the T E C acquisition ($72.8 million).
Gross Profit-Gross profit increased $45.0 million, or 9.0%, to $547.0 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase included a $20.7 million, or 4.1%, increase related to the Walker, TAS and North Carolina electrical contractor acquisitions and a $24.4 million, or 4.9%, increase on a same-store basis. The same-store increase in gross profit was primarily due to improvement in project execution at our North Carolina operation ($14.8 million), one of our Indiana operations ($11.0 million) and one of our Tennessee operations ($6.7 million), offset by a decrease at one of our Florida operations ($8.2 million). As a percentage of revenue, gross profit decreased slightly from 19.2% in 2019 to 19.1% in 2020. Improvements in project execution discussed above were offset by lower margins on the Walker acquisition, which was acquired in April 2019, and by preventative and protective actions taken on projects, such as social distancing and other procedure adjustments caused by COVID-19, which negatively impacted margins starting in March 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)-SG&A increased $17.8 million, or 5.2%, to $357.8 million for 2020 as compared to 2019. On a same-store basis, excluding amortization expense, SG&A decreased $6.2 million, or 1.9%. This decrease is primarily due to the sale of the majority of the assets and ongoing business of our California operation in the third quarter of 2019 ($5.7 million) as well as due to a reduction in travel-related expenses as a result of COVID-19 ($4.2 million). These decreases were partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense of $1.3 million, mainly driven by concerns about collectability of certain receivables due to the business interruptions caused by COVID-19, specifically with respect to receivables with retail, restaurants and entertainment companies. Additionally, tax consulting fees increased from $1.3 million in 2019 to $2.8 million in 2020. Amortization expense increased $3.8 million during the period primarily as a result of the TAS and North Carolina electrical contractor acquisitions. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A decreased from 13.0% in 2019 to 12.5% in 2020 due to the factors discussed above and due to the acquisition of Walker, which has lower SG&A as a percentage of revenue.
We have included same-store SG&A, excluding amortization, because we believe it is an effective measure of comparative results of operations. However, same-store SG&A, excluding amortization, is not considered under generally accepted accounting principles to be a primary measure of an entity’s financial results, and accordingly, should not be considered an alternative to SG&A as shown in our consolidated statements of operations.
Interest Expense-Interest expense decreased $0.9 million, or 10.0%, in 2020. A reduction in our average interest rate on outstanding borrowings in 2020 as compared to 2019 caused the decrease in interest expense.
Changes in the Fair Value of Contingent Earn-out Obligations-The contingent earn-out obligations are measured at fair value each reporting period and changes in estimates of fair value are recognized in earnings. Income from changes in the fair value of contingent earn-out obligations increased $12.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increases were caused by higher expenses in the prior year as a result of increasing our obligation for the BCH acquisition as earnings exceeded forecast in the prior year as well as a reduction in our obligation for Walker in the current year caused by project delays, the impact of COVID-19 and lower than forecasted earnings in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes-We conduct business throughout the United States in virtually all fifty states. Our effective tax rate changes based upon our relative profitability, or lack thereof, in states with varying tax rates and rules. In addition, discrete items, such as tax law changes, judgments and legal structures can impact our effective tax rate. These items can also include the tax treatment for impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets, changes in fair value of acquisition-related assets and liabilities, tax reserves for uncertain tax positions, accounting for losses associated with underperforming operations and noncontrolling interests.
Our provision for income taxes for 2020 was $41.4 million with an effective tax rate of 21.6%, as compared to a provision for income taxes of $37.4 million with an effective tax rate of 24.7% for 2019. The effective rate for 2020 was higher than the 21% federal statutory rate primarily due to net state income taxes (4.4%) and nondeductible expenses, including nondeductible expenses related to TAS (1.3%), partially offset by reductions in unrecognized tax benefits plus interest as a result of settlement with the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) upon completion of its examination of our amended federal returns for 2014 and 2015 (4.7%). The effective rate for 2019 was higher than the 21% federal statutory rate primarily due to net state income taxes (4.4%) and nondeductible expenses (1.4%), partially offset by benefits from the filing, and expected filing, of amended returns to claim the energy efficient commercial buildings deduction (the “179D deduction”) allocated to us (1.5%) and deductions for stock-based compensation (0.5%). Refer to Note 11 in the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the federal statutory rates to the effective tax rates reflected in our financial statements.
The decrease in our effective tax rate from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to reductions in unrecognized tax benefits as a result of settlement with the IRS upon completion of its examination of our amended federal returns for 2014 and 2015 partially offset by nondeductible expenses related to TAS and smaller benefits from the filing of amended returns to claim the 179D deduction allocated to us.
We currently estimate our future effective tax rates will be between 25% and 30%. However, our effective tax rates could be on the low end of this range, or lower, as we continue to pursue claims for the credit for increasing research activities (the “R&D tax credit”) and the 179D deduction allocated to us. The 179D deduction was made permanent by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021.
2019 Compared to 2018
For a discussion of the period-to-period comparison of 2019 to 2018, please refer to “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-2019 Compared to 2018” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Outlook
Industry conditions improved during the four-year period from 2016 to 2019, and at the beginning of 2020 we expected this strong activity to continue during 2020. However, starting at the end of the first quarter of 2020, we experienced negative impacts to our business due to the business disruption caused by COVID-19. In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized COVID-19 as a pandemic, and the United States declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency.
Our service business experienced the first and most pronounced negative impacts, largely because of building closures or decisions by customers to limit building access. As of the end of the third quarter, the majority of our service operations had returned to levels that are at or near normal functioning. Our construction activities have generally been classified as essential services in the substantial majority of our markets, although we have had certain jobs temporarily or partially close due to government action, decisions by owners, or upon positive tests for COVID-19 of workers at various sites. We have also experienced delays in the award of new construction work in certain instances, and we have also faced limited instances of delayed starts. At the outset of the pandemic, we had some delays or cancellations of work in less than 5% of our backlog. Across our operations, we have implemented safety precautions and other COVID-19 related guidelines that have added cost or inefficiency as we work to create a safe environment for our team members and our communities. The Company considered the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on the assumptions and estimates used to determine our results and asset valuations as of December 31, 2020 and determined that there were no material or systematic adverse impacts on the Company except for diminished revenue, operational inefficiency, and adjustments in bad debt expense due to the potential for nonpayment by customers in industries more directly impacted by COVID-19.
Although conditions are stabilizing, COVID-19 continues to affect our business outlook, and we expect that in some markets we will experience additional delays in the award or commencement of a portion of our projects that is likely to impact activity levels in the coming quarters, and particularly during the first half of 2021. Despite these factors, we currently anticipate our full-year 2021 results are likely to be similar to, but somewhat lower than, the record results that we achieved in 2020, and we continue to prepare for a wide range of economic circumstances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow
Our business does not require significant amounts of investment in long-term fixed assets. The substantial majority of the capital used in our business is working capital that funds our costs of labor and installed equipment deployed in project work until our customer pays us. Customary terms in our industry allow customers to withhold a
small portion of the contract price until after we have completed the work, typically for six months. Amounts withheld under this practice are known as retention or retainage. Our average project duration, together with typical retention terms, generally allow us to complete the realization of revenue and earnings in cash within one year.
2020 Compared to 2019
Cash Provided by Operating Activities-Cash flow from operations is primarily influenced by demand for our services and operating margins but can also be influenced by working capital needs associated with the various types of services that we provide. In particular, working capital needs may increase when we commence large volumes of work under circumstances where project costs, primarily associated with labor, equipment and subcontractors, are required to be paid before the receivables resulting from the work performed are billed and collected. Working capital needs are generally higher during the late winter and spring months as we prepare and plan for the increased project demand when favorable weather conditions exist in the summer and fall months. Conversely, working capital assets are typically converted to cash during the late summer and fall months as project completion is underway. These seasonal trends are sometimes offset by changes in the timing of major projects, which can be impacted by the weather, project delays or accelerations and other economic factors that may affect customer spending.
We generated $286.5 million of cash flow from operating activities during 2020 compared with $142.0 million during 2019. The $144.5 million increase was primarily driven by an $88.0 million change in receivables, net attributable to strong collections in the current year, a $15.6 million change in other long-term liabilities, a $15.1 million change in billings in excess of costs, which was driven by timing of payments and project billings, and a $10.7 million change in prepaid expenses and other current assets. Operating cash flows in the current year benefited by approximately $32.0 million from the deferral of payroll taxes allowed by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) that normally would have been paid by December 31, 2020.
Cash Used in Investing Activities-Cash used in investing activities was $207.8 million for 2020 compared to $224.5 million during 2019. The $16.6 million decrease in cash used primarily relates to less cash paid (net of cash acquired) for acquisitions and capital expenditures in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities-Cash used in financing activities was $74.6 million for 2020 compared to cash provided by financing activities of $87.6 million during 2019. The $162.2 million increase in cash used in financing activities is primarily due to a decrease in net proceeds from the debt compared to the prior year, which was driven by stronger operating cash flows in the current year that allowed us to pay down more debt.
2019 Compared to 2018
For a discussion of the period-to-period comparison of 2019 to 2018, please refer to “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources-2019 Compared to 2018” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities, less customary capital expenditures, plus the proceeds from asset sales. We believe free cash flow, by encompassing both profit margins and the use of working capital over our approximately one year working capital cycle, is an effective measure of operating effectiveness and efficiency. We have included free cash flow information here for this reason, and because we are often asked about it by third parties evaluating us. However, free cash flow is not considered under generally accepted accounting principles to be a primary measure of an entity’s financial results, and accordingly free cash flow should not be considered an alternative to operating income, net income, or amounts shown in our consolidated statements of cash flows as determined under generally accepted accounting principles. Free cash flow may be defined differently by other companies.
Share Repurchase Program
On March 29, 2007, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program to acquire up to 1.0 million shares of our outstanding common stock. Subsequently, the Board has from time to time increased the number of shares that may be acquired under the program and approved extensions of the program. On December 8, 2020, the Board
approved an extension to the program by increasing the shares authorized for repurchase by 0.7 million shares. Since the inception of the repurchase program, the Board has approved 10.3 million shares to be repurchased. As of December 31, 2020, we have repurchased a cumulative total of 9.3 million shares at an average price of $19.63 per share under the repurchase program.
The share repurchases will be made from time to time at our discretion in the open market or privately negotiated transactions as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements, and subject to market conditions and other factors. The Board may modify, suspend, extend or terminate the program at any time. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 0.7 million shares for approximately $30.1 million at an average price of $43.99 per share.
Debt
Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan
We have a $600.0 million senior credit facility (the “Facility”) provided by a syndicate of banks. The Facility is composed of a revolving credit line in the amount of $450.0 million and a $150.0 million term loan, and the Facility also provides for a $150.0 million accordion or increase option for the revolving portion of the Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the Facility capacity was $585.0 million as the term loan was paid down by $15.0 million since the inception of the Facility. The Facility also includes a sublimit of up to $160.0 million issuable in the form of letters of credit. The Facility expires in January 2025 and is secured by a first lien on substantially all of our personal property except for assets related to projects subject to surety bonds and assets held by certain unrestricted subsidiaries and our wholly owned captive insurance company and a second lien on our assets related to projects subject to surety bonds. In 2019, we incurred approximately $1.4 million in financing and professional costs in connection with an amendment to the Facility, which are being amortized over the remaining term of the Facility. Of this amount, $0.4 million is attributable to the term loan and is being amortized using the effective interest method. The remaining $1.0 million is attributable to the revolving credit line, which combined with the previous unamortized costs of $1.3 million, is being amortized over the remaining term of the Facility on a straight-line basis as a non-cash charge to interest expense. For the term loan, we are required to make quarterly payments increasing over time from 1.25% to 3.75% of the original aggregate principal amount of the term loan, with the balance due in January 2025. As of December 31, 2020, we had $135.0 million principal outstanding on the term loan, $70.0 million of outstanding borrowings, $49.5 million in letters of credit outstanding and $330.5 million of credit available.
There are two interest rate options for borrowings under the Facility, the Base Rate Loan option and the Eurodollar Rate Loan option. These rates are floating rates determined by the broad financial markets, meaning they can and do move up and down from time to time. Additional margins are then added to these two rates. The weighted average interest rate applicable to the borrowings under the revolving credit facility was approximately 1.4% as of December 31, 2020. The weighted average interest rate applicable to the term loan was approximately 1.4% as of December 31, 2020.
Certain of our vendors require letters of credit to ensure reimbursement for amounts they are disbursing on our behalf, such as to beneficiaries under our self-funded insurance programs. We have also occasionally used letters of credit to guarantee performance under our contracts and to ensure payment to our subcontractors and vendors under those contracts. Our lenders issue such letters of credit through the Facility for a fee. We have never had a claim made against a letter of credit that resulted in payments by a lender or by us and believe such claims are unlikely in the foreseeable future. The letter of credit fees range from 1.25% to 2.00% per annum, based on the ratio of Consolidated Total Indebtedness to “Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA,” which shall mean Consolidated EBITDA as such term is defined in the credit agreement.
Commitment fees are payable on the portion of the revolving loan capacity not in use for borrowings or letters of credit at any given time. These fees range from 0.20% to 0.35% per annum, based on the ratio of Consolidated Total Indebtedness to Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA.
Interest expense included the following primary elements (in thousands):
The Facility contains financial covenants defining various financial measures and the levels of these measures with which we must comply. Covenant compliance is assessed as of each quarter end. Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA is defined under the Facility for financial covenant purposes as net earnings for the four quarters ending as of any given quarterly covenant compliance measurement date, plus the corresponding amounts for (a) interest expense; (b) provision for income taxes; (c) depreciation and amortization; (d) stock compensation; (e) other non-cash charges; and (f) pre-acquisition results of acquired companies. The following is a reconciliation of Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA to net income for 2020 (in thousands):
The Facility’s principal financial covenants include:
Total Leverage Ratio-The Facility requires that the ratio of our Consolidated Total Indebtedness to our Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA not exceed 3.00 to 1.00 as of the end of each fiscal quarter. The total leverage ratio as of December 31, 2020 was 0.8.
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio-The Facility requires that the ratio of (a) Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA, less non-financed capital expenditures, provision for income taxes, dividends and amounts used to repurchase stock when the Company’s Total Leverage Ratio exceeds 2.00 to 1.00 to (b) the sum of interest expense and scheduled principal payments of indebtedness be at least 1.50 to 1.00. Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA, capital expenditures, provision for income taxes, dividends, stock repurchase payments, interest expense, and scheduled principal payments are defined under the Facility, for purposes of this covenant, to be amounts for the four quarters ending as of any given quarterly covenant compliance measurement date. The fixed charge coverage ratio as of December 31, 2020 was 7.2.
Other Restrictions-The Facility permits acquisitions of up to $5.0 million per transaction, provided that the aggregate purchase price of such an acquisition and of acquisitions in the same fiscal year does not exceed $10.0 million. However, these limitations only apply when the Company’s Total Leverage Ratio is greater than 2.50 to 1.00.
While the Facility’s financial covenants do not specifically govern capacity under the Facility, if our debt level under the Facility at a quarter-end covenant compliance measurement date were to cause us to violate the Facility’s leverage ratio covenant, our borrowing capacity under the Facility and the favorable terms that we currently have could be negatively impacted by the lenders.
We were in compliance with all of our financial covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Notes to Former Owners
As part of the consideration used to acquire four companies, we have outstanding notes to the former owners. Together, these notes had an outstanding balance of $31.0 million as of December 31, 2020. In conjunction with the acquisition of T E C in the fourth quarter of 2020, we issued a promissory note to former owners with an outstanding
balance of $7.0 million as of December 31, 2020 that bears interest, payable quarterly, at a stated interest rate of 2.5%. The principal is due in December 2023. In conjunction with the acquisition of TAS in the second quarter of 2020, we issued a promissory note to former owners with an outstanding balance of $8.0 million as of December 31, 2020 that bears interest, payable quarterly, at a stated interest rate of 3.5%. The principal is due in April 2022. In conjunction with the acquisition of the electrical contractor in North Carolina in the first quarter of 2020, we issued a promissory note to former owners with an outstanding balance of $6.0 million as of December 31, 2020 that bears interest, payable quarterly, at a stated interest rate of 3.0%. The principal is due in installments in February 2023 and February 2024. In conjunction with the Walker acquisition in the second quarter of 2019, we issued a promissory note to former owners with an outstanding balance of $10.0 million as of December 31, 2020 that bears interest, payable quarterly, at a stated interest rate of 4.0%. The remaining principal is due in April 2023.
Outlook
We have generated positive net free cash flow for the last twenty-two calendar years, much of which occurred during challenging economic and industry conditions. We also continue to have significant borrowing capacity under our credit facility, and we maintain what we feel are reasonable cash balances. We believe these factors will provide us with sufficient liquidity to fund our operations for the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Other Commitments
As is common in our industry, we have entered into certain off-balance sheet arrangements in the ordinary course of business that result in risks not directly reflected in our Balance Sheets, such as obligations involving letters of credit and surety guarantees.
Certain of our vendors require letters of credit to ensure reimbursement for amounts they are disbursing on our behalf, such as to beneficiaries under our self-funded insurance programs. We have also occasionally used letters of credit to guarantee performance under our contracts and to ensure payment to our subcontractors and vendors under those contracts. The letters of credit we provide are actually issued by our lenders through the Facility as described above. A letter of credit commits the lenders to pay specified amounts to the holder of the letter of credit if the holder demonstrates that we have failed to perform specified actions. If this were to occur, we would be required to reimburse the lenders. Depending on the circumstances of such a reimbursement, we may also have to record a charge to earnings for the reimbursement. Absent a claim, there is no payment or reserving of funds by us in connection with a letter of credit. However, because a claim on a letter of credit would require immediate reimbursement by us to our lenders, letters of credit are treated as a use of the Facility’s capacity just the same as actual borrowings. Claims against letters of credit are rare in our industry. To date, we have not had a claim made against a letter of credit that resulted in payments by a lender or by us. We believe that it is unlikely that we will have to fund claims under a letter of credit in the foreseeable future.
Many customers, particularly in connection with new construction, require us to post performance and payment bonds issued by a financial institution known as a surety. If we fail to perform under the terms of a contract or to pay subcontractors and vendors who provided goods or services under a contract, the customer may demand that the surety make payments or provide services under the bond. We must reimburse the sureties for any expenses or outlays they incur. To date, we are not aware of any losses to our sureties in connection with bonds the sureties have posted on our behalf, and we do not expect such losses to be incurred in the foreseeable future.
Under standard terms in the surety market, sureties issue bonds on a project-by-project basis, and can decline to issue bonds at any time. Historically, approximately 15% to 25% of our business has required bonds. While we currently have strong surety relationships to support our bonding needs, future market conditions or changes in our sureties’ assessment of our operating and financial risk could cause our sureties to decline to issue bonds for our work. If that were to occur, our alternatives include doing more business that does not require bonds, posting other forms of collateral for project performance, such as letters of credit or cash, and seeking bonding capacity from other sureties. We would likely also encounter concerns from customers, suppliers and other market participants as to our creditworthiness. While we believe our general operating and financial characteristics would enable us to ultimately respond effectively to an interruption in the availability of bonding capacity, such an interruption would likely cause our revenue and profits to decline in the near term.
Contractual Obligations
Twelve Months Ended December 31,
As of December 31, 2020, we have $49.5 million in letter of credit commitments, of which $16.8 million will expire in 2021, $16.7 million will expire in 2022 and $16.0 million will expire in 2025. The substantial majority of these letters of credit are posted with insurers who disburse funds on our behalf in connection with our workers’ compensation, auto liability and general liability insurance program. These letters of credit provide additional security to the insurers that sufficient financial resources will be available to fund claims on our behalf, many of which develop over long periods of time, should we ever encounter financial duress. Posting of letters of credit for this purpose is a common practice for entities that manage their self-insurance programs through third-party insurers as we do. While some of these letter of credit commitments expire in 2021, we expect nearly all of them, particularly those supporting our insurance programs, will be renewed annually.
As discussed in Note 11 “Income Taxes,” included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020 is $28.8 million of unrecognized tax benefits. We believe it is reasonably possible that a reduction of up to $28.8 million in unrecognized tax benefits could occur within the next twelve months. However, due to the uncertain and complex application of tax regulations, combined with the difficulty in predicting when tax audits may be concluded, we generally cannot make reliable estimates of the timing of cash outflows relating to these liabilities.
Other than the operating lease obligations discussed in Note 10 “Leases,” we have no significant purchase or operating commitments outside of commitments to deliver equipment and provide labor in the ordinary course of performing project work.