Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section of the Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 detail and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. For a comparison of our results for 2019 to our results of 2018 and other financial information related to 2018, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended February 1, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020.
Business Overview
Foot Locker, Inc. leads the celebration of sneaker and youth culture around the globe through a portfolio of brands including Foot Locker, Lady Foot Locker, Kids Foot Locker, Champs Sports, Eastbay, Footaction, and Sidestep. As of January 30, 2021, we operated 2,998 primarily mall-based stores, as well as stores in high-traffic urban retail areas and high streets, in 27 countries across the United States, Canada, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Asia. Our purpose is to inspire and empower youth culture around the world, by fueling a shared passion for self-expression and creating unrivaled experiences at the heart of the global sneaker community.
Foot Locker, Inc. uses its omni-channel capabilities to bridge the digital world and physical stores, including order-in-store, buy online and pickup-in-store, and buy online and ship-from-store, as well as e-commerce. We operate websites and mobile apps aligned with the brand names of our store banners (including footlocker.com, ladyfootlocker.com, kidsfootlocker.com, champssports.com, footaction.com, footlocker.ca, footlocker.eu (and related e-commerce sites in the various European countries that we operate) footlocker.com.au, footlocker.com.nz, sidestep-shoes.de, sidestep-shoes.nl, footlocker.mo, footlocker.hk, footlocker.sg, and footlocker.my). These sites offer some of the largest online product selections and provide a seamless link between e-commerce and physical stores. We also operate the websites for eastbay.com, final-score.com, and eastbayteamsales.com.
Segment Reporting
Our operating segments are identified according to how our business activities are managed and evaluated by our chief operating decision maker, our CEO. We have three operating segments, North America, Europe, Middle East, and Africa (“EMEA”), and Asia Pacific. Our North America operating segment includes the results of the following banners operating in the U.S. and Canada: Foot Locker, Kids Foot Locker, Lady Foot Locker, Champs Sports, and Footaction, including each of their related e-commerce businesses, as well as our Eastbay business that includes internet, catalog, and team sales. Our EMEA operating segment includes the results of the following banners operating in Europe: Foot Locker, Sidestep, and Kids Foot Locker, including each of their related e-commerce businesses. Our Asia Pacific operating segment includes the results of Foot Locker and Kids Foot Locker operating in Australia, New Zealand, and Asia as well as the related e-commerce businesses. We have further aggregated these operating segments into one reportable segment based upon their shared customer base and similar economic characteristics.
COVID-19
COVID-19 had a significant effect on overall economic conditions in the various geographic areas in which we have operations. Our top priority is to protect our team members and their families, our customers, and our operations. We have taken all precautionary measures as directed by health authorities and local, state, and national governments. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed our stores across all of our brands in North America, EMEA, and Asia Pacific throughout the year. The following represents a summary of the percentage of time that our stores were open, although there were significant regional variances by quarter and other restrictions that reduced operating hours as well:
We continue to monitor the outbreak of COVID-19 and other closures, or closures for a longer period of time, reduced operating hours, capacity limitations, and social distancing may be required to help ensure the health and safety of our team members and our customers. COVID-19 has and may continue to have an effect on ports and trade, as well as global travel.
2020 Form 10-K Page 18
We have set up a special COVID-19 task force which is overseeing the necessary precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our team members as well as following the guidance provided by local health authorities.
Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the duration of business disruption, and reduced customer traffic, the related financial affect cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but may materially affect our business for the full year of 2021.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to reporting our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we report certain financial results that differ from what is reported under GAAP. In the following tables, we have presented certain financial measures and ratios identified as non-GAAP such as Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (“EBIT”), adjusted EBIT, adjusted EBIT margin, adjusted income before income taxes, adjusted net income, adjusted net income margin, adjusted diluted earnings per share, Return on Invested Capital (“ROIC”), and free cash flow.
We present these non-GAAP measures because we believe they assist investors in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that are not indicative of our core business or which affect comparability. These non-GAAP measures are also useful in assessing our progress in achieving our long-term financial objectives.
Additionally, we present certain amounts as excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations, which are also considered non-GAAP measures. Throughout the following discussions, where amounts are expressed as excluding the effects of foreign currency fluctuations, such changes are determined by translating all amounts in both years using the prior-year average foreign exchange rates. Presenting amounts on a constant currency basis is useful to investors because it enables them to better understand the changes in our businesses that are not related to currency movements.
We estimate the tax effect of the non-GAAP adjustments by applying a marginal rate to each of the respective items. The income tax items represent the discrete amount that affected the period.
The non-GAAP financial information is provided in addition to, and not as an alternative to, our reported results prepared in accordance with GAAP. Presented below is a reconciliation of GAAP and non-GAAP results discussed throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please see the non-GAAP reconciliations for free cash flow in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section.
Reconciliation:
2020 Form 10-K Page 19
Notes on Non-GAAP Adjustments:
(1) For 2020, 2019, and 2018, we recorded impairment and other charges of $117 million ($93 million net of tax), $65 million ($49 million net of tax), and $37 million ($31 million net of tax), respectively. See the Impairment and Other Charges section for further information.
(2) During 2020, one of our minority investments, which is measured using the fair value measurement alternative, received additional funding in the third quarter of 2020 at a higher valuation than our initial investment. As a result, we recorded a $190 million non-cash gain, or $140 million net of tax, during the third quarter of 2020. In 2019, Other income, net represented a gain recorded in connection with acquisition of a Canadian distribution center lease and related assets. The tax expense related to this transaction was largely offset by the release of a valuation allowance.
(3) We recorded a $25 million tax charge related to the revaluation of certain intellectual property rights, pursuant to a non-U.S. advance pricing agreement.
(4) We recognized a tax benefit of $5 million and $2 million during the fourth quarters of 2020 and 2019, respectively, and a tax expense of $4 million during the fourth quarter 2018 in connection with tax law changes in the Netherlands.
(5) On December 22, 2017, the United States enacted tax reform legislation that included a broad range of business tax provisions. In 2017, we recognized a $99 million provisional charge for the mandatory deemed repatriation of foreign sourced net earnings and a corresponding change in our permanent reinvestment assertion under ASC 740-30. During 2018, we reduced the provisional amounts by $28 million. This adjustment represented a $21 million reduction in the deemed repatriation tax and a $7 million benefit related to IRS accounting method changes and timing difference adjustments. In 2019, we recorded a charge for $2 million, which reflected an adjustment to U.S. tax on foreign income. We exclude the discrete U.S. tax reform effect from our Adjusted diluted EPS as it does not reflect our ongoing tax obligations under U.S. tax reform.
(6) Valuation allowances were established against deferred tax assets associated with certain foreign tax losses.
(7) During 2018, the U.S. Treasury issued a notice that delayed the effective date of regulations under Internal Revenue Code Section 987. The effective date was further delayed by a notice issued in the fourth quarter of 2019 and third quarter of 2020. These regulations changed our method for determining the tax effects of foreign currency translation gains and losses for our foreign businesses that are operated as branches and are reported in a currency other than the currency of their parent. As a result of the delay in the effective date, we updated our calculations for the effect of these regulations, which resulted in an increase to deferred tax assets and a corresponding reduction in our income tax provision in the amount of $1 million in 2018. The adjustments recorded in 2020 and 2019 were not significant.
2020 Form 10-K Page 20
Return on Invested Capital
ROIC is presented below and represents a non-GAAP measure. We believe ROIC is a meaningful measure because it quantifies how efficiently we generated operating income relative to the capital we have invested in the business. ROIC, subject to certain adjustments, is also used as a measure in executive long-term incentive compensation.
The closest U.S. GAAP measure to ROIC is Return on Assets (“ROA”) and is also presented below. ROA is calculated as net income in the fiscal year divided by the two-year average of total assets. ROA decreased to 4.7 percent as compared with 9.4 percent in the prior year. This decrease reflected lower net income and higher average total assets, primarily driven by an increase in cash and cash equivalents partially offset by lower merchandise inventories.
Prior to the adoption of the new lease standard in 2019, we adjusted our results to reflect our operating leases as if they qualified for finance lease treatment or as if the property were purchased. The presentation in 2018 did not reflect the requirements of the new lease standard. With the adoption of this standard, leases are now recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and therefore, certain adjustments are no longer required. Our ROIC decreased to 8.6 percent in 2020, as compared with 12.5 percent in the prior year. The overall decrease in ROIC reflected a decrease in adjusted return after taxes due to the lower profitability caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
(1) Represents net income of $323 million, $491 million, and $541 million divided by average total assets of $6,816 million, $5,205 million, and $3,891 million for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Calculation of ROIC:
(1) For 2018, the determination of the capitalized operating leases and the adjustments to income was calculated on a lease-by-lease basis and represented the best estimate of the asset base that would be recorded for operating leases as if they had been classified as finance leases or as if the property were purchased. No such adjustments are required for 2020 and 2019 since leases are accounted for on the Consolidated Balance Sheet after the adoption of the new leasing standard.
(2) Represents the add-back to operating income driven by the hypothetical interest expense we would incur if the property under our operating leases were owned or accounted for as finance leases. Calculated using the discount rate for each operating lease recorded as a component of rent expense. Operating lease interest is added back to adjusted net operating profit in the ROIC calculation to account for differences in capital structure between us and our competitors.
(3) The adjusted income tax expense represents the marginal tax rate applied to adjusted net operating profit for each of the periods presented.
(4) For 2019, the amount represents the average total assets for 2019 and 2018, excluding the 2019 right-of-use assets of $2,899 million for comparability to prior periods.
(5) For 2019, the amount represents the average of the right-of-use assets as of February 1, 2020 and February 3, 2019 (the date of the adoption of the new lease standard) of $2,899 million and $3,148 million, respectively.
2020 Form 10-K Page 21
Overview of Consolidated Results
Highlights of our 2020 financial performance include:
● COVID-19 had a significant effect on overall economic conditions in the various geographic areas in which we have operations. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, stores across all of our brands in North America, EMEA, and Asia Pacific were temporarily closed for various periods during the year. As a result of COVID-19, our stores were open for approximately 75 percent of operating days within 2020. While we attempted to mitigate the loss of sales by employing strategies such as buy on-line and pick-up in store or other curbside services, it was not enough to offset the decrease. Social unrest in the United States and Canada also affected our sales performance and affected our results due to the losses that were sustained.
● Footwear sales increased to 84 percent of total sales for 2020, as compared with 83 percent in the prior year.
● Our stores channel experienced decreases in sales due to the previously mentioned store closures and resulting reduced customer traffic to shopping centers and malls.
● Sales per square foot decreased to $417 reflecting store closures and related reduced customer traffic.
● Our direct-to-customers sales channel represented 27.8 percent of total sales in 2020, an increase from 16.1 percent in the prior year. Our ongoing investments in our omnichannel ecosystem, including supply chain capabilities, have been instrumental in delivering a seamless customer experience.
● As noted in the table below, sales and comparable sales both decreased due to closures of our stores throughout the year as a result of COVID-19. Our direct-to-customers channel generated significant increases which partially offset the sales declines in the stores channel.
● Gross margin, as a percentage of sales, decreased to 28.9 percent as a result of increased promotions and the higher portion of direct-to-customer sales, which bear higher freight costs.
● SG&A expenses were 21.0 percent of sales, an increase of 40 basis points as compared with the prior year. The increase reflected lower sales and an increase in personal protective equipment costs, partially offset by governmental retention credits.
● Net income was $323 million, or $3.08 diluted earnings per share, which represented a decrease from the prior-year period. This decrease reflected lower sales and higher impairment charges, partially offset by an increase in other income. Adjusted net income was $296 million, or $2.81 diluted earnings per share, as compared with adjusted net income of $538 million, or $4.93 diluted earnings per share.
2020 Form 10-K Page 22
Highlights of our financial position for the year ended January 30, 2021 include:
● Due to the pandemic, we took various actions to enhance our liquidity, which included borrowing under our revolving credit facility and expense reductions across the organization, including lease concessions negotiated with landlords that reduced or deferred our lease-related payments, scaled-back merchandise inventory orders, extended payment terms with merchandise vendors, temporary workforce reductions, reduced capital spending, reduced salaries and deferred incentive compensation for the CEO and senior executives, and the suspension of our dividend payment in the second quarter, among other measures.
● We ended the year in a strong financial position. At year end, we had $1,580 million of cash and cash equivalents, net of debt. Cash and cash equivalents at January 30, 2021 were $1,680 million. Our ending cash balance was elevated, in part, due to the higher-than-normal accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of merchandise receipts.
● Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,062 million as compared with $696 million last year.
● During the year we amended our revolving credit facility, increasing it to a $600 million asset-based revolving credit facility maturing on July 14, 2025. No amounts were outstanding at January 30, 2021.
● Cash capital expenditures during 2020 totaled $159 million and were primarily directed to the remodeling or relocation of 80 stores, the build-out of 70 new stores, as well as other technology and infrastructure projects.
● During 2020, we returned $110 million of cash to our shareholders. Dividends totaling $73 million were declared and paid during 2020, and 968,547 shares were repurchased under our share repurchase program at a cost of $37 million. In February 2021, our Board of Directors approved a dividend of $0.20 per share payable on April 30, 2021. These initiatives demonstrate our commitment to delivering meaningful returns to our shareholders.
Sales
All references to comparable-store sales for a given period relate to sales of stores that were open at the period-end and had been open for more than one year. The computation of consolidated comparable sales also includes direct-to-customers sales. Stores opened or closed during the period are not included in the comparable-store base; however, stores closed temporarily for relocation or remodeling are included. Stores that were temporarily closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic are also included in the computation of comparable-store sales. Computations exclude the effect of foreign currency fluctuations.
The information shown below represents certain sales metrics by sales channel:
In 2020, sales decreased by 5.7 percent to $7,548 million from sales of $8,005 million in 2019. Excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, sales decreased by 6.3 percent as compared with 2019.
Comparable sales decreased by 5.9 percent as compared with the prior year. The overall comparable sales decline was a result of store closures throughout the year necessitated by COVID-19, this was partially offset by our direct-to-customers channel, which increased by 62.8 percent as compared with the prior year. Our ongoing investments in our omnichannel ecosystem, including supply chain capabilities, have been instrumental in delivering a seamless customer experience resulting in our digital business representing 27.8 percent of our sales for 2020. Our investments allowed us to leverage our direct-to customers business to continue to serve our customers achieving record daily volume levels.
2020 Form 10-K Page 23
Our EMEA and North America operating segments had comparable sales declines, while our Asia Pacific operating segment generated an increase. The decline in EMEA and North America primarily came from the stores channel as a result of the temporary closures of our stores across all of our banners at various times during the year due to the pandemic. Within North America, our Kids Foot Locker and Footaction business generated increases and our Champs Sports business was essentially flat with all other banners being negative. EMEA’s temporary store closures were for longer periods of time and therefore all banners operating in EMEA declined. Our Asia Pacific operating segment increases were led by strong sales in our Australia e-commerce business.
From a product perspective, we experienced a decline across all product categories (footwear, apparel, and accessories) primarily due to closures necessitated by COVID-19. Sales of men’s basketball and women’s footwear were positive for the year. Additionally, our women’s apparel sales also generated an increase for the year.
Gross Margin
Gross margin is calculated as sales minus cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the cost of merchandise, freight, distribution costs including related depreciation expense, shipping and handling, occupancy and buyers’ compensation. Occupancy costs include rent (including fixed common area maintenance charges and other fixed non-lease components), real estate taxes, general maintenance, and utilities.
Overall, the gross margin rate decreased to 28.9 percent as compared with the prior year rate of 31.8 percent. The decline in the gross margin rate was due to increased promotions to remain competitive in the marketplace and to clear inventory, as well as the higher portion of direct-to-customer sales, which bear higher freight costs. The promotional stance was partially necessitated by COVID-19 related store closures and our inability to return slow-moving inventory to our suppliers. Offsetting, in part, the higher promotional markdowns taken was increased supplier support, which positively affected the gross margin rate by 80 basis points as compared with the prior year.
The occupancy rate was positively affected by COVID-19 related rent abatements. Due to completed lease negotiations, we were able to record $67 million of rent savings due primarily to rent abatements during the year. We record rent abatements in rent expense when the negotiations are completed and the leases are modified.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (SG&A)
SG&A decreased by $63 million, or 3.8 percent, in 2020, as compared with the prior year. As a percentage of sales, the SG&A rate increased by 40 basis points as compared with 2019. Excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, SG&A decreased by $78 million, or 4.7 percent, as compared with the prior year.
SG&A included CARES Act retention credits and similar governmental subsidies of $71 million, as we continued to pay our employees throughout most of the first quarter despite the temporary store closures. We also incurred incremental expenses of $14 million for personal protective equipment. We carefully managed expenses by reducing spending in all areas of the business, including marketing and travel, among other categories.
Depreciation and Amortization
2020 Form 10-K Page 24
Capital expenditures were reduced at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and this contributed to the $3 million reduction in depreciation and amortization in 2020 as compared with 2019. Excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, depreciation and amortization decreased by $5 million as compared with the prior year.
Operating Results
Division profit was $491 million, or 6.5 percent of sales in 2020. This compares with $788 million, or 9.8 percent of sales, for the prior year. The decline was from our stores channel and was partially offset by an increase in our direct-to-customers channel. Our direct-to-customers channel improved its gross margins and both channels significantly reduced operating costs as mitigation for the loss of sales caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impairment and Other Charges
Due to COVID-19 and its effect on our actual and projected results, during the first quarter of 2020 we determined that a triggering event occurred for certain underperforming stores operating in Europe and, therefore, we conducted an impairment review. We evaluated the long-lived assets, including the right-of-use assets, and recorded non-cash charges of $15 million to write down store fixtures, leasehold improvements, and right-of-use assets of 70 stores. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we conducted an additional impairment review for approximately 90 underperforming stores. We evaluated the long-lived assets, including the right-of-use assets and recorded non-cash charges of $62 million to write down store fixtures, leasehold improvements, and right-of-use assets for approximately 60 of those stores.
Losses related to social unrest represented inventory losses, damages to store property, repairs, and other costs incurred in connection with the riots that affected certain parts of the United States and Canada during 2020 and resulted in a loss of $18 million. Approximately 140 stores were damaged due to the unrest. The total charge included inventory losses of $15 million, damages to store property of $1 million, and repairs and other costs of $2 million. During the fourth quarter, we recorded a partial insurance recovery of $10 million. We are continuing to work with our insurers to determine the remaining amount of our covered losses under our property insurance policy. Additional insurance recoveries will be recorded in the period in which we conclude our settlement discussions with our insurance providers.
In May 2020, we made the strategic decision to shut down our Runners Point business and to consolidate our Sidestep support staff into our other operations in Europe. Also, as part of the next phase of the Champs Sports and Eastbay strategic initiative, we restructured positions and aligned several functions across the banners and consolidated certain Eastbay operations into Champs Sports. We recorded charges of $19 million related to the shutdown of the Runners Point business and $3 million related to the reorganization associated with Eastbay. We also recorded a charge of $4 million in connection with the reorganization of certain support functions and supply chain operations within our EMEA segment.
During 2020, we recorded charges totaling $4 million related to the write-down of one of our minority investments and we incurred $2 million related to the pension matter and related plan reformation.
See Note 3, Impairment and Other Charges for additional information.
Corporate Expense
Corporate expense consists of unallocated general and administrative expenses as well as depreciation and amortization related to our corporate headquarters, centrally managed departments, unallocated insurance and benefit programs, certain foreign exchange transaction gains and losses, and other items. Depreciation and amortization included in corporate expense was $24 million, $19 million, and $18 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The allocation of corporate expense to the operating divisions is adjusted annually based upon an internal study; accordingly, the allocation increased by $28 million in 2020, thus reducing corporate expense. Excluding the corporate allocation change, corporate expense increased by $25 million as compared with 2019. This increase was primarily due to higher incentive compensation expense.
2020 Form 10-K Page 25
Interest (Expense) Income, net
We recorded net interest expense of $7 million in 2020 as compared with net interest income of $11 million in 2019. Interest income decreased as a result of lower average interest rates on our cash and cash equivalents. Additionally, interest expense increased due to the drawdown of the revolving credit facility in March 2020 and higher costs related to the new revolving credit facility. In the first quarter of 2020, we borrowed $330 million of our credit facility which was repaid in full during the second quarter of 2020.
Other Income, net
Other income, net includes non-operating items, franchise royalty income, gains associated with disposal of property, changes in fair value, premiums paid, and realized gains associated with foreign currency option contracts, changes in the market value of our available-for-sale security, premiums paid to repurchase and retire bonds, changes in value for our investments accounted for using the fair value measurement alternative, which is at cost adjusted for changes in observable prices minus impairment, our share of earnings or losses related to our equity method investments, and net benefit expense or income related to our pension and postretirement programs, excluding the service cost component.
One of our minority investments, which is measured using the fair value measurement alternative, received additional funding at a higher valuation than our initial investment. As a result, we recorded a $190 million non-cash gain during the third quarter of 2020. Other income, net also included $6 million of royalty income, $5 million of net benefit income relating to our pension and post retirement programs. This income was partially offset by $2 million in premiums paid in connection with the repurchase and retirement of bonds and a $1 million loss related to our equity method investments.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for 2020 was 34.5 percent, as compared with 27.0 percent in 2019. The increase was primarily due to valuation allowances for losses in certain foreign jurisdictions and a $25 million tax charge related to the revaluation of certain intellectual property rights pursuant to a non-U.S. advance pricing agreement. Additionally, during the fourth quarters of 2020 and 2019, we recorded tax benefits of $5 million and $2 million, respectively, in connection with tax law changes in the Netherlands.
We regularly assess the adequacy of provisions for income tax contingencies in accordance with the applicable authoritative guidance on accounting for income taxes. As a result, reserves for unrecognized tax benefits may be adjusted due to new facts and developments, such as changes to interpretations of relevant tax law, assessments from taxing authorities, settlements with taxing authorities, and lapses of statutes of limitations. The changes in the tax reserves were not significant in 2020 and 2019.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law in the U.S. to provide certain relief as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. On December 27, the Consolidations Appropriations Act, 2021 (“CAA”) was signed into law to fund the federal government through the end of the fiscal year, provide further COVID-19 economic relief, and extend certain expiring tax provisions. In addition, governments around the world enacted or implemented various forms of tax relief measures in response to the economic conditions in the wake of COVID-19. We are required to recognize the effects of tax law changes in the period of enactment. We have assessed the applicability of the CARES Act & CAA, (combined as “Acts”), and changes to income tax laws or regulations in other jurisdictions and determined there is no significant effect on our income tax provision for the year ended January 30, 2021. We continue to assess the effect of the Acts and ongoing government guidance related to COVID-19 that may be issued.
2020 Form 10-K Page 26
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our primary source of liquidity has been cash flow from operations, while the principal uses of cash have been to fund inventory and other working capital requirements; finance capital expenditures related to store openings, store remodelings, internet and mobile sites, information systems, and other support facilities; make retirement plan contributions, quarterly dividend payments, and interest payments; and fund other cash requirements to support the development of our short-term and long-term operating strategies. We generally finance real estate with operating leases. We believe our cash, cash equivalents, future cash flow from operations, and amounts available under our credit agreement will be adequate to fund these requirements.
We may also repurchase our common stock through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, or otherwise. Such repurchases if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. As of January 30, 2021, approximately $830 million remained available under our current $1.2 billion share repurchase program.
In February 2021, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.20 per share to be paid on April 30, 2021, representing a 33 percent increase over the previous quarterly per share amount.
In January 2022, we will repay the $98 million principal outstanding of our 8.5 percent debentures.
Any material adverse change in customer demand, fashion trends, competitive market forces, or customer acceptance of our merchandise mix and retail locations, uncertainties related to the effect of competitive products and pricing, our reliance on a few key suppliers for a significant portion of our merchandise purchases and risks associated with global product sourcing, economic conditions worldwide, the effects of currency fluctuations, uncertainties caused by COVID-19, as well as other factors listed under the heading “Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” could affect our ability to continue to fund our liquidity needs from business operations.
Maintaining access to merchandise that we consider appropriate for our business may be subject to the policies and practices of our key suppliers. Therefore, we believe that it is critical to continue to maintain satisfactory relationships with these key suppliers. We purchased approximately 91 percent of our merchandise from our top five suppliers in both 2020 and 2019 and expect to continue to obtain a significant percentage of our athletic product from these suppliers in future periods. Approximately 75 percent and 71 percent was purchased from one supplier, Nike, Inc., in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Planned capital expenditures in 2021 are $275 million. Included in the planned amount is $160 million dedicated to real estate projects designed to elevate our customers’ in-store experience. The real estate total includes the remodeling or expansion of approximately 130 existing stores, as well as the planned opening of approximately 100 new stores, including the continued expansion of our off-mall community-based and “power” store formats, which provide pinnacle retail experiences that deliver connected customer interactions through service, experience, product, and a sense of community. The real estate total also includes continued expansion in Asia. Finally, the capital plan for 2021 also includes $115 million for digital and supply chain initiatives. As shown in 2020, we have the ability to revise and reschedule much of the anticipated capital expenditure program should our financial position require it.
Operating Activities
The amount provided by operating activities reflects income adjusted for non-cash items and working capital changes. Adjustments to net income for non-cash items include non-cash gains, non-cash impairment and other charges, depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, and share-based compensation expense.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared with the prior year reflected higher inflows associated with working capital changes, partially offset by lower net income and a non-cash gain. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic we carefully managed our inventory levels. We were also affected by lack of available inventory caused, in part, by slowdowns in the supply chain environment. During 2020, we did not make any contributions to our U.S. qualified pension plan, as compared with $55 million made in 2019. No U.S. qualified pension plan contributions were required during 2020 due to the strong funded position of the plan. The amounts and timing of pension contributions are dependent on several factors, including asset performance.
2020 Form 10-K Page 27
As of January 30, 2021, we have withheld approximately $24 million of lease and lease-related payments as we continue to negotiate rent deferrals or abatements with our landlords for the period that our stores were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash paid for income taxes was $100 million, $201 million, and $184 million for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Investing Activities
Capital expenditures in 2020 decreased to $159 from $187 in the prior year. During 2020, we completed the remodeling or relocation of 82 existing stores and opened 69 new stores.
Investing activities for 2020 included cash outflows of $9 million related to various minority investments as compared with $50 million in 2019. Also included in 2019 is a $2 million inflow related to the sale of a building.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities consisted primarily of our return to shareholders initiatives, including our share repurchase program and cash dividend payments, as follows:
During 2020, we repurchased 968,547 shares of our common stock under our share repurchase programs for $37 million. Additionally, we declared and paid dividends of $73 million, representing an annual rate of $0.70 per share in 2020.
In the first quarter of 2020, we borrowed $330 million of our then-existing revolving credit facility, which was repaid in full during the second quarter of 2020. In July 2020, we entered into a new $600 million revolving credit agreement and in connection with this transaction we paid fees of $4 million. During the year, we purchased and retired $20 million of our outstanding bonds for $22 million. Additionally, we paid $1 million in connection with our finance lease obligations.
During the year, we entered into an agreement with one of our franchisors to operate a limited number of Foot Locker stores in Europe. We have operational control of the new entity and have continued to consolidate the results of the joint venture. We received contributions of $6 million in connection with this agreement.
During 2020, we paid $1 million to satisfy tax withholding obligations relating to the vesting of share-based equity awards. Offsetting the amounts above were proceeds received from the issuance of common stock and treasury stock in connection with the employee stock programs of $6 million for 2020.
Free Cash Flow (non-GAAP measure)
In addition to net cash provided by operating activities, we use free cash flow as a useful measure of performance and as an indication of our financial strength and our ability to generate cash. We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures (which is classified as an investing activity). We believe the presentation of free cash flow is relevant and useful for investors because it allows investors to evaluate the cash generated from underlying operations in a manner similar to the method used by management. Free cash flow is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, it should not be considered a substitute for income or cash flow data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. It should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures.
2020 Form 10-K Page 28
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash flow provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, to free cash flow.
Capital Structure
On July 14, 2020, we amended our then-existing revolving credit agreement to provide for a $600 million asset-based revolving credit facility that is scheduled to mature on July 14, 2025 (as amended, “2020 Credit Agreement”). Under the 2020 Credit Agreement interest is determined, at our option, by either (1) the eurodollar rate, which is determined by reference to LIBOR, plus a margin of 1.75 percent to 2.25 percent per annum, or (2) the base rate, which is determined by reference to the federal funds rate, plus a margin of 0.75 percent to 1.25 percent, in each case. In addition, we are paying a commitment fee of 0.50 percent per annum on the unused portion of the commitments under the 2020 Credit Agreement.
The 2020 Credit Agreement provides for a security interest in certain of our and the Guarantors’ (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement) domestic assets, including inventory, accounts receivable, cash deposits, and certain insurance proceeds. If certain specified events of default have occurred and are continuing, or if availability under the 2020 Credit Agreement is less than or equal to the greater of $60 million and 10 percent of the Loan Cap (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement), we are required to test compliance with a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.00 to 1.00 as of the end of each fiscal quarter. No events of default occurred during 2020.
As long as certain payment conditions are satisfied, including (a) the absence of any default or event of default has occurred availability under the 2020 Credit Agreement is not less than 15 percent of the lesser of the aggregate amount of the commitments and (b) the Borrowing Base (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement), determined as of the preceding fiscal month and on a proforma basis for the following six fiscal months, we may make investments, pay dividends, and repurchase our shares without restriction.
Credit Rating
As of March 25, 2021, our corporate credit ratings from Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service are BB+ and Ba1, respectively. In addition, Moody’s Investors Service has rated our senior unsecured notes Ba2.
Debt Capitalization and Equity
Net debt capitalization percent decreased to 35.2 percent as compared with 49.4 percent in the prior year, primarily reflecting higher cash and cash equivalents.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities that expose us to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. Also, our financial policies prohibit the use of derivatives for which there is no underlying exposure.
2020 Form 10-K Page 29
In connection with the sale of various businesses and assets, we may be obligated for certain lease commitments transferred to third parties and pursuant to certain normal representations, warranties, or indemnifications entered into with the purchasers of such businesses or assets. Although the maximum potential amounts for such obligations cannot be readily determined, we believe that the resolution of such contingencies will not significantly affect our consolidated financial position, liquidity, or results of operations.
We also operate certain stores for which lease agreements are in the process of being negotiated with landlords. Although there is no contractual commitment to make these payments, it is likely that leases will be executed.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our responsibility for integrity and objectivity in the preparation and presentation of the financial statements requires application of appropriate accounting policies. Generally, our accounting policies and methods are those specifically required by U.S. GAAP. Included in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies note in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” is a summary of the most significant accounting policies. In some cases, we are required to calculate amounts based on estimates for matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe the following to be the most critical of those accounting policies that necessitate subjective judgments.
Merchandise Inventories and Cost of Sales
Merchandise inventories for our stores are valued at the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method (“RIM”). The RIM is used by retail companies to value inventories at cost and calculate gross margins due to its practicality. Under the RIM, cost is determined by applying a cost-to-retail percentage across groupings of similar items, known as departments. The cost-to-retail percentage is applied to ending inventory at its current owned retail valuation to determine the cost of ending inventory on a department basis.
The RIM is a system of averages that requires estimates and assumptions regarding markups, markdowns and shrink, among others, and as such, could result in distortions of inventory amounts. Judgment is required for these estimates and assumptions, as well as to differentiate between promotional and other markdowns that may be required to correctly reflect merchandise inventories at the lower of cost or market. Reserves are established based on current selling prices when the inventory has not been marked down to market. The failure to take permanent markdowns on a timely basis may result in an overstatement of cost under the retail inventory method. The decision to take permanent markdowns includes many factors, including the current retail environment, inventory levels, and the age of the item. We believe this method and its related assumptions, which have been consistently applied, to be reasonable.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term for those arrangements where there is an identified asset and the contract conveys the right to control its use. Our lease term includes options to extend or terminate a lease only when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option.
As most of our leases do not provide an implicit interest rate, we use our incremental borrowing rates based on the remaining lease term to determine the present value of future lease payments. Our incremental borrowing rate for a lease is the rate of interest we would have to pay on a collateralized basis to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments under similar terms. Our incremental borrowing rate is calculated as the weighted average risk-free (sovereign) rate plus a spread to reflect our current unsecured credit rating plus the fees to borrow under our credit facility. The weighted average risk-free (sovereign) rates were based on the Treasury BVAL rates curve in Bloomberg. In the regions that we have stores, rates were developed for 3, 5, 7, 10, and 15 years. The weighting given to each region was determined by the number of stores in each region.
The spread to reflect our current credit rating represented the spread between U.S. Treasury rates and Bloomberg’s USD BVAL curve for non-financial companies with the Company’s credit rating. The fees to borrow represent the facility fees paid on the Company’s revolving credit facility.
2020 Form 10-K Page 30
Impairment of Long-Lived Tangible Assets and Right-of-Use Assets
We perform an impairment review when circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived tangible assets and right-of-use assets may not be recoverable (“a triggering event”). Our policy for determining whether a triggering event exists comprises the evaluation of measurable operating performance criteria and qualitative measures at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of cash flows of other assets and liabilities, which is generally at the store level. We also evaluate for triggering events at the banner level. If an impairment review is necessitated by the identification of a triggering event, we determine the fair value of the asset using assumptions predominately identified from our historical performance and our long-range strategic plans. To determine if an impairment exists, we compare the carrying amount of the asset with the estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset group. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted future cash flows, we measure the amount of the impairment by comparing the carrying amount of the asset group with its estimated fair value.
The estimation of fair value is measured by discounting expected future cash flows using a risk adjusted discount rate and by using a market approach to determine current lease rates. Future expected cash flows are based upon estimates that, if not achieved, may result in significantly different results.
During 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our actual and projected results, during the first quarter of 2020, we determined that a triggering event occurred for certain underperforming stores operating in Europe and, therefore, we conducted an impairment review. We evaluated the long-lived assets, including the right-of-use assets, and recorded non-cash charges of $15 million to write down store fixtures, leasehold improvements, and right-of-use assets of 70 stores. Additionally, we performed an impairment review for certain underperforming stores during the fourth quarter and recorded non-cash impairment charges totaling $62 million for approximately 60 stores.
Recoverability of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually during the first quarter of each fiscal year or more frequently if impairment indicators arise. The review of impairment consists of either using a qualitative approach to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the assets is less than their respective carrying values or a one-step qualitative impairment test.
In performing the qualitative assessment, we consider many factors in evaluating whether the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable, including declines in our stock price and market capitalization in relation to the book value of the Company and macroeconomic conditions affecting retail. If, based on the results of the qualitative assessment, it is concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, additional quantitative impairment testing is performed. The quantitative test requires that the carrying value of each reporting unit be compared with its estimated fair value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is greater than its fair value, a goodwill impairment charge will be recorded for the difference (up to the carrying value of goodwill).
We use a discounted cash flow approach to determine the fair value of a reporting unit. The determination of discounted cash flows of the reporting units and assets and liabilities within the reporting units requires significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, the discount rate, terminal growth rates, earnings before depreciation and amortization, and capital expenditures forecasts. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual results could differ from those estimates. We evaluate the merits of each significant assumption, both individually and in the aggregate, used to determine the fair value of the reporting units, as well as the fair values of the corresponding assets and liabilities within the reporting units.
In addition to performing our qualitative assessment as of the beginning of the year, we performed an additional quantitative assessment during the first quarter due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our results and stock price. Neither assessment resulted in the recognition of impairment.
2020 Form 10-K Page 31
Pension and Postretirement Liabilities
We review all assumptions used to determine our obligations for pension and postretirement liabilities annually with our independent actuaries, taking into consideration existing and future economic conditions and our intentions with regard to the plans. The assumptions used are:
Long-Term Rate of Return
The expected rate of return on plan assets is the long-term rate of return expected to be earned on the plans’ assets and is recognized as a component of pension expense. The rate is based on the plans’ weighted-average target asset allocation, as well as historical and future expected performance of those assets. The target asset allocation is selected to obtain an investment return that is sufficient to cover the expected benefit payments and to reduce the variability of future contributions. The expected rate of return on plan assets is reviewed annually and revised, as necessary, to reflect changes in the financial markets and our investment strategy.
The weighted-average long-term rate of return used to determine 2020 pension expense was 5.5 percent.
A decrease of 50 basis points in the weighted-average expected long-term rate of return would have increased 2020 pension expense by approximately $3 million. The actual return on plan assets in a given year typically differs from the expected long-term rate of return, and the resulting gain or loss is deferred and amortized into expense over the average life expectancy of the inactive participants.
Discount Rate
An assumed discount rate is used to measure the present value of future cash flow obligations of the plans and the interest cost component of pension expense and postretirement income. The cash flows are then discounted to their present value and an overall discount rate is determined. The discount rate for our U.S. plans are determined by reference to the Bond:Link interest rate model based upon a portfolio of highly-rated U.S. corporate bonds with individual bonds that are theoretically purchased to settle the plan’s anticipated cash outflows. The discount rate selected to measure the present value of our Canadian benefit obligations is similar to the approach used for the U.S. plan and was determined by reference to the Canadian Rate:Link interest rate model.
The weighted-average discount rates used to determine the 2020 benefit obligations related to our pension and postretirement plans was 2.5 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively.
Changing the weighted-average discount rate by 50 basis points would have changed the accumulated benefit obligation of the pension plans at January 30, 2021 by approximately $42 million and $35 million, depending on if the change was an increase or decrease, respectively. A decrease of 50 basis points in the weighted-average discount rate would have increased or decreased the accumulated benefit obligation on the postretirement plan by approximately $1 million depending on if the change was an increase or decrease, respectively.
Trend Rate
We maintain two postretirement medical plans, one covering certain executive officers and key employees (“SERP Medical Plan”), and the other covering all other team members. With respect to the SERP Medical Plan, a 100-basis point change in the assumed health care cost trend rate would not significantly change this plan’s accumulated benefit obligation. With respect to the postretirement medical plan covering all other team members, there is limited risk to us for increases in health care costs since, beginning in 2001, new retirees have assumed the full expected costs and then-existing retirees have assumed all increases in such costs.
2020 Form 10-K Page 32
Mortality Assumptions
The mortality assumption used to value our 2020 U.S. pension obligations was the Pri-2012 mortality table with generational projection using MP-2020 for both males and females, while in the prior year the obligation was valued using the Pri-2012 mortality table with generational projection using MP-2019. We used the 2014 CPM Private Sector mortality table projected generationally with Scale CPM-B for both males and females to value our Canadian pension obligations for 2020.
For the SERP Medical Plan, the mortality assumption used to value the 2019 obligation was updated to the PriH-2012 table with generational projection using MP-2020. Each year we update this assumption to the most recent study from the Society of Actuaries.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance, which is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We are required to estimate taxable income for future years by taxing jurisdiction and to use our judgment to determine whether to record a valuation allowance for part or all of a deferred tax asset. Estimates of taxable income are based upon our long-range strategic plans. A one percent change in the overall statutory tax rate for 2020 would have resulted in a change of $2 million to the carrying value of the net deferred tax asset and a corresponding charge or credit to income tax expense depending on whether the tax rate change was a decrease or an increase.
We have operations in multiple taxing jurisdictions, and we are subject to audit in these jurisdictions. Tax audits by their nature are often complex and can require several years to resolve. Accruals of tax contingencies require us to make estimates and judgments with respect to the ultimate outcome of tax audits. Actual results could vary from these estimates.
Excluding the effect of any nonrecurring items that may occur, we expect the effective tax rate for 2021 to be in the range of 29.6% to 30.6%. The actual tax rate will depend on the level and geographic mix of income and losses, as well as the limits to tax benefits for losses in certain foreign jurisdictions. Our actual tax rate will also depend on the enactment of a corporate tax rate increase, as proposed by the Biden Administration.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Descriptions of the recently issued accounting principles, and the accounting principles adopted by us during the year ended January 30, 2021 are included in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies note in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”