ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and the section titled “Forward-Looking Information is Subject to Risk and Uncertainty” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 ("Annual Report") for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Our Company
We are a world-leading manufacturer and aftermarket service provider of comprehensive flow control systems. We develop and manufacture precision-engineered flow control equipment integral to the movement, control and protection of the flow of materials in our customers’ critical processes. Our product portfolio of pumps, valves, seals, automation and aftermarket services supports global infrastructure industries, including oil and gas, chemical, power generation and water management, as well as general industrial markets where our products and services add value. Through our manufacturing platform and global network of QRCs, we offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. As of December 31, 2020, we have approximately 16,000 employees (“associates”) globally and a footprint of manufacturing facilities and Quick Response Centers in more than 50 countries.
Our business model is significantly influenced by the capital spending of global infrastructure industries for the placement of new products into service and maintenance spending for aftermarket services for existing operations. The worldwide installed base of our products is an important source of aftermarket revenue, where products are expected to ensure the maximum operating time of many key industrial processes. We have significantly invested in our aftermarket strategy to provide local support to drive customer investments in our offerings and use of our services to replace or repair installed products. The aftermarket portion of our business also helps provide business stability during various economic periods. The aftermarket business, which is primarily served by our network of 163 QRCs located around the globe, provides a variety of service offerings for our customers including spare parts, service solutions, product life cycle solutions and other value-added services. It is generally a higher margin business compared to our original equipment business and a key component of our profitable growth strategy.
Our operations are conducted through two business segments that are referenced throughout this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"):
•Flowserve Pump Division ("FPD") for custom, highly-engineered pumps, pre-configured industrial pumps, pump systems, mechanical seals, auxiliary systems and replacement parts and related services; and
•Flow Control Division ("FCD") for engineered and industrial valves, control valves, actuators and controls and related services.
Our business segments share a focus on industrial flow control technology and have a high number of common customers. These segments also have complementary product offerings and technologies that are often combined in applications that provide us a net competitive advantage. Our segments also benefit from our global footprint, our
economies of scale in reducing administrative and overhead costs to serve customers more cost effectively and shared leadership for operational support functions, such as research and development, marketing and supply chain.
The reputation of our product portfolio is built on more than 50 well-respected brand names such as Worthington, IDP, Valtek, Limitorque, Durco, Argus, Edward, Valbart and Durametallic, which we believe to be one of the most comprehensive in the industry. Our products and services are sold either directly or through designated channels to more than 10,000 companies, including some of the world’s leading engineering, procurement and construction ("EPC") firms, original equipment manufacturers, distributors and end users.
We continue to leverage our QRC network to be positioned as near to customers as possible for service and support in order to capture valuable aftermarket business. Along with ensuring that we have the local capability to sell, install and service our equipment in remote regions, we continuously improve our global operations. Despite recent headwinds caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to enhance our global supply chain capability to increase our ability to meet global customer demands and improve the quality and timely delivery of our products over the long-term. Additionally, we continue to devote resources to improving the supply chain processes across our business segments to find areas of synergy and cost reduction and to improve our supply chain management capability to meet global customer demands. We also remain focused on improving on-time delivery and quality, while managing warranty costs as a percentage of sales across our global operations, through the assistance of a focused Continuous Improvement Process ("CIP") initiative. The goal of the CIP initiative, which includes lean manufacturing, six sigma business management strategy and value engineering, is to maximize service fulfillment to customers through on-time delivery, reduced cycle time and quality at the highest internal productivity.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have an impact on human health, the global economy and society at large. The pandemic is expected to continue to adversely impact, for its duration, our operations and financial performance. In response, we continue to actively monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and geographies. Our cross-functional crisis management team established during the first quarter of 2020 has continued monitoring and making recommendations to management to help us continue operating as an essential business across jurisdictions, while also protecting the health and safety of our associates.
Despite our evolving response, the COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse effect on our performance during the year, and we expect the impact will continue through at least the second quarter of 2021. While we cannot reasonably estimate with certainty the ongoing duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the effects of any vaccine, or its ultimate impact on the global economy, our business or our financial condition and results, we nonetheless remain committed to providing the critical support, products and services that our customers rely on, and currently believe that we will emerge from these events well positioned for long-term growth.
Health and Safety of Our Associates
The health and safety of our associates, suppliers and customers around the world continues to be our first priority as we continue to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic, including recent spikes in cases and returning work-from-home restrictions in various geographies in which we operate. We are incredibly proud of the great teamwork exhibited by our global workforce who have demonstrated strong resilience in adapting to continually evolving health and safety guidelines while addressing these challenging times and providing products and services to our customers.
We have implemented policies and practices to help protect our workforce so they can safely and effectively carry out their vital work, and we have continued to revise those policies and practices in light of guidance received from local and regional health authorities where appropriate. We instituted global restrictions on non-essential travel in March 2020 and the work-from-home policy for all non-essential employees who are able to do so has continued in effect in locations where health officials have advised such policies, including for our global headquarters in Irving, Texas, which will maintain its work-from-home policy at least through the second quarter of 2021. In those locations where employees are going to work in our facilities, we have continued taking steps, in light of guidelines from local and global health experts to protect our employees so that we can continue to manufacture critical technologies and equipment, including providing face coverings and other personal protective equipment, enhanced cleaning of sites and implemented social distancing protocols.
Our employees and facilities have a key role in keeping essential infrastructure and industries operating, including oil and gas, water, chemical, power generation and other essential industries, such as food and beverage and healthcare. While some of our facilities have experienced periods of temporary closures during 2020 in accordance with decrees, orders and laws in their respective countries and geographies, as of February 18, 2021, all of our facilities are open and operational,
and are running close to pre-COVID-19 levels as we continue to make essential products and provide services for our customers. However, the measures described above, combined with continued employee costs and under-absorption of manufacturing costs as a result of temporary closures and work-from-home policies, have had and are expected to continue having an adverse impact on our financial performance throughout the remainder of the pandemic.
Customer Demand
During 2020 and into 2021 the reduction in global demand for oil and gas driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with excessive supply due to disagreements between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and other oil producing nations in the first half of 2020, led to extreme volatility in global markets and in oil prices. These conditions have adversely impacted our customers, particularly in the oil and gas markets. For example, in the first half of 2020, these conditions drove a significant and broad-based decrease in customer planned capital spending, leading many of our large customers to announce double-digit capital expenditure budget decreases for the remainder of 2020. As a result, we saw overall bookings decline by approximately 20% during 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019, resulting in a lower sequential backlog, though we have not seen a significant increase in the levels of customer cancellations in our existing backlog.
Additionally, the rapidly evolving impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020 and into 2021 have caused reduced activity levels in our aftermarket business due to deferred spending of our customers' repair and maintenance budgets, including the impact of restricted access to our customers' facilities. While we expect that these repair and maintenance projects will ultimately need to be completed, the timing will largely depend on the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and how the virus and any variants continue to spread in our customers' various geographies.
These trends are likely to continue during the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic as various actions implemented to combat the pandemic will continue to reduce demand for oil and gas. As a result, we have experienced decreased bookings, sales and financial performance and anticipate this continuing throughout the remainder of the pandemic. Additionally, we expect the headwinds in the oil and gas markets that have resulted in, and are likely to continue to result in, reduced capital expenditures and bookings for oil and gas customers to continue at least until oil demand and prices stabilize, which may not occur until after the pandemic subsides.
Supply Chain Impact
Since the onset of the pandemic, many of our suppliers have also experienced varying lengths of production and shipping conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, some of which continue to exist in highly affected countries. These conditions have had an adverse effect on the speed at which we can manufacture and ship our products to customers, and have also led to an increase in logistics, transportation and freight costs, requiring that we diversify our supply chain and, in some instances, source materials from new suppliers. Additionally, these conditions have in some cases impacted our ability to deliver products to customers on time, which has in turn led to an increase in backlog at some of our manufacturing sites. Though some of these issues have abated in the second half of 2020 and into 2021 certain disruptions in our supply chain and their effects have continued through the year, and we expect they will continue as the COVID-19 pandemic continues.
Operational Impacts
We have also engaged in a number of cost savings measures in order to help mitigate certain of the adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results, including certain realignment activities (further described below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS"), a freeze on all non-essential open employment requisitions, cancellation of merit-based payroll increases for 2020, reduction of capital expenditures to approximately $60 million and cuts in other discretionary spending. Together, we planned for approximately $100 million of cost reductions, excluding realignment charges, in 2020 as compared to 2019, due in large part to our response to the effects of COVID-19, which partially offsets the increased costs and operational impacts of the safety protocols and procedures that we have implemented as described above under the heading "-Health and Safety of Our Associates." We continue to evaluate additional cost savings measures and will continue to implement such measures in the near term in order to reduce the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results.
We continue to monitor and assess the spread of COVID-19, including in areas that have seen recent increases in cases, and we will continue to adapt our operations to respond the changing conditions as needed. As we continue to manage our business through this unprecedented time of uncertainty and market volatility, we will remain focused on the
health and safety of our associates, suppliers, customers, and will continue to provide essential products and services to our customers.
Our Markets
Our products and services are used in several distinct industries: oil and gas, chemical, power generation, water management, and several other industries, such as mining, steel and paper, that are collectively referred to as "general industries."
Oil and Gas
The oil and gas industry, which represented approximately 34% and 41% of our bookings in 2020 and 2019, respectively, experienced a material decrease in capital spending in 2020 compared to the previous year. The decrease was primarily due to decreased project activity and short cycle investment resulting from the pandemic's negative impact on demand for refined products. Aftermarket opportunities in this industry also experienced a material decrease in 2020 due to deferred spending of our customers' repair and maintenance budgets and pandemic related challenges accessing our customers’ facilities.
The outlook for the oil and gas industry is heavily dependent on the duration of the pandemic and its impact on fuel demand, demand growth from both mature markets and developing geographies as well as changes in the regulatory environment. In the short-term, we believe that the pandemic will continue to negatively impact our customers’ capital investment and maintenance budgets. We further believe improved and stable oil prices provide support for increased demand for our aftermarket products and services. We believe the medium and long-term fundamentals for this industry remain attractive and see a stabilized environment with expected increased fuel demand on improved pandemic management, and as the industry works through current excess supply. In addition, we believe projected depletion rates of existing fields and forecasted long-term demand growth will require additional investments. With our long-standing reputation in providing successful solutions for upstream, mid-stream and downstream applications, along with the advancements in our portfolio of offerings, we believe that we continue to be well-positioned to assist our customers in this improving environment.
Chemical
The chemical industry represented approximately 24% and 22% of our bookings in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The chemical industry is comprised of petrochemical, specialty chemical and pharmaceutical products. Capital spending in 2020 decreased materially primarily due to the pandemic's negative impact on demand for chemical products. The aftermarket opportunities also materially decreased in 2020 due to deferred spending of our customers' repair and maintenance budgets and pandemic related challenges accessing our customers’ facilities.
The outlook for the chemical industry remains heavily dependent on global economic conditions. As global economies and unemployment conditions improve, a rise in consumer spending should follow. An increase in spending would drive greater demand for petrochemical, specialty chemical and pharmaceutical products supporting improved levels of capital investment. We believe the chemical industry will continue to invest in North America and Middle East capacity additions, maintenance and upgrades for optimization of existing assets and that developing regions will selectively invest in capital infrastructure to meet current and future indigenous demand. We believe our global presence and our localized aftermarket capabilities are well-positioned to serve the potential growth opportunities in this industry.
Power Generation
The power generation industry represented approximately 13% and 11% of our bookings in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, the power generation industry continued to experience softness in thermal power generation capital spending in the mature and key developing markets. China continued to curtail the construction of new coal-fired power generation over the last year, while in India and southeast Asia capital investment remained in place driven by increased demand forecasts.
Natural gas-fired combined cycle (“NGCC”) plants increased their share of the energy mix, driven by market prices for gas remaining low and stable (partially due to the increasing global availability of liquefied natural gas (“LNG”)), low capital expenditures, and the ability of NGCC to stabilize unpredictable renewable sources. With the potential of unconventional sources of gas, the global power generation industry is forecasting an increased use of this form of fuel for power generation plants.
Despite fewer new nuclear plants being constructed in recent years, nuclear power remains an important contributor to the global energy mix. We continue to support our significant installed base in the global nuclear fleet by providing aftermarket and life extension products and services. Due to our extensive history, we believe we are well positioned to take advantage of this ongoing source of aftermarket and new construction opportunities.
Political efforts to limit the emissions of carbon dioxide may have some adverse effect on thermal power investment plans depending on the potential requirements imposed and the timing of compliance by country. However, many proposed methods of capturing and limiting carbon dioxide emissions offer business opportunities for our products and services. At the same time, we continue to take advantage of new investments in concentrated solar power generating capacity, where our pumps, valves, and seals are uniquely positioned for both molten salt applications as well as the traditional steam cycle.
We believe the long-term fundamentals for the power generation industry remain solid based on projected increases in demand for electricity driven by global population growth, growth of urbanization in developing markets and the increased use of electricity driven transportation. We also believe that our long-standing reputation in the power generation industry, our portfolio of offerings for the various generating methods, our advancements in serving the renewable energy market and carbon capture methodologies, as well as our global service and support structure, position us well for the future opportunities in this important industry.
Water Management
The water management industry represented approximately 3% and 4% of our bookings in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Water management industry activity levels decreased in 2020 primarily due to the pandemic's negative impact on government budgets across the globe. Worldwide demand for fresh water, water treatment and re-use, desalination and flood control are expected to create requirements for new facilities or for upgrades of existing systems, many of which require products that we offer, particularly pumps. With improved management of the pandemic, we expect capital and aftermarket spending to rise in developed and emerging markets with governments and private industry providing funding for critical projects when their priorities shift away from pandemic-management.
The proportion of people living in regions that find it difficult to meet water requirements is expected to double by 2025. We believe that the persistent demand for fresh water during all economic cycles supports continued investments, especially in North America and developing regions.
General Industries
General industries represented, in the aggregate, approximately 26% and 22% of our bookings in 2020 and 2019, respectively. General industries comprise a variety of different businesses, including mining and ore processing, pulp and paper, food and beverage and other smaller applications, none of which individually represented more than 5% of total bookings in 2020 and 2019. General industries also include sales to distributors, whose end customers operate in the industries we primarily serve. Sales to distributors in 2020 were negatively impacted by decreased upstream oil and gas activity in North America.
The outlook for this group of industries is heavily dependent upon the condition of global economies and consumer confidence levels. The long-term fundamentals of many of these industries remain sound, as many of the products produced by these industries are common staples of industrialized and urbanized economies. We believe that our specialty product offerings designed for these industries and our aftermarket service capabilities will provide continued business opportunities.
Outlook for 2021
As the headwinds experienced during the year continue to impact our business, we experienced approximately a 20% decline in bookings as compared to the same period in 2019, with less of an impact on revenue, which declined approximately 5% as compared to the same period in 2019. We anticipate further pressure on revenue with a year over year decline of approximately 4% to 7% in 2021 as a result of lower bookings in 2020, resulting in lower customer backlog as we enter 2021. Despite these effects, however, we expect to maintain adequate liquidity over the next 12 months as we manage through the current market environment. We will continue to actively monitor the potential impacts of COVID-19 and related events on the credit markets in order to maintain sufficient liquidity and access to capital throughout 2021.
Our future results of operations and other forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, including this MD&A, involve a number of risks and uncertainties - in particular, the statements regarding our goals and strategies, new product introductions, plans to cultivate new businesses, future economic conditions, revenue, pricing, gross profit margin
and costs, capital spending, expected cost savings from our transformation and realignment programs, global economic and political risk, depreciation and amortization, research and development expenses, potential impairment of assets, tax rate and pending tax and legal proceedings. Our future results of operations may also be affected by employee incentive compensation including our annual program and the amount, type and valuation of share-based awards granted, as well as the amount of awards forfeited due to employee turnover. In addition to the various important factors discussed above, a number of other factors could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. See the risks described in "Item 1A. Risk Factors" as well as the section titled “Forward-Looking Information is Subject to Risk and Uncertainty” of this Annual Report.
Our bookings were $3,411.6 million during 2020. Because a booking represents a contract that can be, in certain circumstances, modified or canceled, and can include varying lengths between the time of booking and the time of revenue recognition, there is no guarantee that bookings will result in comparable revenues or otherwise be indicative of future results.
On December 31, 2020, we had $1,701.5 million of fixed-rate Senior Notes outstanding. We expect our interest expense in 2021 will be modestly higher compared with amounts incurred in 2020. Our results of operations may also be impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements. See “