ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this filing. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” See the cautionary note regarding forward-looking statements set forth at the beginning of Part I of this Annual Report.
Overview
Founded in 2000, Floor & Decor is a high-growth, differentiated, multi-channel specialty retailer of hard surface flooring and related accessories with 133 warehouse-format stores across 31 states as of December 31, 2020. We believe that we offer the industry’s broadest assortment of tile, wood, laminate, vinyl, and natural stone flooring along with decorative and installation accessories at everyday low prices. We appeal to a variety of customers, including our Pro, DIY and BIY customers. Our warehouse-format stores, which average approximately 78,000 square feet, carry on average approximately 4,100 flooring and decorative and installation accessory SKUs, 1.2 million square feet of flooring products, and $2.5 million of inventory at cost. We believe that our inspiring design studios and creative and informative visual merchandising also greatly enhance our customers’ renovation experience. In addition to our stores, our website FloorandDecor.com showcases our products.
We believe our strong financial results are a reflection of a growing domestic hard surface flooring market, a unique approach to selling hard surface flooring, and our consistent and disciplined culture of innovation and reinvestment, together creating a differentiated business model in the hard surface flooring category. In fiscal 2020, we experienced our twelfth year of comparable store sales growth, averaging 13.1% over this time period and 6.2% over the past three years.
(1) Fiscal 2020 comparable store sales exclude sales from the 53rd week.
During fiscal 2020, we continued to make key long-term strategic investments, including:
•investing in the protection of the health of our employees and customers, including temporarily implementing a curbside pickup model, shortening store operating hours, and implementing enhanced safety and sanitation measures in our stores;
•opening 13 new warehouse-format stores, including four new stores in densely populated markets in Central New Jersey, Detroit, and the San Diego area, ending the year with 133 warehouse-format stores;
•focusing on innovative new products and localized assortments, supported by inspirational in-store and online visual merchandising solutions;
•investing in our connected customer, in-store designer, and Pro customer personnel and customer relationship and store focused technology;
•adding more resources dedicated to serving our Pro customers, including hiring a professional external sales staff to drive more commercial sales;
•increasing proprietary credit offerings, including launching our non-recourse Pro credit card; and
•investing capital to continue enhancing the in-store shopping experience for our customers
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic had a material negative impact on our operations and financial results for the first and second quarters of fiscal 2020. Compared with the same periods of the prior year, comparable store sales declined by 20.8% and 9.6% during the thirteen and twenty-six weeks ended June 25, 2020, respectively, leading to decreases in operating and net income. These declines in sales, operating income, and net income were due to operational disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Financial results improved substantially during the second half of fiscal 2020, with comparable store sales increasing by 18.4% and 21.6% during the fiscal quarters ended September 24, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively, and by 5.5% for fiscal 2020, leading to increases in operating and net income compared with the same periods a year ago.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took measures to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers, including temporarily limiting most of our stores to curbside services starting in late March 2020. Beginning in May 2020 and concluding in June 2020, we implemented a phased approach to reopening stores for in-store shopping with enhanced safety and sanitation measures such as requiring associates to wear face masks, installing social distancing markers on floors and protective shields at cash registers, and regularly sanitizing shopping carts, pin pads, design desks, and other high-traffic areas. By the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2020, all of our stores were reopened to customers and have remained open other than for temporary cleaning or in response to certain weather events.
Despite the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain focused on three priorities while navigating through this period of volatility and uncertainty:
•First, protect the health and safety of our employees and customers.
•Second, keep our brand strong and support all of our customers, including the numerous small businesses that rely upon us such as general contractors and flooring installers.
•Third, position Floor & Decor to emerge strong from this event.
We are working hard to continue monitoring and quickly responding to the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including communicating often throughout the organization and adapting our operations to follow evolving federal, state, and local ordinances as well as health guidelines on mitigating the risk of COVID-19 transmission. We have teams in place monitoring this evolving situation and recommending risk mitigation actions; we have implemented travel restrictions; and we are encouraging social distancing practices. We have assessed and are implementing supply chain continuity plans. There has been no material impact on supply for most of our sourced merchandise, and we are also working closely with our suppliers and transportation partners.
There remains substantial uncertainty regarding the potential duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic. While we have reopened our stores to the public, we may face closure requirements and other operational restrictions at some or all of our physical locations for prolonged periods of time due to, among other factors, evolving and potentially more stringent federal, state, and local restrictions including shelter-in-place orders. We also may face store closures due to staffing challenges, including if store and distribution center associates are in quarantine due to the COVID-19 pandemic. While the U.S. Food and Drug Administration authorized vaccines produced by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna for emergency use in December 2020, it remains unclear how quickly the vaccines will be distributed nationwide and globally or if or when “herd immunity” will be achieved and the restrictions that were imposed to slow the spread of the virus will be lifted entirely. The delay in distributing the vaccines could lead people to continue to self-isolate and not participate in the economy at pre-pandemic levels for a prolonged period of time. In addition, changes in consumer behavior due to financial, health, or other concerns may continue even after the COVID-19 pandemic and may reduce consumer demand for our products. As a result of these and other uncertainties, the full financial impact of the pandemic cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
As discussed in Note 6, “Income Taxes,” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, on March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") into law. Based on our assessment of the CARES Act, we estimate the following benefits to the Company:
•Due to the accelerated depreciation under the CARES Act of Qualified Improvement Property ("QIP") placed in service during fiscal 2018 and 2019, we incurred a net operating loss for fiscal 2019 that we expect to carry back to prior years during which the federal tax rate was 35%, resulting in a $7.7 million income tax benefit during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. We received $28.4 million of cash refunds related to the accelerated QIP depreciation and the carry back of fiscal 2019 net operating losses.
•Cash savings in fiscal 2020 from the temporary deferral of the employer portion of social security taxes. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred $12.1 million of employer social security taxes, of which 50% are required to be deposited by December 2021 and the remaining 50% by December 2022.
•The receipt of refundable payroll tax credits related to employee retention. For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized employee retention credits totaling and $1.7 million.
Fiscal 2021 - A Look At The Upcoming Year
We believe that our compelling business model, in addition to the projected growth of the large and highly fragmented hard surface flooring market, provides us with an opportunity to significantly expand our store base in the U.S. from 133 warehouse format stores as of December 31, 2020 to approximately 400 stores nationwide within the next 8-10 years based on our past success as well as internal research with respect to housing density, demographic data, competitor concentration, and other variables in both new and existing markets. In 2021, we plan to grow our warehouse store base by approximately 20% and add two small design studios. In addition to opening new stores, our focus will be on executing our core strategies as well as continuing to make investments that we believe will support our long-term growth, as outlined in “Item 1. Business - Our Growth Strategy.” Our ability to open profitable new stores depends on many factors, including the successful selection of new markets and store locations, our ability to negotiate leases on acceptable terms, and our ability to attract highly qualified managers and staff. For further information, see “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business.”
Key Performance Indicators
We consider a variety of performance and financial measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key measures we use to determine how our business is performing are comparable store sales, the number of new store openings, gross profit and gross margin, operating income, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Comparable Store Sales
Our comparable store sales growth is a significant driver of our net sales, profitability, cash flow, and overall business results. We believe that comparable store sales growth is generated by continued focus on providing a dynamic and expanding product assortment in addition to other merchandising initiatives, quality of customer service, enhancing sales and marketing strategies, improving visual merchandising and overall aesthetic appeal of our stores and our website, effectively serving our Pro customers, continued investment in store staff and infrastructure, growing our proprietary credit offering, and further integrating connected customer strategies and other key information technology enhancements.
Comparable store sales refer to period-over-period comparisons of our net sales among the comparable store base and are based on when the customer obtains control of the product, which is typically at the time of sale. A store is included in the comparable store sales calculation on the first day of the thirteenth full fiscal month following a store’s opening, which is when we believe comparability has been achieved. Changes in our comparable store sales between two periods are based on net sales for stores that were in operation during both of the two periods. Any change in the square footage of an existing comparable store, including for remodels and relocations within the same primary trade area of the existing store being relocated, does not eliminate that store from inclusion in the calculation of comparable store sales. Stores that are closed for a full fiscal month or longer are excluded from the comparable store sales calculation for each full fiscal month that they are closed. Since our e-commerce, regional account manager, and design studio sales are fulfilled by individual stores, they are included in comparable store sales only to the extent the fulfilling store meets the above mentioned store criteria.
Our fiscal 2020 year, which ended December 31, 2020, includes a 53rd week. When presenting comparable store sales for fiscal 2020, we have excluded the last week of fiscal 2020.
Definitions and calculations of comparable store sales differ among companies in the retail industry; therefore, comparable store metrics disclosed by us may not be comparable to the metrics disclosed by other companies.
We believe that comparable store sales is a useful measure as it allows management as well as analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate the sales performance of our retail stores. In addition, comparable store sales highlights our sales and market share growth. Management uses comparable store sales to evaluate the effectiveness of our selling strategies, to make budgeting decisions, and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures.
Various factors affect comparable store sales, including:
•national and regional economic conditions;
•the retail sales environment and other retail trends;
•the home improvement spending environment;
•the hard surface flooring industry trends;
•the impact of competition;
•changes in our product mix;
•changes in staffing at our stores;
•cannibalization resulting from the opening of new stores in existing markets;
•changes in pricing;
•changes in advertising and other operating costs; and
•weather conditions.
Number of New Stores
The number and timing of new store openings, and the costs and fixed lease obligations associated with those openings, have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant impact on our results of operations. The number of new stores reflects the number of stores opened during a particular reporting period. Before we open new stores, we incur pre-opening expenses, which are defined below. While net sales at new stores are generally lower than net sales at our stores that have been open for more than one year, our new stores have historically been profitable in their first year. Generally, our newer stores have also averaged higher comparable store sales growth than our total store average. Our ability to open new, profitable stores is important to our long-term sales and profit growth goals.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in net sales. Our gross profit and gross margin can also be impacted by changes in our prices, our merchandising assortment, shrink, damage, selling of discontinued products, the cost to transport our products from the manufacturer to our stores, and our distribution center costs. With respect to our merchandising assortment, certain of our products tend to generate somewhat higher margins than other products within the same product categories or among different product categories. We have experienced modest inflation increases in certain of our product categories, but historically have been able to source from a different manufacturer or pass increases onto our consumers with modest impact on our gross margin. Our gross profit and gross margin, which reflect our net sales and our cost of sales and any changes to the components thereof, allow us to evaluate our profitability and overall business results.
Gross profit is calculated as net sales less cost of sales. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales is referred to as gross margin. Cost of sales consists of merchandise costs, as well as freight costs to transport inventory to our distribution centers and stores, and duty and other costs that are incurred to distribute the merchandise to our stores. Cost of sales also includes shrinkage, damage product disposals, distribution, warehousing costs, sourcing and compliance costs. We receive cash consideration from certain vendors related to vendor allowances and volume rebates, which is recorded as a reduction of costs of sales as the inventory is sold or as a reduction of the carrying value of inventory while the inventory is still on hand. Costs associated with arranging and paying for freight to deliver products to customers is included in cost of sales. The components of our cost of sales may not be comparable to the components of cost of sales, or similar measures, of other retailers. As a result, data in this filing regarding our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to similar data made available by other retailers.
We believe that gross profit and gross margin are useful measures as they allow management and analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate the cost and profitability of our products and overall cost of sales, which is our largest expense. Gross profit and gross margin are also important indicators of our ability to grow profits and leverage our expenses on a growing sales base. Management uses gross profit and gross margin, among other measures, to make decisions related to product, pricing, supplier, and distribution strategies as well as other areas affecting the products we offer to our customers.
Operating Income, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA
Operating income, EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA are key metrics used by management and our Board to assess our financial performance and enterprise value. We believe that operating income, EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA are useful measures, as they eliminate certain expenses that are not indicative of our core operating performance and facilitate a comparison of our core operating performance on a consistent basis from period to period. We also use Adjusted EBITDA as a basis to determine covenant compliance with respect to our Credit Facilities, to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions, and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. Operating income, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties as performance measures to evaluate companies in our industry.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of financial performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We define EBITDA as net income before interest, (gain) loss on early extinguishment of debt, taxes, depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest, loss on early extinguishment of debt, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that we do not consider indicative of our core operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP measures of our financial performance and should not be considered as alternatives to net income as a measure of financial performance or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP and they should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Additionally, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not intended to be measures of liquidity or free cash flow for management's discretionary use. In addition, these non-GAAP measures exclude certain non-recurring and other charges. Each of these non-GAAP measures has its limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. In evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the items eliminated in the adjustments made to determine EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, such as stock compensation expense, loss (gain) on asset impairments and disposals, executive recruiting/relocation, and other adjustments. Our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed to imply that our future results will be unaffected by any such adjustments. Definitions and calculations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differ among companies in the retail industry, and therefore EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA disclosed by us may not be comparable to the metrics disclosed by other companies.
Other Key Financial Definitions
Net Sales
The retail sector in which we operate is cyclical, and consequently our sales are affected by general economic conditions. Purchases of our products are sensitive to trends in the levels of consumer spending, which are affected by a number of factors such as consumer disposable income, housing market conditions, unemployment trends, stock market performance, consumer debt levels and consumer credit availability, interest rates and inflation, tax rates and overall consumer confidence in the economy.
Net sales reflect our sales of merchandise, less discounts and estimated returns and include our in-store sales and e-commerce sales. In certain cases, we arrange and pay for freight to deliver products to customers and bill the customer for the estimated freight cost, which is also included in net sales. Revenue is recognized when we satisfy the performance obligations in contracts with our customers. Our performance obligations for our retail store sales, as well as for orders placed through our website and shipped to our customers, are satisfied at the point at which the customer obtains control of the inventory, which is typically at the point-of-sale.
Selling and Store Operating Expenses
We expect that our selling and store operating expenses will increase in future periods with future growth. Selling and store operating expenses consist primarily of store personnel wages, bonuses and benefits, rent and infrastructure expenses, supplies, depreciation and amortization, training expenses, and advertising costs. Credit card fees, insurance, personal property taxes, and other miscellaneous operating costs are also included.
The components of our selling and store operating expenses may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of other retailers.
General and Administrative Expenses
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods with future growth and in part due to additional legal, accounting, insurance, and other expenses that we expect to incur as a result of being a public company, including compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. General and administrative expenses include both fixed and variable components, and therefore, are not directly correlated with net sales.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs incurred outside of our stores and include administrative personnel wages in our store support center and regional functions, bonuses and benefits, supplies, depreciation and amortization, and store support center expenses. Insurance, legal expenses, information technology costs, consulting, and other miscellaneous operating costs are also included.
The components of our general and administrative expenses may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of other retailers.
Pre-opening Expenses
We account for non-capital operating expenditures incurred prior to opening a new store or relocating an existing store as “pre-opening” expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income. Our pre-opening expenses begin, on average, three months to one year in advance of a store opening or relocating due to, among other things, the amount of time it takes to prepare a store for its grand opening. The majority of pre-opening expenses are incurred during the three months before a store opens. Pre-opening expenses primarily include the following: rent, advertising, training, staff recruiting, utilities, personnel, and equipment rental. A store is considered to be relocated if it is closed temporarily and re-opened within the same primary trade area.
Segments
We have one operating segment and one reportable segment. For additional segment information, refer to Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The comparison of the fiscal years ended December 26, 2019 and December 27, 2018 can be found in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2019 (the “2019 Annual Report”) located within Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 26, 2019
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, in dollars and as a percentage of net sales (actuals in thousands, dollar changes in millions; certain numbers may not sum due to rounding):
NM- Not Meaningful
(1) Comparable store sales, comparable average ticket, and comparable customer transactions exclude sales from the 53rd week in fiscal 2020.
(2) Refer to "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures" further below for reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income.
Results of operations for prior periods should not be considered indicative of future results, in particular while our revenue and earnings improved during the second half of fiscal 2020 compared to the first half of fiscal 2020, the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our business remains highly uncertain. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - COVID-19 Update” and Item 1A., “Risk Factors” for more information about the potential impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our results of operations and overall financial performance for future periods.
Impact of the 53rd Week in Fiscal 2020
The 53rd week in fiscal 2020 added approximately $41.8 million in net sales as well as an estimated $8.5 million in operating income, $6.4 million in net income, $0.06 in diluted earnings per share, $8.5 million in EBITDA, and $8.8 million in adjusted EBITDA. When presenting comparable store sales for fiscal 2020, we have excluded the last week of fiscal 2020.
Net Sales
Net sales during fiscal 2020 increased $380.3 million, or 18.6%, compared to fiscal 2019 due to the opening of 13 new stores since December 26, 2019 and an increase in comparable store sales of 5.5%. The comparable store sales increase during the period of 5.5%, or $112.3 million, was driven by a 4.8% increase in comparable customer transactions and a 0.7% increase in comparable average ticket. Among our six product categories, five experienced comparable store sales increases during the year, including tile, laminate/luxury vinyl plank, decorative accessories/wall tile, installation materials and tools, and natural stone. Non-comparable store sales increased $268.0 million during fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in new stores previously described.
We believe the increase in second half of fiscal 2020 sales relative to the first half of the year is due in part to (i) government intervention, including from the CARES Act, to help mitigate the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) customers nesting at home and investing in home improvements while spending less on leisure activities like travel, eating out, sporting events, and hotels, (iii) favorable macroeconomic housing metrics, such as low interest rates, rising home values, and an increase in housing turnover, and (iv) the investments we have made in our assortment, connected customer, Pro, design, real estate strategies, and associate training. We believe our business model, which relies in part on substantial amounts of on-trend, in-stock inventory, also contributed to the sales increase.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit during fiscal 2020 increased $171.9 million, or 19.9%, compared to fiscal 2019. This increase in gross profit was driven by the 18.6% increase in net sales and an increase in gross margin to 42.7%, up approximately 50 basis points from 42.2% in fiscal 2019. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to higher product margin driven by improved merchandising strategies and lower costs from the elimination of certain tariffs, partially offset by higher distribution center costs related to our new distribution center in Maryland. Refer to Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report for additional details related to tariff refunds.
Selling and Store Operating Expenses
Selling and store operating expenses during fiscal 2020 increased $107.2 million, or 19.6%, compared to fiscal 2019 due primarily to opening 13 new stores since December 26, 2019. As a percentage of net sales, our selling and store operating expenses increased approximately 20 basis points to 27.0% from 26.7% in fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to higher operating costs for new stores open less than one year. Comparable store selling and store operating expenses as a percentage of comparable store sales decreased by approximately 80 basis points driven by a decrease in advertising spending and a decline in occupancy costs as a percentage of net revenue due to the year-over-year increase in sales.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses, which are typically expenses incurred outside of our stores, increased $12.3 million, or 9.3%, during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to higher incentive compensation expense and costs to support store growth, including increased depreciation related to technology and other store support center investments and higher occupancy costs for our new store support center that we moved into during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019. Our general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased approximately 50 basis points to 6.0% in fiscal 2020 from 6.5% in fiscal 2019. The decline was driven by lower impairment charges compared to the prior year and a year-over-year decrease in expenses for travel, meals, and meetings as in-person meetings were reduced in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pre-Opening Expenses
Pre-opening expenses during fiscal 2020 decreased $3.1 million, or 12.6%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease is primarily the result of a decline in the number of stores that we either opened or were preparing for opening compared to the prior year. We opened 13 warehouse stores and one design studio in fiscal 2020 as compared to opening 20 warehouse stores in fiscal 2019. Of the new store openings, 7 were in existing markets and 6 were in new markets in fiscal 2020 as compared to 12 in existing markets and 8 in new markets in fiscal 2019. We also relocated one warehouse store in fiscal 2019 and had no relocations in fiscal 2020.
Interest Expense
Net interest expense in fiscal 2020 decreased $0.4 million, or 4.7%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in net interest expense was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates on borrowings, an increase in interest capitalized during the construction period of certain capital assets, and higher interest income related to cash on hand and tariff refund receivables during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Refer to Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report for additional details related to interest on tariff refunds.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was an $12.2 million expense in fiscal 2020 compared to a $0.3 million benefit in fiscal 2019. The effective tax rate was 5.9% for fiscal 2020 compared to (0.2)% for fiscal 2019. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to an increase in operating income, the recognition of discrete expense for loss contingencies related to uncertain tax positions, and a decrease in excess tax benefits related to stock option exercises, partially offset by income tax benefits related to the CARES Act.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
For the periods presented, the following table reconciles EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP:
(1) Excludes amortization of deferred financing costs, which is included as part of interest expense, net in the table above.
(2) Represents gain on partial debt extinguishment in connection with the May 2020 amendment to the senior secured term loan credit facility.
(3) Non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation programs, which vary from period to period depending on the timing of awards and forfeitures.
(4) Amounts are comprised of sanitation, personal protective equipment, and other costs directly related to disruptions caused by or efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
(5) Represents income for estimated tariff refunds recognized for certain bamboo and other flooring products in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2019, represents income recognized during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019 for the portion of expected tariff refunds related to products sold prior to November 20, 2019, the date on which U.S. Customs issued Chapter 99 tariff exclusions for certain of our click-vinyl and engineered flooring products, net of a resulting increase to incentive compensation. Interest income for tariff refunds is included within interest expense, net in the table above.
(6) Amount primarily represents impairment loss for the operating lease right-of-use asset related to our former store support center in Smyrna, Georgia.
(7) Other adjustments include amounts management does not consider indicative of our core operating performance. Amounts for fiscal 2020 primarily relate to relocation expenses for our Houston distribution center, costs associated with two secondary public offerings of the Company’s Class A common stock by certain of our stockholders, and legal fees associated with the February 2020 amendment to our senior secured term loan credit facility. Amounts for fiscal 2019 primarily relate to costs associated with the secondary public offering of our Class A common stock by certain of our stockholders, the relocation of our store support center in Smyrna, Georgia, and the closure of our Miami distribution center. The Company did not sell any shares in the offerings and did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares by the selling stockholders.
Seasonality
Historically, our business has had very little seasonality. Our specialty hard surface flooring and decorative home product offering makes us less susceptible to holiday shopping seasonal patterns compared to other retailers. However, we generally conduct a clearance event during our third fiscal quarter followed by a smaller clearance event towards the end of the year. The timing of these clearance events is driven by operational considerations rather than customer demand and could change from year to year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is provided primarily by our cash flows from operations and our $400.0 million ABL Facility. Unrestricted liquidity based on our December 31, 2020 financial data was $686.4 million, consisting of $307.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and $378.7 million immediately available for borrowing under the ABL Facility without violating any covenants thereunder.
Our primary cash needs are for merchandise inventories, payroll, store rent, and other operating expenses and capital expenditures associated with opening new stores and remodeling existing stores, as well as information technology, e-commerce, and store support center infrastructure. We also use cash for the payment of taxes and interest.
The most significant components of our operating assets and liabilities are merchandise inventories and accounts payable, and, to a lesser extent, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, other current and non-current liabilities, taxes receivable, and taxes payable. In an operating environment outside of the COVID-19 pandemic, our liquidity is not generally seasonal, and our uses of cash are primarily tied to when we open stores and make other capital expenditures.
Merchandise inventory is our most significant working capital asset and is considered “in-transit” or “available for sale” based on whether we have physically received the products at an individual store location or in one of our four distribution centers. In-transit inventory generally varies due to contractual terms, country of origin, transit times, international holidays, weather patterns, and other factors.
We measure realizability of our inventory by monitoring sales, gross margin, inventory aging, weeks of supply or inventory turns as well as by reviewing SKUs that have been determined by our merchandising team to be discontinued. Based on our analysis of these factors, we believe our inventory is realizable.
Twice a year, we conduct a clearance event with the goal of selling through discontinued inventory, followed by donations of the aged discontinued inventory that we are unable to sell. We generally conduct a larger clearance event during our third fiscal quarter followed by a smaller clearance event towards the end of the fiscal year. We define aged discontinued inventory as inventory in discontinued status for more than 12 months that we intend to sell or donate. As of December 31, 2020, we had $0.1 million of aged discontinued inventory that we intend to donate if we are unable to sell.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Liquidity
Historically, our primary sources of funds for our business activities are cash flows from operations and our existing credit facilities. As described in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - COVID-19 Update” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant negative impact on our business and financial results during the first half of fiscal 2020, and the full financial impact of the pandemic cannot be reasonably estimated at this time due to uncertainty regarding its potential severity and duration. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may be required to rely more heavily on our cash reserves and lines of credit than we have in recent years. In response to these uncertainties, we have taken proactive steps to improve liquidity and maintain financial flexibility, including making targeted reductions in operating expenses and capital expenditures and entering into a $75.0 million incremental term loan (see Note 10, "Debt" to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional details).
We continue to monitor this rapidly developing situation and may, as necessary, reduce expenditures further, borrow additional amounts under our term loan and revolving credit facilities, or pursue other sources of capital that may include other forms of external financing in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility. The financial and credit markets have experienced and may continue to experience significant volatility and turmoil. Our continued access to external sources of liquidity depends on multiple factors, including the condition of debt capital markets, our operating performance, and maintaining strong credit ratings. If the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to create severe disruptions or turmoil in the financial markets, or if rating agencies lower our credit ratings, it could adversely affect our ability to access the debt markets, our cost of funds, and other terms for new debt or other sources of external liquidity. We expect that cash generated from operations together with cash on hand, our actions to reduce expenditures, the availability of borrowings under our Credit Facilities, and if necessary, additional funding through other forms of external financing, will be sufficient to meet liquidity requirements, anticipated capital expenditures, and payments due under our Credit Facilities for at least the next twelve months.
Total capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 are planned to be between approximately $440 million to $460 million and will be funded primarily by cash generated from operations and borrowings under the ABL Facility. Our capital needs may change in the future due to changes in our business, including in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, or new opportunities that we choose to pursue; however, we currently expect the following for capital expenditures in fiscal 2021:
•open 27 warehouse-format stores, open 3 small-format design studios, and start construction on stores opening and relocating in fiscal 2022 using approximately $285 million to $295 million of cash;
•relocate our Houston, Texas distribution center and open a transload facility in Los Angeles, California using approximately $72 million to $76 million of cash;
•invest in existing store remodeling and expansion projects and existing distribution centers maintenance using approximately $56 million to $59 million of cash; and
•invest in information technology infrastructure, e-commerce and other store support center initiatives using approximately $27 million to $30 million of cash.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of our operating, investing, and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities
Cash from operating activities consists primarily of net income adjusted for changes in working capital as well as non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, and stock-based compensation.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $406.2 million for fiscal 2020 and $204.7 million for fiscal 2019. The change in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily the result of an increase in net income and a decrease in net working capital.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures for new store openings, existing store remodels (including leasehold improvements, new racking, new fixtures, new product and display vignettes, and enhanced design studios) and new infrastructure and information systems.
Capital expenditures were $212.4 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $196.0 million for fiscal 2019. The increase is primarily related to the purchase of land to relocate our distribution center in the Houston, Texas area to a nearby location. For fiscal 2020, approximately 66% of capital expenditures was for new stores, 23% was for existing stores and distribution centers, while the remaining spending was associated with information technology, e-commerce, and store support center investments to support our growth.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of borrowings and related repayments under our credit agreements as well as dividends paid to common stockholders.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $87.0 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $17.7 million for fiscal 2019. The increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily driven by net proceeds from borrowings under the incremental term loan facility during the second quarter of fiscal 2020.
Our Credit Facilities
The indebtedness outstanding under our Credit Facilities is secured by substantially all of our assets. In particular, the indebtedness outstanding under (i) the ABL Facility is secured by a first-priority security interest in all of our current assets, including inventory and accounts receivable, and a second-priority security interest in the collateral that secures the Term Loan Facility on a first-priority basis, and (ii) the Term Loan Facility is secured by a first-priority security interest in all of our fixed assets and intellectual property, and a second- priority interest in the collateral that secures the ABL Facility on a first-priority basis.
The credit agreements governing our Credit Facilities contain customary restrictive covenants that, among other things and with certain exceptions, limit our ability to (i) incur additional indebtedness and liens in connection with such indebtedness, (ii) pay dividends and make certain other restricted payments, (iii) effect mergers or consolidations, (iv) enter into transactions with affiliates, (v) sell or dispose of property or assets, and (vi) engage in unrelated lines of business. In addition, these credit agreements subject us to certain reporting obligations and require that we satisfy certain financial covenants, including, among other things, a requirement that if borrowings under the ABL Facility exceed 90% of availability, we will maintain a certain fixed charge coverage ratio (defined as consolidated EBITDA less non-financed capital expenditures and income taxes paid to consolidated fixed charges, in each case as more fully defined in the credit agreement governing the ABL Facility).
Term Loan Facility
As of December 31, 2020, the Term Loan B Facility bore interest based on one of the following rates, at our option:
i.Adjusted LIBOR Rate plus a margin of 2.00% (subject to a leverage-based step-up to 2.25% if we exceed certain leverage ratio tests and a 0.00% LIBOR floor).
ii.Base Rate plus a margin of 1.00% (subject to a leverage-based step-up to 1.25% if we exceed certain leverage ratio tests). Base Rate defined as the greater of the following:
a.the base rate in effect on such day,
b.the federal funds rate plus 0.50%,
c.the adjusted LIBOR rate for the interest period of one month plus a margin of 1.00%.
As of December 31, 2020, the Term Loan B-1 Facility bore interest based on one of the following rates, at our option:
i.Adjusted LIBOR Rate plus a margin of 4.00% (subject to a 1.00% LIBOR floor)
ii.Base Rate plus a margin of 3.00%.
On February 14, 2020, we entered into a repricing and third amendment to the credit agreement governing our senior secured term loan facility (as amended, the “Term Loan Facility”) which, among other things, (a) refinanced our existing term loan B facility with a new term loan B facility in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $144.6 million, (b) extended the stated maturity date under the Term Loan Facility to February 14, 2027, and (c) included an “accordion” feature that allows us to borrow additional amounts as described more fully in Note 10, “Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
On May 18, 2020, we entered into a fourth amendment to the Term Loan Facility which, among other things, provides for a new incremental term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $75.0 million with a maturity date of February 14, 2027 (the “term loan B-1 facility”). We received net proceeds of $70.5 million from the term loan B-1 facility after deducting a $4.1 million original issuance discount and $0.3 million of debt issuance costs to third parties, and we intend to use the net proceeds to support our growth plans and for general corporate purposes. The term loan B-1 facility is a separate tranche from our existing term loan B facility. The terms of loans under the term loan B facility remain unchanged under the fourth amendment.
On February 9, 2021, we entered into a fifth amendment to the Term Loan Facility; see “Recent Developments” below.
ABL Facility
As of December 31, 2020, the ABL Facility bore interest based on one of the following rates, at our option:
i.LIBOR Rate plus a margin of 1.25%
ii.Base Rate plus a margin of 0.25%. Base Rate defined as the greater of the following:
a.the federal funds rate plus 0.50%,
b.the adjusted LIBOR rate plus 1.00%, or
c.the lender’s prime rate.
On February 14, 2020, we also entered into a repricing and general amendment to the credit agreement governing our revolving credit facility (as amended, the “ABL Facility”), which, among other things, (a) increased our revolving commitments to a total aggregate principal amount of $400.0 million, and (b) extended the stated maturity date under the ABL Facility to February 14, 2025. The ABL Facility also includes an “accordion” feature that allows us under certain circumstances, to increase the size of the facility by an amount up to $100.0 million, or such higher amount as may be agreed to by the Required Lenders (as defined in the ABL Facility).
The amendment to the ABL Facility also amended the margin applied to loans and letters of credit to (x) in the case of base rate loans, from 0.25% or 0.50% per annum (based on availability) to a flat rate of 0.25% per annum, (y) in the case of LIBOR loans and letter of credit fees for standby letters of credit, from 1.25% or 1.50% per annum (based on availability) to a flat rate of 1.25% per annum (subject to a 0.00% floor on LIBOR loans) and (z) in the case of letter of credit fees for commercial letters of credit, from 0.75% or 1.00% per annum (based on availability) to a flat rate of 0.75% per annum. The material terms of the ABL Facility were otherwise unchanged.
In July 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority (the authority that regulates LIBOR) announced it intends to stop compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after 2021. The Alternative Reference Rates Committee ("ARRC") has proposed that the Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR") is the rate that represents best practice as the alternative to USD-LIBOR for use in derivatives and other financial contracts that are currently indexed to USD-LIBOR. ARRC has proposed a paced market transition plan to SOFR from USD-LIBOR and organizations are currently working on industry wide and company specific transition plans as it relates to derivatives and cash markets exposed to USD-LIBOR. Both of our debt facilities are indexed to USD-LIBOR, and we believe all our material agreements have appropriate language to negotiate a transition to an alternative index rate. While we are uncertain about the affects this transition may have on our cash flows, we are continuing to monitor this activity and evaluate the potential risks.
Refer to Note 10, “Debt” for additional details regarding our Term Loan Facility and ABL Facility, including applicable covenants.
Credit Ratings
Our credit ratings are periodically reviewed by rating agencies. In April 2020, Moody’s reaffirmed the Company’s issuer corporate family rating of Ba3 but changed its outlook for the Company to negative from stable. In November 2020, Moody's reaffirmed the Company's issuer corporate family rating of Ba3 and changed its outlook for the Company to stable from negative. In December 2020, Standard & Poor's reaffirmed the Company's corporate credit rating of BB- and revised its outlook for the Company to positive from stable. These ratings and our current credit condition affect, among other things, our ability to access new capital. Negative changes to these ratings may result in more stringent covenants and higher interest rates under the terms of any new debt. Our credit ratings could be lowered or rating agencies could issue adverse commentaries in the future, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity. In particular, a weakening of our financial condition, including any further increase in our leverage or decrease in our profitability or cash flows, could adversely affect our ability to obtain necessary funds, could result in a credit rating downgrade or change in outlook, or could otherwise increase our cost of borrowing.
Supply Chain Finance Program
As part of our ongoing efforts to improve cash flow and liquidity, we facilitate a voluntary supply chain finance program (the “Finance Program”) for certain of our suppliers. Suppliers that participate in the Finance Program extend our payment terms by approximately 40 days on average. Under with the Finance Program, participating suppliers may choose to sell receivables due from us to a participating financial institution at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and the financial institution. The Finance Program is administered by a third-party financial institution, and the Company's responsibility is limited to making payment on the terms originally negotiated with participating suppliers, regardless of whether such suppliers sell receivables to the financial institution. Suppliers who choose to participate in the Finance Program may, at their sole discretion, make offers to the financial partners who administer the Finance Program to finance one or more payment obligations of the Company prior to their scheduled due dates at a discounted price to the third party financial institution.
Accordingly, amounts due to our suppliers that elected to participate in the Finance Program totaled $88.2 million and $101.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 26, 2019, respectively, and are included in trade accounts payable in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Payments made under the Finance Program are reflected in net cash provided by operating activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
U.S. Tariffs and Global Economy
The current domestic and international political environment, including existing and potential changes to U.S. policies related to global trade and tariffs, have resulted in uncertainty surrounding the future state of the global economy. In particular, the ongoing trade dispute between the U.S. and China has resulted in the U.S. imposing tariffs of 25% on many products from China. While exclusions from tariffs were granted for certain products from China, nearly all of these exclusions have expired. Historically, approximately half of the products we sell were imported from China, the majority of which are impacted by these tariffs. As we continue to manage the impact these tariffs may have on our business, we continue taking steps to mitigate some of these cost increases through negotiating lower costs from our vendors, increasing retail pricing as we deem appropriate, and sourcing from alternative countries. While our efforts have mitigated a substantial portion of the overall effect of increased tariffs, the enacted tariffs have increased our inventory costs and associated cost of sales for the remaining products still sourced from China.
Antidumping and Countervailing Duties
On May 24, 2019, the U.S. International Trade Commission (the “ITC”) announced it had completed a preliminary phase antidumping and countervailing duty investigation pursuant to the Tariff Act of 1930 with respect to the imports of ceramic tile from China and determined there is a reasonable indication that the ceramic tile production industry in the U.S. is being materially injured by imports of ceramic tile from China that have allegedly been subsidized by the Chinese government and are being sold in the U.S. at less than fair value, otherwise known as “dumping”. As a result of the ITC’s affirmative determinations, the U.S. Department of Commerce (the “DOC”) began its own related investigation. In April 2020, the DOC reached a final determination that imports from China were subsidized and were being sold in the U.S. at less than fair value. As a result of these final determinations, the DOC set the countervailing duty to 358.81% for all Chinese exporters and the antidumping duty to 203.71% or 330.69% depending on the exporter. In May 2020, the ITC announced their final determination that the ceramic tile production industry in the U.S. is being materially injured by imports of ceramic tile from China, but retroactive duty deposits would not be required as the ITC made a negative critical circumstances determination. The DOC subsequently issued antidumping and countervailing orders.
The DOC has instructed U.S. Customs to require cash deposits based on the announced effective rates. The final rates for the first 18 months of the orders will not be determined until the first administrative review process is completed, approximately two years after the published date of the orders.
We took steps to mitigate the risk of future exposure by sourcing from alternative countries, and we are no longer importing applicable products from China. We have made duty deposits for applicable entries according to U.S. Customs entry procedures. While we do not currently believe additional duty deposits will apply, we believe our potential exposure could be up to approximately $3.0 million. The actual additional duties, if applicable, could differ from this estimate. We have not established a reserve for this matter as we currently do not believe additional duties will be applicable. Potential costs and any attendant impact on pricing arising from these tariffs or potential duties, and any further expansion in the types or levels of tariffs or duties implemented, could require us to modify our current business practices and could adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Tariff Refunds
In November 2019, the U.S. Trade Representative (“USTR”) made a ruling to retroactively exclude certain flooring products imported from China from the Section 301 tariffs that were implemented at 10% beginning in September 2018 and increased to 25% in June 2019. The granted exclusions apply to certain “click” vinyl and engineered products that we have sold and continue to sell. As these exclusions were granted retroactively, we are entitled to a refund from U.S. Customs and Border Protection for the applicable Section 301 tariffs previously paid on these goods. While tariff refund claims are subject to the approval of U.S. Customs, the Company currently expects to recover $24.3 million related to these Section 301 tariff payments, including interest, of which $12.9 million was received in fiscal 2020. Refer to Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional details regarding tariff refunds.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into long-term obligations and commitments in the normal course of business, primarily debt obligations and non-cancelable operating leases. As of December 31, 2020, our contractual cash obligations over the next several periods were as follows:
(1)For purposes of this table, interest has been estimated based on interest rates in effect for our indebtedness as of December 31, 2020 and estimated borrowing levels in the future. Actual borrowing levels and interest costs may differ.
(2)We enter into operating leases during the normal course of business. Most lease arrangements provide us with the option to renew the leases at defined terms. The future operating lease obligations set forth above would change if we were to exercise these options or enter into additional operating leases.
(3)Purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts such as firm commitments for inventory purchases, container commitments, software and license commitments, and legally binding service contracts. Purchase orders that are not binding agreements are excluded from the table above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
For fiscal 2020, we were not party to any material off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, net sales, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources. We do not have any relationship with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for information on the recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements that are applicable to the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates, and judgments on an ongoing basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ under different assumptions and conditions, and such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
Management evaluated the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following accounting policies are critical as they involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are the most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. All of our significant accounting policies are discussed in “Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
Description. We recognize revenue and the related cost of sales when we satisfy the performance obligations in contracts with our customers in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“Topic 606”). Our performance obligations for our retail store sales, as well as for orders placed through our website and shipped to our customers, are satisfied at the point-of-sale, which is typically the point at which the customer obtains control of the inventory. In some cases, merchandise is not physically ready for transfer to the customer at the point-of-sale, and revenue recognition is deferred until the customer has control of the inventory. Shipping and handling activities are accounted for as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer goods rather than as separate performance obligations as outlined within Topic 606. Payment is generally due from the customer immediately at the point-of-sale for both retail store sales and website sales.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. Our customers have the right to return the goods sold to them within a reasonable time period, typically 90 days. The right of return is an element of variable consideration as defined within Topic 606. We estimate a reserve for future returns of previously sold goods based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. Merchandise exchanges of similar product and price are not considered merchandise returns and, therefore, are excluded when calculating the sales returns reserve. While we believe that our current sales returns reserves are adequate, there can be no assurances that historical data and trends will accurately predict returns or that future developments might not lead to a significant change in the reserve.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. A 10% change in our sales returns reserve at December 31, 2020 would have affected operating income by approximately $1.0 million in fiscal 2020.
Gift Cards and Merchandise Credits
Description. We sell gift cards to our customers in our stores and through our website and issue merchandise credits in our stores. We account for the programs by recognizing a liability at the time the gift card is sold or the merchandise credit is issued. The liability is relieved and revenue is recognized upon redemption. Additionally, we recognize breakage income in proportion to the pattern of rights exercised by the customer when we expect to be entitled to breakage. Net sales related to the estimated breakage are included in net sales in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income. We have an agreement with an unrelated third-party who is the issuer of the Company's gift cards and also assumes the liability for unredeemed gift cards. The Company is not subject to claims under unclaimed property statutes, as the agreement effectively transfers the ownership of such unredeemed gift cards and the related future escheatment liability, if any, to the third-party.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. Our gift card breakage assumptions require judgments in assessing the level at which we group gift cards for analysis of breakage rates, redemption patterns, and the ultimate value of gift cards which we do not expect to be redeemed.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. A 10% change in our accrual for estimated gift card breakage at December 31, 2020 would have affected operating income by approximately $0.9 million in fiscal 2020.
Loyalty Program
Description. Our Pro Premier loyalty program allows customers to earn points through purchases in our stores and our website. Loyalty points are typically awarded at 1%, but may be awarded at up to 3% percent for our higher volume customers, of the relative standalone selling price of the merchandise sold and are recognized at the time of sale as a liability with a corresponding reduction to net sales. Additionally, loyalty breakage is recognized based on our estimate of the balance of loyalty points for which the likelihood of redemption by the customer is deemed remote.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. With assistance from the third party servicer that manages the loyalty program, we estimate and recognize loyalty breakage based on historical redemption trends, market benchmarks for the pattern of redemptions for other retail loyalty programs, and other assumptions related to the likelihood of customer redemptions.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. The loyalty program was rolled out to all stores in late fiscal 2018. As the program matures, we may find that actual customer redemption patterns differ significantly from our estimated breakage rates. A 10% change in our accrual for estimated loyalty breakage at December 31, 2020 would have affected operating income by less than $0.1 million in fiscal 2020.
Inventory Valuation and Shrinkage
Description. Inventories consist of merchandise held for sale and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. When evidence exists that the net realizable value of inventory is lower than its cost, the difference is recorded in cost of sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income as a loss in the period in which it occurs. We determine inventory costs using the moving weighted average cost method. We capitalize transportation, duties, and other costs to get product to our retail locations.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. We provide provisions for losses related to shrinkage and other amounts that are otherwise not expected to be fully recoverable. These provisions are calculated based on historical shrinkage, selling price, margin, and current business trends. The estimates have calculations that require management to make assumptions based on the current rate of sales, age, salability and profitability of inventory, historical percentages that can be affected by changes in our merchandising mix, customer preferences, rates of sell through, and changes in actual shrinkage trends.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. A 10% change in our inventory valuation and shrinkage reserves at December 31, 2020 would have affected operating income by approximately $0.5 million in fiscal 2020.
Vendor Rebates and Allowances
Description. Vendor allowances consist primarily of volume rebates that are earned as a result of reaching certain inventory purchase levels and advertising allowances or incentives for the promotion of vendors' products. These vendor allowances are accrued as earned and are estimated based on annual projections. Vendor allowances earned are initially recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of inventory and a subsequent reduction in cost of sales when the related product is sold. Certain incentive allowances that are reimbursements of specific, incremental, and identifiable costs incurred to promote vendors’ products are recorded as an offset against these promotional expenses.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. For vendor allowances, we develop accrual rates based on the provisions of the agreements in place. Due to the complexity and diversity of the individual vendor agreements, we perform analyses and review historical purchase trends and volumes throughout the year, adjust accrual rates as appropriate, and confirm actual amounts with select vendors to ensure the amounts earned are appropriately recorded. Amounts accrued throughout the year could be impacted if actual purchase volumes differ from projected purchase volumes, especially in the case of programs that provide for increased funding when graduated purchase volumes are met.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to recognize vendor allowances during the past three fiscal years. If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions and estimates used, we could be exposed to additional adjustments that could positively or negatively impact gross margin and inventory. However, substantially all receivables associated with vendor rebates and allowances do not require subjective long-term estimates because they are collected soon after quarter end, primarily within the first two months. Adjustments to gross margin and inventory in the following fiscal year have historically not been material.
Leases
Description. We recognize lease assets and corresponding lease liabilities for all operating leases on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, excluding short-term leases (leases with terms of 12 months or less) as described under ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842).” The majority of our long-term operating lease agreements include options to extend, which are also factored into the recognition of their respective assets and liabilities when appropriate based on management’s assessment of the probability that the options will be exercised. Lease payments are discounted using the rate implicit in the lease, or, if not readily determinable, a third-party secured incremental borrowing rate based on information available at lease commencement. The secured incremental borrowing rate is estimated based on yields obtained from Bloomberg for U.S. consumers with a BB- credit rating and is adjusted for collateralization as well as inflation. Additionally, certain of our lease agreements include escalating rents over the lease terms which, under Topic 842, results in rent being expensed on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease that commences on the date we have the right to control the property.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate. The determination of an appropriate secured incremental borrowing rate requires judgments in selecting an appropriate yield curve and estimating adjustments for collateralization and inflation.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions. Based on the volume of new store leases that we enter into each year, a significant increase or decrease in the incremental borrowing rates used to discount lease payments could have a significant impact on the value of operating lease liabilities and right-of-use assets subsequently reported on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Recent Developments
On February 9, 2021 (the “Fifth Amendment Effective Date”), we entered into a fifth amendment to the Term Loan Facility which among other things, (a) provides for a supplemental term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $65.0 million with a maturity date of February 14, 2027 (the “Supplemental Term Loan Facility”), and has the same terms as the Term Loan B Facility and (b) provides that voluntary prepayments of the Term Loan Facility made within six (6) months after the Fifth Amendment Effective Date are subject to a 1% soft call prepayment premium.
The margin applicable to the Supplemental Term Loans Facility is the same as the margin applicable to the Term Loan B Facility, which is: (x) in the case of ABR Loans (as defined in the Term Loan Facility), 1.00% per annum (subject to satisfying a leverage ratio test and subject to a leverage-based step-up to 1.25% if such leverage ratio test is exceeded), and (y) in the case of Eurodollar Loans (as defined in the Term Loan Facility), 2.00% per annum (subject to satisfying a leverage ratio test and subject to a leverage-based step-up to 2.25% if such leverage ratio test is exceeded) (subject to a 0.00% floor on Eurodollar Loans).