Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto and Selected Financial Data included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
For a description of our business, including descriptions of segments, see the discussion under Business in Item 1 of Part I of this Annual Report, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Recent Developments
Acquisition of F&G
On June 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of F&G for approximately $2.7 billion pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated February 7, 2020, as amended (the "Merger Agreement").
For additional information on our acquisition of F&G refer to Note B Acquisitions.
Business Trends and Conditions
Title
Our Title segment revenue is closely related to the level of real estate activity that includes sales, mortgage financing and mortgage refinancing. Declines in the level of real estate activity or the average price of real estate sales will adversely affect our title insurance revenues.
We have found that residential real estate activity is generally dependent on the following factors:
•mortgage interest rates;
•mortgage funding supply;
•housing inventory and home prices;
•supply and demand for commercial real estate; and
•the strength of the United States economy, including employment levels.
While we cannot predict the severity and duration of the negative impacts related to the outbreak of COVID-19, the most recent forecast of the MBA, as of February 19, 2021, estimated (actual for fiscal year 2019) the size of the U.S. residential mortgage originations market as shown in the following table for 2019 - 2023 in its "Mortgage Finance Forecast" (in trillions):
As of January 20, 2021, the MBA expects residential purchase transactions to steadily increase in 2021 and beyond from 2020 levels. Additionally the MBA expects residential refinance transactions to steadily decrease in 2021 and beyond as interest rates are expected to rise. The MBA expects overall mortgage originations to decrease in 2021 and thereafter.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared that the novel coronavirus or COVID-19 “can be characterized as a pandemic,” which is defined as a worldwide spread of a new disease for which most people do not have immunity. On March 15, 2020, the Federal Reserve took emergency action and reduced its benchmark interest rate by a full percentage point to nearly zero. Through the year ended December 31, 2020, mortgage interest rates continued to decline to below 3.0%. Concerns over a slowing global economy and the impact of a prolonged trade war, now combined with the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, have resulted in significant uncertainty in the economic outlook. However, existing-home sales climbed month-over-month and year-over-year between September 2020 and December 2020, showing strong signs of a market turnaround after three consecutive months of sales declines caused primarily by the ongoing pandemic, according to the National Association of Realtors.
Other economic indicators used to measure the health of the U.S. economy, including the unemployment rate and consumer confidence, indicated that the U.S was on strong footing prior to the outbreak of COVID-19. However, the impact of COVID-19 reduced the outlook related to these economic indicators in March 2020. According to the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor, the unemployment rate was at a historically low 3.5% in February 2020 but as of December 31, 2020, the unemployment rate had risen to 6.7%. Additionally, the Conference Board's monthly Consumer Confidence Index remained at high levels through February 2020 before falling as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. As of December 31, 2020, the Consumer Confidence Index had fallen by 33% from its February 2020 highs.
In 2019, total originations were reflective of a strong residential real estate market driven by increasing home prices and low mortgage interest rates. Concerns over a slowing global economy and the impact of a prolonged trade war resulted in interest rate cuts in the second half of the year, which significantly increased refinance transactions and slightly increased purchase transactions when compared to 2018. Additionally, existing home sales increased in each quarter of 2019. Average interest rates on 30-year fixed rate mortgages, averaged 4.4% in the first quarter of 2019 but subsequently decreased in the following three quarters to an average of 3.7% in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Because commercial real estate transactions tend to be generally driven by supply and demand for commercial space and occupancy rates in a particular area rather than by interest rate fluctuations, we believe that our commercial real estate title insurance business is less dependent on the industry cycles discussed above than our residential real estate title business. Commercial real estate transaction volume is also often linked to the availability of financing. Factors including U.S. tax reform and a shift in U.S. monetary policy have had, or are expected to have, varying effects on availability of financing in the U.S. Lower corporate and individual tax rates and corporate tax-deductibility of capital expenditures have provided increased capacity and incentive for investments in commercial real estate. In recent years, we have experienced strong demand in commercial real estate markets and from 2015 through 2019, we experienced historically high volumes and fee-per-file in our commercial business. In 2020, we have experienced decreases in commercial volumes and commercial fee-per-file as a result of the outbreak of COVID-19. While COVID-19 will likely have an impact on the timing and volume of commercial real estate transactions in the short term as the logistics of transactions evolve and some buyers move to the sidelines until the pandemic is resolved, we believe that refinance activity will likely remain elevated in response to the recent Federal rate cuts.
We cannot be certain how the outbreak of COVID-19 and the steps taken to attempt to mitigate its spread will impact our future results of operations. We continually monitor mortgage origination trends and believe that, based on our ability to produce industry leading operating margins through all economic cycles, we are well positioned to adjust our operations for adverse changes in real estate activity and to take advantage of increased volume when demand increases.
See Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report for further discussion of risk factors related to COVID-19.
Seasonality. Historically, real estate transactions have produced seasonal revenue fluctuations in the real estate industry. The first calendar quarter is typically the weakest quarter in terms of revenue due to the generally low volume of home sales during January and February. The second and third calendar quarters are typically the strongest quarters in terms of revenue, primarily due to a higher volume of residential transactions in the spring and summer months. The fourth quarter is typically strong due to the desire of commercial entities to complete transactions by year-end. Seasonality in 2020 deviated from historical patterns due to COVID-19. We have noted short-term fluctuations through recent years in resale and refinance transactions as a result of changes in interest rates.
Geographic Operations. Our direct title operations are divided into approximately 180 profit centers. Each profit center processes title insurance transactions within its geographical area, which is usually identified by a county, a group of counties forming a region, or a state, depending on the management structure in that part of the country. We also transact title insurance business through a network of approximately 5,400 agents, primarily in those areas in which agents are the more prevalent title insurance provider. Substantially all of our revenues are generated in the United States.
The following table sets forth the approximate dollar and percentage volumes of our title insurance premium revenue by state:
F&G
We acquired F&G on June 1, 2020. The following factors represent some of the key trends and uncertainties that have influenced the development of our F&G segment and its historical financial performance, and we believe these key trends and uncertainties will continue to influence the business and financial performance of our F&G segment in the future.
COVID-19 pandemic
While continuously evolving, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant economic and financial turmoil in the U.S. and around the world, and has fueled concerns that it will lead to a global recession. These conditions may continue or worsen in the near term. At this time, it is not possible to estimate the longer term-effects the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our F&G segment or our consolidated financial statements. Increased economic uncertainty and increased unemployment resulting from the economic impacts of the spread of COVID-19 may result in F&G policyholders seeking sources of liquidity and withdrawing at rates greater than was previously expected. If policyholder lapse and surrender rates significantly exceed expectations, it could have an adverse effect on our F&G segment's, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows. Such events or conditions could also have an adverse effect on its sales of new policies. F&G is monitoring the impact of COVID-19 on its investment portfolio and the potential for ratings changes caused by the sudden slowdown of economic activity. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our F&G segment's, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity or prospects will depend on future developments which cannot be predicted.
Market Conditions
Market volatility has affected and may continue to affect our business and financial performance in varying ways. Volatility can pressure sales and reduce demand as consumers hesitate to make financial decisions. To enhance the attractiveness and profitability of our products and services, we continually monitor the behavior of our customers, as evidenced by annuitization rates and lapse rates, which vary in response to changes in market conditions. See Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report for further discussion of risk factors that could affect market conditions.
Interest Rate Environment
Some of our products include guaranteed minimum crediting rates, most notably our fixed rate annuities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's reserves, net of reinsurance, and average crediting rate on our fixed rate annuities were $4.0 billion and 3%, respectively. We are required to pay the guaranteed minimum crediting rates even if earnings on our investment portfolio decline, which would negatively impact earnings. In addition, we expect more policyholders to hold policies with comparatively high guaranteed rates for a longer period in a low interest rate environment. Conversely, a rise in average yield on our investment portfolio would increase earnings if the average interest rate we pay on our products does not rise correspondingly. Similarly, we expect that policyholders would be less likely to hold policies with existing guarantees as interest rates rise and the relative value of other new business offerings are increased, which would negatively impact our earnings and cash flows.
See “