Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
First Northwest is a bank holding company which primarily engages in the business activity of its subsidiary, First Federal. First Federal is a community-oriented financial institution serving Clallam, Jefferson, Kitsap, Whatcom, and King counties in Washington State, through its Seattle lending center and ten full service branches. We offer a wide range of products and services focused on the financial security and payment needs of the communities we serve. While we have a concentration of first lien one- to four-family mortgage loans, we have increased our origination of commercial real estate, multi-family real estate, construction, and commercial business loans, and have increased our auto and consumer loans through originations, indirect auto lending, and purchased auto loan programs, in order to diversify our portfolio and increase interest income. We continue to originate one- to four-family residential mortgage loans and regularly sell conforming loans into the secondary market to increase noninterest income and manage interest rate risk or retain select loans in our portfolio to enhance interest income. We offer traditional consumer and business deposit products, including transaction accounts, savings and money market accounts and certificates of deposit for individuals, businesses and nonprofit organizations. Deposits are our primary source of funding for our lending and investing activities
First Federal is impacted by prevailing economic conditions as well as government policies and regulations concerning, among other things, monetary and fiscal affairs, including fiscal stimulus, interest rate policy and open market operations, housing and financial institutions. Deposit flows are influenced by various factors, including sales and marketing efforts, interest rates paid on competing deposits, available alternative investments such as the stock market, account maturities, government stimulus and unemployment programs, and the overall level of personal income and savings. Lending activities are influenced by prevailing interest rates and property values in our markets, the demand for funds, the number and quality of lenders employed by First Federal, and regional economic cycles.
Our primary source of pre-tax income is net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest income earned on our loans and investments and interest expense paid on our deposits and borrowings. Changes in levels of interest rates can affect our net interest income. A secondary source of income is noninterest income, which includes revenue we receive from providing products and services, including service charges on deposit accounts, debit card interchange income, mortgage banking income, treasury and other commercial banking related fees, earnings from bank-owned life insurance, and gains and losses from sales of securities.
An offset to net interest income is the provision for loan losses, which represents the periodic charge to operations which is required to adequately provide for probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio through our allowance for loan losses. As a loan's risk rating improves, property values increase, or recoveries of amounts previously charged off are received, a recapture of previously recognized provision for loan losses may be added to net interest income.
The noninterest expenses we incur in operating our business consist of salaries and employee benefit costs, occupancy and equipment expenses, federal deposit insurance premiums and regulatory assessments, digital delivery and data processing expenses, advertising and promotion expenses, expenses related to real estate and personal property owned, state and local taxes, federal income tax, and other miscellaneous expenses.
Our Business and Operating Strategy
Our operating strategy is focused on diversifying our loan portfolio, expanding our deposit product offerings, and enhancing our infrastructure. Certain highlights of our operations in recent years are as follows:
•
Expanding our market presence. We hired several experienced and talented bankers with connections throughout Western Washington. We opened four full-service branches in Silverdale, Bellingham, and Bainbridge Island, Washington and a lending center in Seattle, Washington. Through these new locations, we have realized growth in deposits and expanded our ability to secure customer relationships and lending opportunities outside of our historic market areas in the North Olympic Peninsula. We also utilize technology to expand our market presence and to service new and existing businesses and consumers.
•
Enhancing the loan portfolio. We have significantly increased the origination of commercial real estate, multi-family real estate, and construction and land loans as well as increased our portfolio of commercial business loans. This helped to increase overall net interest income.
•
Adding new servicing capabilities. In addition to traditional consumer and business deposit products, we offer remote deposit capture, consumer and small business digital banking, and commercial digital banking capabilities. At our branch locations in Forks, Port Angeles-Eastside, Silverdale, Bainbridge Island, and Bellingham, Washington, and at our main administrative building and downtown locations in Port Angeles, Washington, we have implemented interactive teller machines, allowing our customers to conduct business with a teller through a video monitor.
•
Enhancing our infrastructure. We have focused on upgrading our infrastructure, both in terms of equipment and personnel, in order to support our changing lending and deposit capabilities and position ourselves for growth.
Our objective is to be an independent, high performing bank focused on meeting the needs of individuals, small businesses and community organizations throughout our market areas with exceptional service and competitive products. We intend to implement these strategies to achieve our objective:
•
Increasing our portfolio of higher yielding commercial loans. Through increased loan originations, we intend to increase our loan to deposit ratio and the percentage of our loan portfolio consisting of higher-yielding commercial real estate and commercial business loans. These loan categories offer higher risk-adjusted returns, shorter maturities and more sensitivity to interest rate fluctuations than traditional fixed-rate, one- to four-family residential loans. Our commercial and multifamily real estate and commercial business loans have increased from $393.4 million, or 44.5% of total loans, at December 31, 2019, to $559.2 million, or 48.5% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. The increase resulted in part from building the commercial team by adding talented lenders; developing relationships with loan referral sources, including our Board of Directors and loan brokers; pursuing loan purchase and participation opportunities; competing successfully in new and existing markets; and benefiting from the improvement of the economy in northwestern Washington.
•
Increasing exposure to wholesale assets. We may purchase wholesale assets in order to augment our organic growth strategy. This may include continuing to participate in indirect auto lending and manufactured home programs. We may also purchase pools of residential mortgage loans and manufactured home loans.
•
Maintaining our focus on asset quality. We believe that strong asset quality is a key to our long-term financial success. We are focused on monitoring existing performing loans, resolving nonperforming loans, and selling foreclosed assets. Nonperforming assets were $2.0 million at December 31, 2019 and $2.3 million at December 31, 2020. We have taken proactive steps to resolve our nonperforming loans, including negotiating repayment plans, forbearances, loan modifications and loan extensions with our borrowers when appropriate. We have also accepted short payoffs on delinquent loans, particularly when such payoffs result in a smaller loss to us than foreclosure. We also retain the services of independent firms to periodically review segments of our loan portfolio and provide comments regarding our loan policies and procedures.
•
Attracting core deposits and other deposit products. Our strategy is to emphasize relationship banking with our customers to obtain a greater share of their deposits, with specific emphasis on their primary transaction accounts. We believe this emphasis will help to increase our level of core deposits. In addition to our retail branches, we continually upgrade our digital delivery solutions, such as on-line personal financial management, business online banking, business remote deposit products, mobile remote deposit services through smartphones and tablets, account-to-account transfer services between First Federal and other banks, and person-to-person funds transfer through smartphones and tablets, enabling us to compete effectively with banks of all sizes. We enhanced our integrated mobile banking platform by introducing applications for both smartphones and tablets, upgraded our business on-line banking platform, and extended banking hours through our interactive teller machines. In 2020, we significantly increased our level of commercial demand deposits as we added a Treasury Management department. We intend to further build out this department in 2021 and beyond.
•
Expanding our market presence and capturing business opportunities resulting from changes in the competitive environment. By delivering high quality, customer-focused products and services, we believe we can attract additional borrowers and depositors and thus increase our market share and revenue generation in our market areas. We intend to continue our franchise growth. We expect that community bank consolidation will continue to take place and may consider acquiring individual branches or other banks. Our primary focus for expansion will be in Western Washington; however, we may offer digital delivery in other markets.
•
Hiring experienced employees with a customer sales and service focus. Our goal is to compete by relying on the strength of our customer service and relationship building. We believe that our ability to continue to attract and retain banking professionals who have significant knowledge of existing and new market areas, possess strong commercial banking sales and service skills, and maintain a focus on community relationships will enhance our success. We intend to hire additional lenders and relationship managers who are established in their communities to enhance our market position and add profitable growth opportunities.
•
Improving our digital presence and streamlining the customer experience. By investing in and improving on the interfaces that connect customers to our products and services, we believe we will be in a better position to compete and grow in an environment that is becoming increasingly technology driven. We intend to invest in our online presence and engage in digital strategies that will help us to successfully compete in an ever-changing digital marketplace. In 2019, the Company committed to fund $3.0 million in an investment to identify and infuse capital into certain promising digital companies for which we may have an interest to use their services at some future date or which may result in additional investment opportunities. This commitment includes management participation in meetings and events that we feel will benefit us when making decisions regarding digital services offerings and customer engagement. We introduced a new online mortgage application with a leading fintech partner in 2020 and we plan to launch new digital deposit application and consumer loan origination platforms in the first half of 2021.
•
Exploring alternative lending opportunities to improve interest income. We strive to grow the balance sheet and leverage capital in a safe and sound manner and believe that lending opportunities outside of organic originations may be a valuable source of interest income. We continued to engage with Northpointe Bank to participate in the interim financing for mortgage originators during the year and have increased our auto loan portfolio significantly as a result of our partnership involving the purchase of loans made to borrowers purchasing high-end automobiles and classic cars. We also engaged with Triad Financial Services in 2020 to purchase a pool of manufactured home loans as well as purchase individual loans on an ongoing basis. We will continue to explore other opportunities such as these as a means to improve net income and supplement organic originations.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have certain accounting policies that are important to the assessment of our financial condition, since they require management to make difficult, complex or subjective judgments, some of which may relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. Estimates associated with these policies are susceptible to material changes as a result of changes in facts and circumstances. Facts and circumstances which could affect these judgments include, but are not limited to, changes in interest rates, changes in the performance of the economy and changes in the financial condition of borrowers. Our accounting policies are discussed in detail in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
The following represent our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is the amount estimated by management as necessary to cover losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of balance sheet date. The allowance is established through the provision for loan losses, which is charged to income. Determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses necessarily involves a high degree of judgment. Among the material estimates required to establish the allowance are: the likelihood of default; the loss exposure at default; the amount and timing of future cash flows on impaired loans; the value of collateral; and the determination of loss factors to be applied to the various elements of the portfolio. All of these estimates are susceptible to significant change. Management reviews, and the Board of Directors approves, at least quarterly, the level of the allowance and the provision for loan losses based on past loss experience, current economic conditions and other factors related to the collectability of the loan portfolio. Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if economic or other conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the evaluation. In addition, the FDIC and the DFI, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our allowance for loan losses and may require us to recognize adjustments to the allowance based on their judgment about information available at the time of their examination. A large loss could deplete the allowance and require increased provisions for loan losses to replenish the allowance, which would adversely affect earnings. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
Mortgage Servicing Rights. We record mortgage servicing rights on loans originated and subsequently sold into the secondary market. We stratify our capitalized mortgage servicing rights based on the type, term and interest rates of the underlying loans. Mortgage servicing rights are initially recognized at fair value. The value is determined through a discounted cash flow analysis, which uses interest rates, prepayment speeds and delinquency rate assumptions as inputs. All of these assumptions require a significant degree of management judgment. If our assumptions prove to be incorrect, the value of our mortgage servicing rights could be negatively affected. See Notes 1 and 7 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
Income Taxes. Management makes estimates and judgments to calculate certain tax liabilities and to determine the recoverability of certain deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenues and expenses. We also estimate a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods. These estimates and judgments are inherently subjective. In evaluating the recoverability of deferred tax assets, management considers all available positive and negative evidence, including past operating results, recent cumulative losses - both capital and operating - and the forecast of future taxable income, both capital gains and operating. In determining future taxable income, management makes assumptions for the amount of taxable income, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require judgments about future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates to manage our business. Any reduction in estimated future taxable income may require us to record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. An increase in the valuation allowance would result in additional income tax expense in the period and could have a significant impact on future earnings.
Fair Value. Fair values of financial instruments are estimated using relevant market information and other assumptions. Fair value estimates involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment regarding interest rates, credit risk, prepayments, and other factors, especially in the absence of broad markets for particular items. Changes in assumptions or in market conditions could significantly affect these estimates.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements and their impact on the Company, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Assets. Total assets increased $347.0 million, or 26.5%, to $1.65 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.31 billion at December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in new deposits.
Total loans, excluding loans held for sale, increased $270.3 million, or 30.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2020. Multi-family and commercial real estate loans increased $107.2 million, or 30.5%, consisting mainly of an increase in multi-family real estate loans of $66.4 million. Auto and other consumer loans increased $16.1 million, or 14.4%, with the purchase of a pool of manufactured home loans as well as purchases of individual manufactured home loans and specialty auto loans. Commercial business loans increased $58.6 million through our partnership in the Northpointe Bank Mortgage Participation Program and the SBA Paycheck Protection Program.
One- to four-family residential loans increased $3.8 million, or 1.2%. We continue to focus on the origination of one- to four-family mortgages loans with the intention of retaining certain loans which may not be readily sold in the secondary market while selling the majority of our saleable production to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ("Freddie Mac") and other investors. While we intend to continue lending on residential real estate at our Seattle lending center, we expanded that location to include commercial loan production as well. We developed a team of strong mortgage lenders in each of our market areas in order to meet our balance sheet and revenue goals.
Construction and land loans increased $86.4 million, or 232.4%. There was $155.1 million in undisbursed construction commitments at December 31, 2020 compared to $46.8 million at December 31, 2019. Undisbursed construction commitments at December 31, 2020 included $22.7 million of mainly custom one- to four-family residential construction; $98.1 million of multi-family construction; and $34.2 million of commercial real estate construction. Our construction loans are geographically disbursed throughout the state of Washington with one commitment for a property in Oregon. We manage our construction lending by utilizing a licensed third-party vendor to assist us in monitoring our construction projects and began utilizing internal staffing during 2019 to monitor certain projects, which we expect will enhance fee income related to these loans.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company originated $871.3 million of loans, of which $610.3 million, or 70.0%, were originated in the Puget Sound region; $203.3 million, or 23.3%, in the Olympic Peninsula region; $29.7 million, or 3.4%, in other areas in Washington; and $28.0 million, or 3.2%, in Oregon. The Company also purchased loans totaling $88.3 million with the largest concentration of property located in California.
Loans receivable, excluding loans held for sale, consisted of the following at the dates indicated:
Our allowance for loan losses increased $4.2 million, or 43.8%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, due in part to adjustments made to qualitative factors as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the result of loan growth. Asset quality has remained stable year over year despite the challenging economic conditions due to the pandemic. Management continues to closely monitor these conditions. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans was 1.2% at December 31, 2020 and 1.1% at December 31, 2019. There was no material change in our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We believe our allowance for loan losses is adequate to cover inherent losses in the loan portfolio.
Nonperforming loans increased $477,000, or 26.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.3 million. This increase was mainly the result of increases in nonperforming one- to four-family of $214,000 and multi-family loans of $284,000. Increased nonperforming loans in these categories is mainly attributable to a few loans and is not indicative of the portfolio. Nonperforming loans to total loans was 0.2% at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Real estate owned and repossessed assets decreased $152,000, or 98.7%, as defaulted auto loans were sold. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of nonperforming loans increased to 609.2% at December 31, 2019 from 536.1% at December 31, 2019 as result of the increase in nonperforming loans.
At December 31, 2020, substantially all restructured loans were performing in accordance with their modified payment terms and returned to accrual status. Classified loans, consisting solely of substandard loans, increased by $2.6 million, or 52.1%, to $7.5 million at December 31, 2020, from $5.0 million at December 31, 2019. The change in classified loans was mainly the result of an increase in substandard commercial real estate and one- to four-family loans, offset by improvements in commercial business loans during the year. The Bank continued to work with its borrowers to facilitate satisfactory repayment.
In late March 2020, the Bank announced loan modification programs to support and provide relief for its borrowers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Loans subject to payment forbearance under the Bank's COVID-19 loan modification program are not reported as delinquent during the forbearance time period. For additional information, see "COVID-19 Loan Modifications" below.
The following table represents nonperforming assets and troubled debt restructurings ("TDRs") at the dates indicated.
Total investment securities increased $48.7 million, or 15.4%, to $364.3 million at December 31, 2020, from $315.6 million at December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase was the result of increased investment purchases, partially offset by sales, prepayment activity, and normal amortization during the year. The estimated average life of the total investment securities portfolio was 7.3 years, and the average repricing term was approximately 5.0 years as of December 31, 2020, based on the interest rate environment at that time. We anticipate the investment portfolio will continue to provide additional interest income, as well as a source of liquidity to fund loan growth and a means with which to manage interest rate risk. During the fourth quarter of 2019, all held to maturity investments were marked as available for sale in order to provide greater flexibility to navigate changes to the portfolio as market conditions change or business needs may warrant, particularly as it relates to the sale of investments.
Municipal bonds represent the largest portion of our investment portfolio and totaled $127.9 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $88.6 million, or 225.5%, from $39.3 million at December 31, 2019. Mortgage-backed securities are the second largest segment totaling $89.3 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $79.2 million, or 47.0% from $168.5 million at December 31, 2019. Other investment securities, including U.S. government agencies, corporate and asset-backed securities, were $147.2 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $39.4 million, or 36.5% from $107.8 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the investment portfolio contained 48.0% of amortizing securities, compared to 81.8% at December 31, 2019. The projected average life of our securities may vary due to prepayment activity, which, particularly in the mortgage-backed securities portfolio, is generally affected by changing interest rates. We continue to focus on growing our loan portfolio and improving our earning asset mix over the long term, as evidenced by net loan growth exceeding the rate of investments during the year. We may purchase investment securities as a source of additional interest income and in lieu of carrying higher cash balances at nominal interest rates. For additional information, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Form 10-K.
Liabilities. Total liabilities increased $337.5 million, or 29.9%, to $1.47 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.13 billion at December 31, 2019, mainly due to deposit account balances increasing $331.9 million, or 33.1%, to $1.33 billion at December 31, 2020 from $1.00 billion at December 31, 2019. Certificates of deposit increased $689,000, or 0.2%, to $308.8 million at December 31, 2020. Included in certificates of deposit balances at year end were $89.6 million in brokered certificates of deposit. Transaction accounts increased $154.7 million and money market accounts increased $181.1 million as customers significantly increased their liquidity during the year. Our focus will continue to be on increasing our customer deposits and maintaining a stable source of funding for our continued growth.
Borrowings decreased $3.0 million, or 2.6%, to $110.0 million at December 31, 2020, from $112.9 million at December 31, 2019, as we continued to utilize brokered certificates of deposit during the year to manage our cost of funds and interest rate risk. At December 31, 2020, we had $50.0 million of long term FHLB advances and $60.0 million in short term advances maturing in three months or less.
Equity. Total shareholders' equity increased $9.5 million, or 5.4%, to $186.4 million at December 31, 2020, from $176.9 million at December 31, 2019. This increase during the year resulted from net income of $10.3 million, an increase of $7.0 million due to the change in accumulated other comprehensive loss related to the change in unrealized market value of available for sale securities, net of tax, and an increase of $1.3 million related to our stock-based compensation plans. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $7.4 million related to our repurchase of shares and $2.2 million in dividends paid in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 575,859 shares of common stock at an average cost of $12.87 per share, pursuant to the Company's 2017, 2019, and 2020 stock repurchase plans.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General. The Company had net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $10.3 million, compared to net income of $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.3 million, or 14.7%. The increase in net income was primarily due to increases in net interest income and noninterest income. We earned $1.11 per common share and $1.10 per diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.92 per common share and $0.91 per diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in earnings per share year-over-year was the result of an increase in net income combined with lower weighted-average common shares outstanding of 9,348,874 basic and 9,380,294 diluted shares in 2020, compared to 9,845,021 basic and 9,923,110 diluted shares for the same period in 2019. The decrease in average shares year-over-year is due to our share repurchase program coupled with changes to our share-based compensation plans.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $6.1 million, or 16.1%, to $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly as the result of additional interest income related to the increase in the average balances of loans receivable and investment securities.
The average balance of loans receivable increased $104.7 million, at an average yield of 4.44%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an average yield of 4.64%, for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in the volume of loans receivable and resulting interest income during 2020, and a decrease in the interest-bearing liabilities to 0.70% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 1.03% for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulted in a 7 basis point improvement in our net interest margin of 3.27% at December 31, 2020, and 3.20% at December 31, 2019.
Net interest income increased $6.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $6.5 million was the result of an increase in volume, partially offset by a $435,000 decrease due to changes in rates. As noted above, loans receivable was the main contributor to the increase in net interest income with $4.8 million due to an increase in average volumes offset by a decrease of $2.0 million due to decreases in rates. The decrease to the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to lower rates paid on certificates of deposit and borrowings, the result of the utilization of brokered certificates of deposit and new long-term borrowing agreements during the year.
Interest Income. Interest income increased $2.4 million, or 4.8%, to $51.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $49.3 million for the comparable period in 2019, primarily due to an increase in the average balance of loans receivable. Interest and fees on loans receivable increased $2.9 million as a result.
Interest income on investment securities increased $1.6 million to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. While the average balance of investment securities increased $106.3 million during the year to $227.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $121.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, the average yield decreased 83 basis points, resulting in higher interest income from the investment securities portfolio. The change in average yields on investment securities does not include the benefit of nontaxable income from municipal bonds. Interest income on mortgage-backed and related securities decreased $1.9 million to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, commensurate with a decline in the average balance of $52.0 million and a decrease in average yield of 44 basis points.
The following table compares average earning asset balances, associated yields, and resulting changes in interest income for the periods shown:
Interest Expense. Total interest expense decreased $3.7 million, or 32.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, with decreases in deposit costs of $1.6 million, or 19.8%, and borrowing costs of $2.1 million, or 66.3%. Deposit costs decreased due to the decrease in the interest rates and growth in non-maturity deposits. The average balance of interest-bearing deposits increased $151.6 million, or 18.8%, to $957.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $805.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as we continued to target growth in deposits in new and existing market areas. Additionally, the bank experienced deposit growth due the significant inflow of deposits into the banking system during the pandemic due to government stimulus payments and changes to consumer and business savings and spending habits. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the cost of certificates of deposit decreased $1.1 million due to a decrease in the average rate paid of 64 basis points. The average rate paid on savings accounts decreased 40 basis points and the cost of money market and transaction accounts both decreased 7 basis points even though the average balance of all deposit accounts increased $151.6 million. The average cost of all interest-bearing deposit products decreased 33 basis points to 0.70% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 1.03% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Borrowing costs decreased 66.3%, or 154 basis points, mainly due to lower rates paid on overnight and long-term borrowings.
The following table details average balances, cost of funds and the change in interest expense for the periods shown:
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to loan growth and uncertainty caused by the pandemic, as compared to 2019.
The following table details activity and information related to the allowance for loan losses for the periods shown:
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income increased $8.8 million, or 126.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to income received from the gain on sale of mortgage loans as the volume of loans sold increased 405.2% from 136 loans sold in 2019 to 687 sold in 2020. Gain on sale of investments also increased in 2020 as we changed the mix of securities to improve earnings. The cash surrender value of bank-owned life insurance increased over the prior year due to additional investments in BOLI as well as a restructure that resulted in the recognition of market gains.
The following table provides a detailed analysis of the changes in the components of noninterest income for the periods shown:
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense increased $8.3 million, or 25.2%, to $41.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in compensation and benefits as well as occupancy and equipment related to our growth. Included in the compensation and benefit increase was a $2.6 million increase in commissions paid on mortgage and commercial loan production, as well as one-time pandemic-related payments to staff. All categories increased as a direct result of expanding our lending and deposit activities. A one-time FHLB prepayment penalty of $210,000 was also incurred as we retired long-term debt to reduce interest expense in March 2020.
The following table provides an analysis of the changes in the components of noninterest expense for the periods shown:
Provision for Income Tax. Our income tax expense increased $877,000 to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, mainly due to an increase in income before taxes. An estimate for the penalty on the early surrender of the BOLI contract was also recorded in 2020.
Average Balances, Interest and Average Yields/Cost
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, information regarding average balances of assets and liabilities as well as the total dollar amounts of interest income from average interest-earning assets and interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, resultant yields, interest rate spread, net interest margin (otherwise known as net yield on interest-earning assets), and the ratio of average interest-earning assets to average interest-bearing liabilities. Also presented is the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets, rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant spread at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Income and all average balances are monthly average balances, which management deems to be not materially different than daily averages. Nonaccrual loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield.
(1) The average loans receivable, net balances include nonaccrual loans.
(2) Includes interest-bearing deposits (cash) at other financial institutions.
(3) Net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following tables present the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The presentation distinguishes between the changes related to outstanding balances and the changes in interest rates. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to (i) changes in volume (i.e., changes in volume multiplied by old rate) and (ii) changes in rate (i.e., changes in rate multiplied by old volume). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
(1) Includes interest-bearing deposits (cash) at other financial institutions.
Asset and Liability Management and Market Risk
Risk Management Overview. Managing risk is an essential part of successfully managing a financial institution. Our Enterprise Risk Management Committee reports key risk indicators to the Board of Directors through the Audit Committee. The most prominent risk exposures management monitors are strategic, credit, interest rate, liquidity, operational, compliance, reputational, cybersecurity, and legal risk. We utilize the services of outside firms to assist us in our asset and liability management and our analysis of market risk.
Interest Rate Risk Management. We manage the interest rate sensitivity of interest-bearing liabilities and interest-earning assets in an effort to minimize the adverse effects of changes in the interest rate environment. Except for certain adjustable-rate investment securities, home equity lines of credit, and commercial real estate loans that are tied to the prime rate, the twelve month constant maturity treasury, or the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"), certain deposit accounts may reprice more quickly in response to changes in market interest rates because of their shorter maturities. Typically, decreases in interest rates beneficially affect our earnings in the short term when fixed-rate interest-earning assets stay at higher interest rates longer than it takes for deposit and borrowing costs to reset lower. However, decreases in interest rates adversely affect earnings due to prepayments and refinancing associated with loans and investment securities, particularly consumer and one- to four-family residential loans and MBS securities with no prepayment restrictions, which are then reinvested into lower yielding assets, reducing interest income. In contrast, First Federal has little or no long-term ability to reduce funding costs associated with deposits and borrowings.
We currently do not participate in hedging programs, interest rate swaps or other activities involving the use of derivative financial instruments to manage interest rate risk.
Interest Rate Sensitivity Analysis. Management uses an interest rate sensitivity analysis to review our level of interest rate risk. This analysis measures interest rate risk by computing changes in the present value of our cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items in the event of a range of assumed changes in market interest rates. The present value of equity is equal to the market value of assets minus the market value of liabilities, with adjustments made for off-balance sheet items. This analysis assesses the risk of loss in market risk sensitive instruments in the event of a sudden and sustained 100 to 300 basis point increase or a 100 basis point decrease in market interest rates with no effect given to any future steps that management might take to counter the impact of that interest rate movement. The following table presents the change in the present value of First Federal’s equity at December 31, 2020, that would occur in the event of an immediate change in interest rates based on management's assumptions.
Using the same assumptions as above, the sensitivity of our projected net interest income over a one-year period for the year ended December 31, 2020, is as follows:
Assumptions made by management relate to interest rates, loan prepayment rates, deposit decay rates, and the market values of certain assets under differing interest rate scenarios, among others. As with any method of measuring interest rate risk, certain shortcomings are inherent in the method of analysis presented in the foregoing tables. For example, although certain assets and liabilities may have similar maturities or periods to repricing, they may react in different degrees to changes in market interest rates. Also, the interest rates on certain types of assets and liabilities may fluctuate in advance of changes in market interest rates, while interest rates on other types may take longer to adjust to changes in market rates. Additionally, certain assets have features, such as rate caps or floors, which restrict changes in interest rates on a short-term basis and over the life of the asset. Further, in the event of a change in interest rates, expected rates of prepayments on loans and early withdrawals from certificates could deviate significantly from those assumed in calculating the table.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity is the ability to meet current and future financial obligations of a short-term and long-term nature. Our primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, loan repayments, maturities and sales of securities and borrowings from the FHLB. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are usually predictable sources of funds, deposit flows, calls of investment securities and borrowed funds, and prepayments on loans and investment securities are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition, which can cause those sources of funds to fluctuate.
Management regularly adjusts our investments in liquid assets based upon an assessment of expected loan demand, expected deposit flows, yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities, and objectives of our interest-rate risk and investment policies.
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents followed by available for sale securities. The levels of these assets depend on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $65.2 million, and securities classified as available-for-sale, which provide additional potential sources of liquidity, had a market value of $364.3 million. We have pledged collateral to support borrowings from the FHLB of $110.0 million. We have also pledged collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco to secure discount window advances; no funds were borrowed as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we had $1.6 million in loan commitments outstanding and an additional $212.1 million in undisbursed loans, including undisbursed construction commitments, and standby letters of credit.
Certificates of deposit due within one year of December 31, 2020 totaled $185.8 million, or 60.2% of certificates of deposit. The large percentage of certificates of deposit that mature within one year reflects customers' hesitancy to invest their funds for longer periods in this low rate environment. Management believes, based on past experience, that a significant portion of our certificates of deposit will be renewed or rolled into new certificates of deposit given the current rate environment; however, should rates continue to stay at lower levels, balances could continue to shift into more liquid money market accounts over time. If these maturing deposits are not renewed or rolled into other deposit products, however, we will be required to seek other sources of funds, which may include borrowings and brokered deposits. We also can attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered, including the offering of promotional rates on certificates of deposit to encourage the renewal or rollover of maturing certificates of deposit and mitigate the risk of loss of these deposits to our competitors. Depending on market conditions, we may also be required to pay higher rates on borrowings or brokered deposits than we currently pay on standard certificates of deposit or promotional rate offerings. We believe that business developed by our sales teams, including our commercial relationship managers, branch managers and members of our branch network, and the general cash flows from our existing lending and investment activities, will afford us enough long-term liquidity. For additional information, see the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Form 10-K.
The Company is a separate legal entity from the Bank and relies on dividends from its sole subsidiary, First Federal, and cash flows and sales of its investment portfolio for liquidity to pay its operating expenses and other financial obligations. At December 31, 2020, the Company (on an unconsolidated basis) had liquid assets of $8.7 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Activities
In the normal course of operations, First Federal engages in a variety of financial transactions that are not recorded in the financial statements. These transactions involve varying degrees of off-balance sheet credit, interest rate and liquidity risks. These transactions are used primarily to manage customers’ requests for funding and take the form of loan commitments and lines of credit. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we engaged in no off-balance sheet transactions likely to have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table summarizes our commitments and contingent liabilities with off-balance sheet risks as of December 31, 2020:
Capital Resources
First Northwest Bancorp is a bank holding company subject to regulation by the Federal Reserve. As a bank holding company, we are subject to capital adequacy requirements of the Federal Reserve under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, and the regulations of the Federal Reserve. Our subsidiary, First Federal, is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by the FDIC. Capital adequacy requirements are quantitative measures established by regulation that require us to maintain minimum amounts and ratios of capital.
First Federal is subject to meeting minimum capital adequacy requirements for common equity Tier 1 ("CET1") capital, Tier 1 risk-based capital, total risk-based capital, and tier 1 capital ("leverage"). Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by bank regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
First Federal is subject to capital requirements adopted by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. See Item 1, "Business-How We Are Regulated," and Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding First Northwest Bancorp and First Federal’s regulatory capital requirements.
In order to avoid limitations on paying dividends, engaging in share repurchases, and paying discretionary bonuses based on percentages of eligible retained income that could be utilized for such actions, First Northwest Bancorp and First Federal must maintain CET1 capital at an amount greater than the required minimum levels plus a capital conservation buffer. This new capital conservation buffer requirement was phased in starting in January 2016 until fully implemented in the amount of 2.5% of risk-weighted assets in January 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the conservation buffer was 2.5%.
Consistent with our goals to operate a sound and profitable organization, our policy for First Federal is to maintain its "well-capitalized" status in accordance with regulatory standards. At December 31, 2020, the Bank and consolidated Company exceeded all regulatory capital requirements, and the Bank was considered "well capitalized" under FDIC regulatory capital guidelines.
The following table provides the capital requirements and actual results at December 31, 2020.
Effect of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and related financial data presented in this report have been prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, which require the measurement of financial and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the change in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs and the effect that general inflation may have on both short-term and long-term interest rates. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates generally have a more significant impact on a financial institution's performance than do general levels of inflation. Although inflation expectations do affect interest rates, interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Form 10-K.