Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with “Part II, Item 6, Selected Financial Data” and the historical financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The information in this section contains forward-looking statements. Please read “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ significantly from the results suggested by these forward-looking statements and from our historical results. Some factors that may cause our results to differ are described in “Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors.” The historical financial data discussed below reflects the historical results of operations and financial position of Focus Inc., including consolidation of its investment in Focus LLC, since July 30, 2018. Prior to July 30, 2018, the closing date of the IPO, the historical financial data discussed below represents the historical results of operations and financial position of Focus LLC.
Overview
We are a leading partnership of independent, fiduciary wealth management firms operating in the highly fragmented RIA industry, with a footprint of over 70 partner firms primarily in the United States. We have achieved this market leadership by positioning ourselves as the partner of choice for many firms in an industry where a number of secular trends are driving consolidation. Our partner firms primarily service ultra-high net worth and high net worth individuals and families by providing highly differentiated and comprehensive wealth management services. Our partner firms benefit from our intellectual and financial resources, operating as part of a scaled business model with aligned economic interests, while retaining their entrepreneurial culture and independence.
Our partnership is comprised of trusted professionals providing comprehensive wealth management services through a largely recurring, fee-based model, which differentiates our partner firms from the traditional brokerage platforms whose revenues are largely derived from commissions. We derive a substantial majority of our revenues from wealth management fees for investment advice, financial and tax planning, consulting, tax return preparation, family office services and other services. We also generate other revenues primarily from recordkeeping and administration service fees, commissions and distribution fees and outsourced services.
Since we began revenue-generating and acquisition activities in 2006, we have created a partnership of over 70 partner firms, the substantial majority of which are RIAs registered with the SEC and built a business with revenues in excess of $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, in excess of 95% of our revenues were fee-based and recurring in nature. We have established a national footprint across the United States and expanded our international footprint into Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom.
Sources of Revenue
Our partner firms provide comprehensive wealth management services through a largely recurring, fee-based model. We derive a substantial majority of our revenue from wealth management fees, which are comprised of fees earned from wealth management services, including investment advice, financial and tax planning, consulting, tax return preparation, family office services and other services. Fees are primarily based either on a contractual percentage of the client’s assets based on the market value of the client’s assets on the predetermined billing date, a flat fee, an hourly rate based on predetermined billing rates or a combination of such fees and are billed either in advance or arrears on a monthly, quarterly or semiannual basis. In certain cases, such wealth management fees may be subject to minimum fee levels depending on the services performed. We also generate other revenues, which primarily include recordkeeping and administration service fees, commissions and distribution fees and outsourced services. The following table summarizes our sources of revenue:
During the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, our wealth management fees were impacted by the acquisitions of new partner firms and the growth of existing partner firms, which includes the acquisitions of wealth management practices and customer relationships by our existing partner firms. In 2018, 2019 and 2020, we completed acquisitions of eight, six and seven partner firms, respectively. In 2018, the new partner firms were Cornerstone Wealth, Fortem Financial, Bartlett Wealth Management, Campbell Deegan Financial, Nigro Karlin Segal Feldstein & Bolno, Asset Advisors Investment Management, Edge Capital Group and Vista Wealth Management. In 2019, the new partner firms were Altman Greenfield & Selvaggi, Prime Quadrant, Foster Dykema & Cabot, Escala Partners, Sound View Wealth Advisors and Williams Jones. In 2020, the new partner firms were Nexus Investment Management, MEDIQ Financial Services, InterOcean Capital, Seasons of Advice, CornerStone Partners, Fairway Wealth Management and Kavar Capital Partners.
In 2018, 2019 and 2020, our partner firms completed 17, 28 and 18 transactions, respectively, consisting of business acquisitions accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805: Business Combinations and asset acquisitions, including four transactions completed by Connectus in 2020.
See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our acquisitions.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, in excess of 95% of our revenues were fee-based and recurring in nature. Although the substantial majority of our revenues are fee-based and recurring, our revenues can fluctuate due to macroeconomic factors and the overall state of the financial markets, particularly in the United States. Our partner firms’ wealth management fees are primarily based either on a contractual percentage of the client’s assets based on the market value of the client’s assets on the predetermined billing date, a flat fee, an hourly rate based on predetermined billing rates or a combination of such fees and are billed either in advance or arrears on a monthly, quarterly or semiannual basis. We estimate that approximately 26% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were not directly correlated to the financial markets. Of the 74% of our revenues that were directly correlated to the financial markets, primarily equities and fixed income, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we estimate that approximately 67% of such revenues were generated from advance billings. We estimate that approximately 25% of our revenues for the three months ended December 31, 2020 were not directly correlated to the financial markets. Of the 75% of our revenues that were directly correlated to the financial markets, primarily equities and fixed income, for the three months ended December 31, 2020, we estimate that approximately 63% of such revenues were generated from advance billings. These revenues are impacted by market movements as a result of contractual provisions with clients that entitle our partner firms to bill for their services either in advance or arrears based on the value of client assets at such time. Since approximately 63% of our market correlated revenues are set based on the market value of client assets in advance of the
respective service period, this generally results in a one quarter lagged effect of any market movements on our revenues. Longer term trends in the financial markets may favorably or unfavorably impact our total revenues, but not in a linear relationship. For example, during 2018, 2019 and 2020, the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index had a total return of (4.4)%, 31.5% and 18.4%, respectively, and the Barclays U.S. Aggregate Bond Index had a total return for the same periods of 0.0%, 8.7% and 7.5% respectively. By comparison, for the same periods our organic revenue growth was 13.0%, 15.1% and 7.0%, respectively. For additional information, please read “-How We Evaluate our Business.”
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenues were negatively impacted by the effects of Covid-19 on the financial markets as a result of our market correlated revenues, which represented 74% of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our market correlated revenues for subsequent periods could be impacted by any negative effects of Covid-19 on the financial markets. Additionally, a portion of our non-market correlated revenues are derived from family office type services for clients in the entertainment industry and relate to live events. The cancellation of events and the general slowdown of other entertainment activities will impact a portion of our non-market correlated revenues in subsequent periods. We anticipate that the ongoing cancellations of live events and slowdown of other entertainment activities will persist in 2021. However, this revenue outlook is subject to material change because it is dependent on the continued impact of the Covid-19 pandemic which is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of compensation and related expenses, management fees, selling, general and administrative expenses, management contract buyout, intangible amortization, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration and depreciation and other amortization expense.
Compensation and Related Expenses
Compensation and related expenses include salaries, wages, related employee benefits and taxes for employees at our partner firms and employees at the Focus LLC company level. Compensation and related expenses also include non-cash compensation expense, associated with both Focus Inc.’s and Focus LLC’s equity grants to employees and non-employees, including management company principals.
Management Fees
While we have to date, with limited exceptions, acquired substantially all of the assets of a target firm, following our acquisition of a new partner firm, the partner firm continues to be primarily managed by its principals through their 100% ownership of a management company formed by them concurrently with the acquisition. Our operating subsidiary, the management company and the principals enter into a management agreement that provides for the payment of ongoing management fees to the management company. The terms of the management agreements are generally six years subject to automatic renewals for consecutive one-year terms, unless earlier terminated by either the management company or us in certain limited situations. Under the management agreement, the management company is entitled to management fees typically consisting of all EBPC in excess of Base Earnings up to Target Earnings, plus a percentage of EBPC in excess of Target Earnings.
We retain a cumulative preferred position in Base Earnings. To the extent earnings of an acquired business in any year are less than Base Earnings, in the following year we are entitled to receive Base Earnings together with the prior years’ shortfall before any management fees are earned by the management company.
The following table provides an illustrative example of our economics, including management fees earned by the management company, for periods of projected revenues, +10% growth in revenues and −10% growth in revenues. This example assumes (i) Target Earnings of $3.0 million; (ii) Base Earnings acquired of 60% of Target Earnings or
$1.8 million; and (iii) a percentage of earnings in excess of Target Earnings retained by the management company of 40%.
As a result of our economic arrangements with the various management company entities, 100% of management fees are variable expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses include rent, insurance premiums, professional fees, travel and entertainment and other costs.
Management Contract Buyout
Management contract buyout represents cash consideration to buyout a management agreement with one of our retiring principals whereby the business operations of the relevant partner firm were transitioned to one of our other partner firms.
Intangible Amortization
Amortization of intangibles consists primarily of the amortization of intangibles we acquired through our various acquisitions of new partner firms and acquisitions by our partner firms.
Non-Cash Changes in Fair Value of Estimated Contingent Consideration
We have typically incorporated into our acquisition structure contingent consideration paid to the sellers upon the satisfaction of specified financial thresholds, and the purchase price for a typical acquisition is comprised of a base purchase price and the right to receive such contingent consideration in the form of earn out payments. The contingent consideration for acquisitions of new partner firms is generally paid over a six-year period upon the satisfaction of
specified growth thresholds, in years three and six. These growth thresholds are typically tied to the compounded annual growth rate (“CAGR”) of the partner firm’s earnings. Such growth thresholds can be set annually over the six-year period as well. The contingent consideration for acquisitions made by our partner firms is paid upon the satisfaction of specified financial thresholds. These thresholds are generally tied to revenue as adjusted for certain criteria or other operating metrics based on the retention or growth of the business acquired. These arrangements may result in the payment of additional purchase price consideration to the sellers for periods following the closing of an acquisition. Contingent consideration payments are typically payable in cash and, in some cases, equity.
For business acquisitions, we recognize the fair value of estimated contingent consideration at the acquisition date as part of the consideration transferred in exchange for substantially all of the assets or equity of the wealth management firm. The contingent consideration is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved. Any changes in fair value are recognized each reporting period in non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration in our consolidated statements of operations.
Depreciation and Other Amortization
Depreciation and other amortization expense primarily represents the benefits we received from using long-lived assets such as computers and equipment, leasehold improvements and furniture and fixtures. Those assets primarily consist of purchased fixed assets as well as fixed assets acquired through our acquisitions.
Business Acquisitions
We completed 19, 31 and 21 business acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively, consisting of both new partner firms and acquisitions by our partner firms. Such business acquisitions were accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 805: Business Combinations.
The purchase price is comprised of a base purchase price and a right to receive contingent consideration in the form of earn out payments. The base purchase price typically consists of an upfront cash payment and may include equity. The contingent consideration for acquisitions of new partner firms generally consists of earn outs over a six year period following the closing, with payment upon the satisfaction of specified growth thresholds in years three and six. The growth thresholds are typically tied to the CAGR of the partner firm’s earnings. Such growth thresholds can be set annually over the six-year period as well. The contingent consideration for acquisitions made by our partner firms generally is earned upon the satisfaction of specified financial thresholds. These thresholds are generally tied to revenue as adjusted for certain criteria or other operating metrics based on the retention or growth of the business acquired. The contingent consideration is typically payable in cash and, in some cases, equity.
The following table summarizes our business acquisitions for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
In addition, we completed six, three and four acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively, that did not meet the definition of a business under ASC Topic 805: Business Combinations. These acquisitions primarily related to the acquisition of customer relationships.
Substantially all of our acquisitions have been paid for with a combination of cash flow from operations, proceeds from the IPO, proceeds from borrowings under our Credit Facility and equity, valued at the then-fair market value.
Our acquisition activity was negatively impacted during 2020 by the effects of Covid-19 as a result of targets focusing on management and client matters as well as potential uncertainties around valuations during periods of Covid-19 related market stress. We completed 21 business acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 31 business acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2019. The effects of Covid-19 may impact the timing and our ability to pursue and make future acquisitions.
Recent Development
In January 2021, we announced a joint venture with Orion Advisor Solutions, which will make the cash, credit and related services developed by Focus Client Solutions available to wealth management firms on Orion’s WealthTech platform. While an important and innovative initiative, we do not expect the joint venture to have a meaningful impact on our results of operations in the short term but believe that this joint venture will create important value over time.
How We Evaluate Our Business
We focus on several key financial metrics in evaluating the success of our business, the success of our partner firms and our resulting financial position and operating performance. Key metrics include the following:
* Not meaningful
(1) Represents period-over-period growth in our GAAP revenue.
(2) Organic revenue growth represents the period-over-period growth in revenue related to partner firms, including growth related to acquisitions of wealth management practices and customer relationships by our partner firms, including Connectus, and partner firms that have merged, that for the entire periods presented, are included in our consolidated statements of operations for each of the entire periods presented. We believe these growth statistics are useful in that they present full-period revenue growth of partner firms on a “same store” basis exclusive of the effect of the partial results of partner firms that are acquired during the comparable periods.
(3) The terms of our management agreements entitle the management companies to management fees typically consisting of all EBPC in excess of Base Earnings up to Target Earnings, plus a percentage of any EBPC in excess of Target Earnings. Management fees growth represents the period-over-period growth in GAAP management fees earned by management companies. While an expense, we believe that growth in management fees reflect the strength of the partnership.
(4) Organic management fees growth represents the period-over-period growth in management fees earned by management companies related to partner firms, including growth related to acquisitions of wealth management practices and customer relationships by our partner firms and partner firms that have merged, that for the entire periods presented, are included in our consolidated statements of operations for each of the entire periods presented. We believe that these growth statistics are useful in that they present full-period growth of management fees on a “same store” basis exclusive of the effect of the partial period results of partner firms that are acquired during the comparable periods.
(5) In disclosures, including filings with the SEC, made prior to the quarter ended September 30, 2020, “Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments” and “Tax Adjustments” were presented together as “Adjusted Net Income.” Additionally, “Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share” and “Tax Adjustments Per Share” were presented together as “Adjusted Net Income Per Share.”
(6) For additional information regarding Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share, Tax Adjustments, Tax Adjustments Per Share and Adjusted Shares Outstanding, including a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, please read “-Adjusted EBITDA” and “-Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share.”
(7) Tax Adjustments represent the tax benefits of intangible assets, including goodwill, associated with deductions allowed for tax amortization of intangible assets in the respective periods based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate. Such amounts were generated from acquisitions completed where we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets provide additional significant supplemental economic benefit. The tax benefit from amortization is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for acquired intangible assets with the step-up in tax basis. As of December 31, 2020, estimated Tax Adjustments from intangible asset related income tax benefits from closed acquisitions based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate for the next 12 months is $41,718.
(8) Net Leverage Ratio represents the First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility), and means the ratio of amounts outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan and First Lien Revolver plus other outstanding debt obligations secured by a lien on the assets of Focus LLC (excluding letters of credit other than unpaid drawings thereunder) minus unrestricted cash and cash equivalents to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Facility).
(9) The terms of our management agreements entitle the management companies to management fees typically consisting of all future EBPC of the acquired wealth management firm in excess of Base Earnings up to Target Earnings, plus a percentage of any EBPC in excess of Target Earnings. Acquired Base Earnings is equal to our retained cumulative preferred position in Base Earnings. We are entitled to receive these earnings notwithstanding any earnings that we are entitled to receive in excess of Target Earnings. Base Earnings may
change in future periods for various business or contractual matters. For example, from time to time when a partner firm consummates an acquisition, the management agreement among the partner firm, the management company and the principals is amended to adjust Base Earnings and Target Earnings to reflect the projected post-acquisition earnings of the partner firm.
(10) Represents the number of partner firms on the last day of the period presented.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) excluding interest income, interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), amortization of debt financing costs, intangible amortization and impairments, if any, depreciation and other amortization, non-cash equity compensation expense, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration, gain on sale of investment, loss on extinguishment of borrowings, other expense/income, net, impairment of equity method investment, management contract buyout and other one-time transaction expenses, if any. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, viewed in addition to and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provides additional useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations for various reasons, including the following:
● non-cash equity grants made to employees or non-employees at a certain price and point in time do not necessarily reflect how our business is performing at any particular time; stock-based compensation expense is not a key measure of our operating performance;
● contingent consideration or earn outs can vary substantially from company to company and depending upon each company’s growth metrics and accounting assumption methods; the non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration is not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance; and
● amortization expenses can vary substantially from company to company and from period to period depending upon each company’s financing and accounting methods, the fair value and average expected life of acquired intangible assets and the method by which assets were acquired; the amortization of intangible assets obtained in acquisitions are not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance.
We use Adjusted EBITDA:
● as a measure of operating performance;
● for planning purposes, including the preparation of budgets and forecasts;
● to allocate resources to enhance the financial performance of our business; and
● to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies.
Adjusted EBITDA does not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss) or cash flows from operating activities. The term Adjusted EBITDA is not defined under GAAP, and Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of net income (loss), operating income or any other performance or liquidity measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect all cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs; and
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments.
In addition, Adjusted EBITDA can differ significantly from company to company depending on strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments. We compensate for these limitations by also relying on the GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental information.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA:
Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share
We analyze our performance using Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share. Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share are non GAAP measures. We define Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments as net income (loss) excluding income tax expense (benefit), amortization of debt financing costs, intangible amortization and impairments, if any, non-cash equity compensation expense, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration, gain on sale of investment, loss on extinguishment of borrowings, management contract buyout, if any, and other one time transaction expenses. The calculation of Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments also includes adjustments to reflect a pro forma 27% income tax rate reflecting the estimated U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income tax rates applicable to corporations in the jurisdictions we conduct business.
Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share is calculated by dividing Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments by the Adjusted Shares Outstanding. Adjusted Shares Outstanding includes: (i) the weighted average shares of Class A common stock outstanding during the periods, (ii) the weighted average incremental shares of Class A common stock related to stock options outstanding during the periods, (iii) the weighted average incremental shares of Class A common stock related to unvested Class A common stock outstanding during the periods, (iv) the weighted average incremental shares of Class A common stock related to restricted stock units outstanding during the periods, (v) the weighted average number of Focus LLC common units outstanding during the periods (assuming that 100% of such Focus LLC common units have been exchanged for Class A common stock), (vi) the weighted average
number of Focus LLC unvested restricted common units outstanding during the periods (assuming that 100% of such Focus LLC unvested restricted common units have been exchanged for Class A common stock) and (vii) the weighted average number of common unit equivalents of Focus LLC vested and unvested incentive units outstanding during the periods based on the closing price of our Class A common stock on the last trading day of the periods (assuming that 100% of such Focus LLC common units have been exchanged for Class A common stock).
We believe that Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share, viewed in addition to and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provide additional useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations for various reasons, including the following:
● non-cash equity grants made to employees or non-employees at a certain price and point in time do not necessarily reflect how our business is performing at any particular time; stock-based compensation expense is not a key measure of our operating performance;
● contingent consideration or earn outs can vary substantially from company to company and depending upon each company’s growth metrics and accounting assumption methods; the non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration is not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance; and
● amortization expenses can vary substantially from company to company and from period to period depending upon each company’s financing and accounting methods, the fair value and average expected life of acquired intangible assets and the method by which assets were acquired; the amortization of intangible assets obtained in acquisitions are not considered a key measure in comparing our operating performance.
Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share do not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss) or cash flows from operating activities. The terms Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share are not defined under GAAP, and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share are not a measure of net income (loss), operating income or any other performance or liquidity measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share have limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share do not reflect all cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs; and
● Other companies in the financial services industry may calculate Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
In addition, Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share can differ significantly from company to company depending on strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments. We compensate for these limitations by relying also on the GAAP results and use Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share as supplemental information.
Tax Adjustments and Tax Adjustments Per Share
Tax Adjustments represent the tax benefits of intangible assets, including goodwill, associated with deductions allowed for tax amortization of intangible assets in the respective periods based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate. Such amounts were generated from acquisitions completed where we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets provide additional significant supplemental economic benefit. The tax benefit from amortization is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for acquired intangible assets with the step-up in tax basis.
Tax Adjustments Per Share is calculated by dividing Tax Adjustments by the Adjusted Shares Outstanding.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments and Adjusted Net Income Excluding Tax Adjustments Per Share:
(1) In 2018, primarily relates to one-time expenses related to (a) Loring Ward severance cash compensation of $507 during the three months ended December 31, 2018, which was recorded in compensation and related expenses, and IPO and Reorganization Transaction cash compensation expenses of $5,926 during the three months ended September 30, 2018, which were recorded in compensation and related expenses, (b) transaction expenses of $1,762, which were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses, associated with the
acquisition of Loring Ward, of which $1,114 were incurred during the three months ended December 31, 2018 and $648 were incurred during the three months ended September 30, 2018 and (c) other expenses, net of $2,373 during the three months ended December 31, 2018, which were recorded in other (expense) income-net, primarily related to the loss on sale of a tax customer list and related receivables. In 2019, relates to one time expenses related to (a) Loring Ward severance cash compensation of $280 during the three months ended March 31, 2019, which were recorded in compensation and related expenses and (b) transaction expenses of $786 and $420, associated with the acquisition of Loring Ward, which were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses during the three months ended March 31, 2019 and June 30, 2019, respectively.
(2) The pro forma income tax rate of 27% reflects the estimated U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income tax rates applicable to corporations in the jurisdictions we conduct business.
(3) Tax Adjustments represent the tax benefits of intangible assets, including goodwill, associated with deductions allowed for tax amortization of intangible assets in the respective periods based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate. Such amounts were generated from acquisitions completed where we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets provide additional significant supplemental economic benefit. The tax benefit from amortization is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for acquired intangible assets with the step-up in tax basis. As of December 31, 2020, estimated Tax Adjustments from intangible asset related income tax benefits from closed acquisitions based on a pro forma 27% income tax rate for the next 12 months is $41,718.
(4) Represents our GAAP weighted average Class A common stock outstanding-basic.
(5) The incremental shares for the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2019 related to stock options, unvested Class A common stock and restricted stock units as calculated using the treasury stock method were not included in the calculation of the GAAP weighted average shares of Class A common stock-diluted as the result would have been anti-dilutive.
(6) Assumes that 100% of Focus LLC common units were exchanged for Class A common stock.
(7) Assumes that 100% of Focus LLC unvested restricted common units were exchanged for Class A common stock.
(8) Assumes that 100% of the vested and unvested Focus LLC incentive units were converted into Focus LLC common units based on the closing price of our Class A common stock at the end of the respective period and such Focus LLC common units were exchanged for Class A common stock.
Factors Affecting Comparability
Our future results of operations may not be comparable to our historical results of operations, principally for the following reasons:
Tax Treatment
As a flow-through entity, Focus LLC is generally not and has not been subject to U.S. federal and certain state income taxes at the entity level, although it has been subject to the New York City Unincorporated Business Tax. Instead, for U.S. federal and certain state income tax purposes, taxable income was and is passed through to its unitholders, which, after the IPO on July 30, 2018, now includes Focus Inc. Focus Inc. is subject to U.S. federal and certain state income taxes applicable to corporations. Accordingly, our effective tax rate, and the absolute dollar amount of our tax expense, has increased as a result of the IPO.
Public Company Expenses
Our operating expenses have increased as a result of being a publicly traded company, including expenses related to annual and quarterly report preparation, tax return preparation, independent auditor fees, investor relations activities, transfer agent fees, incremental director and officer liability insurance costs and independent director compensation. Our accounting, legal, tax and personnel-related expenses have increased as we supplemented our compliance and governance functions, maintained and reviewed internal controls over financial reporting and prepared and distributed periodic reports as required by the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2018 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a comparison of the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, see Part II. Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following discussion presents an analysis of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. Where appropriate, we have identified specific events and changes that affect comparability or trends and, where possible and practical, have quantified the impact of such items.
* Not meaningful
Revenues
Wealth management fees increased $136.5 million, or 11.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. New partner firms added subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2019 that are included in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 include Nexus Investment Management, MEDIQ Financial Services, InterOcean Capital, Seasons of Advice, CornerStone Partners, Fairway Wealth Management and Kavar Capital Partners. Additionally, our partner firms completed 18 acquisitions subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2019. The new partner firms contributed approximately $20.9 million in wealth management fees during the year ended December 31, 2020. The balance of the increase of $115.6 million was due to the revenue growth at our existing partner firms associated with wealth management services and partner firm-level acquisitions as well as a full period of revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 for partner firms that were acquired during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other revenues increased $6.5 million, or 9.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related to new partner firms was approximately $0.9 million. The balance of the increase of $5.6 million was due primarily to an increase in recordkeeping and administration fees from a partner firm-level acquisition.
Operating Expenses
Compensation and related expenses increased $44.7 million, or 10.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related to new partner firms was approximately $3.8 million. Non-cash equity compensation increased $4.0 million primarily from incentive units granted in 2019. The balance of the increase of $36.9 million was due to an increase in salaries and related expense, in part the result of a full period of expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 for partner firms acquired and partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2019 and partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management fees increased $44.8 million, or 14.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related to the new partner firms was approximately $8.9 million. Management fees are variable and a function of earnings during the period. The balance of the increase of $35.9 million was due to the increase in earnings during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, in part the result of a full period of earnings recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 for partner firms acquired and partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2019, and partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $3.5 million, or 1.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. New partner firms added approximately $3.1 million.
Management contract buyout of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to cash consideration for the buyout of a management agreement with one of our retiring principals whereby the business operations of the relevant partner firm were transitioned to one of our other partner firms.
Intangible amortization increased $17.1 million, or 13.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related to new partner firms was approximately $3.0 million. The balance of the increase of $14.1 million was due in part to a full period of amortization during the year ended December 31, 2020 for partner firms acquired and partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2019, and in part to partner firm-level acquisitions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration decreased $19.6 million or 50.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the probability that certain contingent consideration payments would be achieved decreased resulting in a decrease in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability.
Depreciation and other amortization expense increased $1.8 million, or 16.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to fixed assets at our corporate headquarters during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense decreased $16.6 million, or 28.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to lower average interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the January 2020 Credit Facility amendment to reduce the interest rate spread on the First Lien Term Loan and lower LIBOR rates.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, a loss on extinguishment of borrowings of $6.1 million was recognized in connection with the January 2020 Credit Facility amendment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an impairment of an equity method investment of $11.8 million due to an other-than-temporary decline in the fair value of the investment. This investment contributed $0.5 million to income from equity method investments during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased $13.6 million, or 193.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a tax expense of approximately $20.7 million resulting in an estimated annual effective tax rate of 29.7%. The estimated annual effective tax rate is primarily related to federal, state and local income taxes imposed on Focus Inc.’s allocable portion of taxable income from Focus LLC as a result of the IPO and Reorganization Transactions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we met our cash and liquidity needs primarily through cash generated by our operations and borrowings under our Credit Facility. Over the next twelve months, and in the longer term, we expect that our cash and liquidity needs will continue to be met by cash generated by our ongoing operations as well as the Credit Facility, especially for acquisition activities. If our acquisition activity continues at an accelerated pace, or for larger acquisition opportunities, we may decide to issue equity either as consideration or in an offering. For information regarding the Credit Facility, please read “-Credit Facilities.”
Tax Receivable Agreements
Our Tax Receivable Agreements with the TRA holders generally provide for the payment by Focus Inc. to each TRA holder of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income and franchise tax that Focus Inc. actually realizes (computed using simplifying assumptions to address the impact of state and local taxes) or is deemed to realize in certain circumstances in periods after the IPO as a result of certain increases in tax basis and certain tax benefits attributable to imputed interest. Focus Inc. will retain the benefit of the remaining 15% of these cash savings.
The payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreements are Focus Inc.’s obligations and not obligations of Focus LLC, and we expect that such payments required to be made under the Tax Receivable Agreements will be substantial. Estimating the amount and timing of payments that may become due under the Tax Receivable Agreements is by its nature imprecise. For purposes of the Tax Receivable Agreements, cash savings in tax generally are calculated by comparing Focus Inc.’s actual tax liability (determined by using the actual applicable U.S. federal income tax rate and an assumed combined state and local income and franchise tax rate) to the amount Focus Inc. would have been required to pay had it not been able to utilize any of the tax benefits subject to the Tax Receivable Agreements. As of
December 31, 2020, we expect that future payments to the TRA holders will be $81.6 million, in aggregate. Future payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements in respect of subsequent exchanges will be in addition to this amount.
The actual increases in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of any redemption of units, the price of our Class A common stock at the time of each redemption, the extent to which such redemptions are taxable transactions, the amount of Focus LLC’s assets that consist of equity in entities taxed as corporations at the time of each redemption, the amount and timing of the taxable income we generate in the future, the U.S. federal income tax rates then applicable and the portion of the payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements that constitute imputed interest or give rise to depreciable or amortizable tax basis.
The foregoing amount of expected future payments to TRA holders is merely an estimate and the actual payments could differ materially. It is possible that future transactions or events could increase or decrease the actual tax benefits realized and the corresponding payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements as compared to the foregoing estimates. Moreover, there may be a negative impact on our liquidity if, as a result of timing discrepancies or otherwise, (i) the payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements exceed the actual benefits realized in respect of the tax attributes subject to the Tax Receivable Agreements and/or (ii) distributions to Focus Inc. by Focus LLC are not sufficient to permit Focus Inc. to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements after it has paid its taxes and other obligations.
The payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements will not be conditioned upon a TRA holder’s having a continued ownership interest in either Focus Inc. or Focus LLC.
We expect that future unitholders may become party to one or more Tax Receivable Agreements entered into in connection with future acquisitions by Focus LLC or issuances of units of Focus LLC to employees, partners and directors.
Cash Flows
The following table presents information regarding our cash flows and cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For information regarding our cash flows and cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see Part II. Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities includes net income (loss) adjusted for non-cash expenses such as intangible amortization, depreciation and other amortization, amortization of debt financing costs, non-cash equity compensation expense, non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration, other non-cash items and changes in cash resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Operating assets and liabilities include receivables from our clients, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses, deferred revenues and other assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $16.6 million, or 8.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to an increase in net income of $61.0 million offset in part by a decrease in adjustments to reconcile net income of $3.9 million, due primarily to a decrease in non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration and impairment of equity method investment offset in part by an increase in intangible amortization, and a decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $40.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $183.5 million, or 33.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $183.8 million in cash paid for acquisitions and contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $231.7 million, or 58.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net borrowings made under the Credit Facility of $210.9 million and an increase in contingent consideration paid of $27.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow
To supplement our statements of cash flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use a non-GAAP liquidity measure on a trailing 4-quarter basis to analyze cash flows generated from our operations. We consider Adjusted Free Cash Flow to be a liquidity measure that provides useful information to investors about the amount of cash generated by the business and is one factor in evaluating the amount of cash available to pay contingent consideration, make strategic acquisitions and repay outstanding borrowings. Adjusted Free Cash Flow does not represent our residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures as it does not deduct our mandatory debt service requirements and other non-discretionary expenditures. We define Adjusted Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities, less purchase of fixed assets, distributions for Focus LLC unitholders and payments under Tax Receivable Agreements (if any). Adjusted Free Cash Flow is not defined under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net cash from operating, investing or financing activities. Adjusted free cash flow may not be calculated the same for us as for other companies. The table below reconciles net cash provided by operating activities, as reflected on our cash flow statement, to our adjusted free cash flow.
(1) A portion of contingent consideration paid is classified as operating cash outflows in accordance with GAAP, with the balance reflected in investing and financing cash flows. Contingent consideration paid classified as operating cash outflows for each quarter in the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2019 was $9.2 million, $4.0 million, $0.8 million and $0.8 million, respectively, totaling $14.8 million for the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2019. Contingent consideration paid classified as operating cash outflows for each quarter in the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2020 was $8.3 million, $16.4 million, $3.8 million and $2.4 million, respectively, totaling $30.9 million for the trailing 4-quarters ended December 31, 2020. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Contractual Obligations
The following table describes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2020, our Credit Facility consisted of a $1.13 billion First Lien Term Loan and a $650.0 million First Lien Revolver.
In January 2020, we amended our First Lien Term Loan to reduce the interest rates. The First Lien Term Loan bears interest (at our option) at: (i) the LIBOR plus a margin of 2.00% or (ii) the lender’s Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Facility) plus a margin of 1.00%.
In January 2021, we amended and expanded our First Lien Term Loan by $500.0 million and incurred $2.7 million in debt financing costs. The debt was issued at a discount of 0.125% or $0.6 million which is being amortized to interest expense over the remaining term of the First Lien Term Loan. The required quarterly installment repayments of $2.9 million were increased to $4.2 million. The First Lien Term Loan has a maturity date of July 2024.
The First Lien Revolver has a maturity date of July 2023. Up to $30.0 million of the First Lien Revolver is available for the issuance of letters of credit, subject to certain limitations. The First Lien Revolver bears interest at LIBOR plus a margin of 2.00% with step downs to 1.75%, 1.50% and 1.25% or the lender’s Base Rate plus a margin of 1.00% with step downs to 0.75%, 0.50% and 0.25%, based on achievement of a specified First Lien Leverage Ratio. The First Lien Revolver unused commitment fee is 0.50% with step downs to 0.375% and 0.25% based on achievement of a specified First Lien Leverage Ratio.
Our obligations under the Credit Facility are collateralized by the majority of our assets. The Credit Facility contains various customary covenants, including, but not limited to: (i) incurring additional indebtedness or guarantees, (ii) creating liens or other encumbrances on property or granting negative pledges, (iii) entering into a merger or similar transaction, (iv) selling or transferring certain property and (v) declaring dividends or making other restricted payments.
We are required to maintain a First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) of not more than 6.25:1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. At December 31, 2020, our First Lien Leverage Ratio was 3.89:1.00, which satisfied the maximum ratio of 6.25:1.00. First Lien Leverage Ratio means the ratio of amounts outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan and First Lien Revolver plus other outstanding debt obligations secured by a lien on the assets of Focus LLC (excluding letters of credit other than unpaid drawings thereunder) minus unrestricted cash and cash equivalents to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Facility). Consolidated EBITDA for purposes of the Credit Facility was $370.5 million at December 31, 2020. Focus LLC is also subject on an annual basis to contingent principal payments based on an excess cash flow calculation (as defined in the Credit Facility) for any fiscal year if the First Lien Leverage Ratio exceeds 3.75:1.00. No contingent principal payments were required to be made in 2020. Based
on the excess cash flow calculation for the year ended December 31, 2020, no contingent principal payments are required to be made in 2021.
We defer and amortize our debt financing costs over the respective terms of the First Lien Term Loan and First Lien Revolver. The debt financing costs related to the First Lien Term Loan are recorded as reduction of the carrying amount of the First Lien Term Loan in the consolidated balance sheets. The debt financing costs related to the First Lien Revolver are recorded in debt financing costs-net in the consolidated balance sheets.
At December 31, 2020, outstanding stated value borrowings under the Credit Facility were approximately $1.5 billion. The weighted-average interest rate for outstanding borrowings was approximately 3% for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the First Lien Revolver available unused commitment line was $262.4 million. At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit in the amount of $7.6 million bearing interest at an annual rate of approximately 2%.
In March 2020, we entered into a 4 year floating to fixed interest rate swap with a notional amount of $400.0 million. The interest rate swap effectively fixes the variable interest rate applicable to $400.0 million of borrowings outstanding on the First Lien Term Loan. The terms of the interest rate swap provide that we pay interest to the counterparty each month at a rate of 0.713% and receive interest from the counterparty each month at the 1 month USD LIBOR rate, subject to a 0% floor.
In April 2020, we entered into two 4 year floating to fixed interest rate swap agreements with notional amounts of $250.0 million and $200.0 million. These swaps effectively fix the variable interest rate applicable to associated amount of borrowings outstanding on the First Lien Term Loan. The terms of these swaps provide that we pay interest to the counterparty each month at a rate of 0.537% and 0.5315%, respectively, and receive interest from the counterparty each month at the 1 month USD LIBOR rate, subject to a 0% floor.
In summary, at December 31, 2020, $850.0 million or approximately 75% of borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan have been swapped from a variable interest rate to a fixed interest rate. The weighted average interest rate on these borrowings is approximately 2.62%, inclusive of the 2.0% LIBOR spread.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our financial statements include the accounts of Focus Inc. and our subsidiaries. Intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated in consolidation. Critical accounting policies are those that are the most important to the preparation of our financial condition and results of operations and that require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the Note 2 to our financial statements, our most critical accounting policies are discussed below. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and the accompanying notes. Management believes that the estimates utilized in preparing the financial statements are reasonable and prudent. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Wealth Management Fees
We recognize revenue from wealth management fees, which are primarily comprised of fees earned for advising on the assets of clients, financial and tax planning fees, consulting fees, tax return preparation fees, fees for family office services, and fees for wealth management and operational support services provided to third-party wealth management firms. Client arrangements may contain one of the services or multiple services, resulting in either a single or multiple performance obligations within the same client arrangement, each of which are separately identifiable and priced, and accounted for as the related services are provided and consumed over time. Fees are primarily based either on a contractual percentage of the client’s assets based on the market value of the client’s assets on the predetermined
billing date, a flat fee, an hourly rate based on predetermined billing rates or a combination of such fees and are billed either in advance or arrears on a monthly, quarterly, or semiannual basis. Revenue is recognized over the respective service period based on time elapsed or hours expended, as the case may be, which is deemed to be the most faithful depiction of the transfer of services as clients benefit from services over the respective period. Revenue for wealth management and operational support services provided to third party wealth management firms is presented net since these services are performed in an agent capacity. Client agreements typically do not have a specified term and may be terminated at any time by either party subject to the respective termination and notification provisions in each agreement.
A majority of our wealth management fees are correlated to the markets, and therefore are considered variable consideration. Our market-correlated fees are dependent on the market and, thus, are susceptible to factors outside our control. Therefore, at inception of the contractual service period for fees which are based on the market values at the end of the service period, we cannot conclude that it is probable that a reversal in the cumulative revenue recognized would not occur if the estimate was included in the transaction price at that time. However, at each quarterly reporting date, we update our estimate of the transaction price as the market uncertainty is typically resolved. We can then reasonably conclude that a reversal of the variable consideration will not occur for those services already provided.
Wealth management fees are recorded when: (i) an arrangement with a client has been identified; (ii) the performance obligations have been identified; (iii) the fee or other transaction price has been determined; (iv) the fee or other transaction price has been allocated to each performance obligation based on standalone fee rates; and (v) we have satisfied the applicable performance obligation.
Other
Other revenue primarily includes recordkeeping and administration service fees, commissions and distribution fees and outsourced services. Client arrangements may contain a single or multiple performance obligations, each of which are separately identifiable and accounted for as the related services are provided and consumed over time. Recordkeeping and administration and outsourced services revenue, in accordance with the same five criteria above, are recognized over the period in which services are provided. Commissions and distribution fees are recognized when earned.
Business Acquisitions
Business acquisitions are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 805: Business Combinations. Business acquisitions are accounted for by allocating the purchase price consideration to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The purchase price allocations are based upon preliminary valuations, and our estimates and assumptions are subject to change within the measurement period as valuations are finalized. Any change in the estimated fair value of the net assets, prior to the finalization of the more detailed analyses, but not to exceed one year from the dates of acquisition, will change the amount of the purchase price allocations. Goodwill is recognized as the excess of the purchase price consideration over the fair value of net assets of the business acquired. All transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
We have incorporated contingent consideration into the structure of our partner firm acquisitions. These arrangements may result in the payment of additional purchase price consideration to the sellers based on the growth of certain financial thresholds for periods following the closing of the respective acquisition. The additional purchase price consideration is payable in the form of cash and, in some cases, equity.
For business acquisitions, we recognize the fair value of estimated contingent consideration at the acquisition date as part of the consideration transferred in exchange for the acquired wealth management firm. The contingent consideration is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved. Any changes in fair value are recognized each reporting period in non-cash changes in fair value of estimated contingent consideration in the consolidated statements of operations.
The results of the acquired wealth management firms are included in our consolidated financial statements from the respective dates of acquisition.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill is deemed to have an indefinite useful life and is not amortized. Intangible assets are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives. We have no indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as of October 1, or more frequently if events and circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. We compare the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value of the net assets of the reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined using a market approach. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets of the reporting unit no further consideration is necessary. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, we would record an impairment charge for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit.
Intangible assets and other long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired or that the estimated useful life should be changed prospectively. If impairment indicators are present, the recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset, which is determined using a discounted cash flow approach.
Income Taxes and Tax Receivable Agreements
In connection with the IPO and Reorganization Transactions, Focus Inc. became a holding company whose most significant asset is a membership interest in Focus LLC, and, as a result, Focus Inc. became subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes on Focus Inc.’s allocable portion of taxable income from Focus LLC. Focus LLC is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, Focus LLC is generally not and has not been subject to U.S. federal and certain state income taxes at the entity level, although it has been subject to the New York City Unincorporated Business Tax and certain of its subsidiaries have been subject to U.S. federal and certain state and local or foreign income taxes. Instead, for U.S. federal and certain state income tax purposes, the income, deductions, losses and credits of Focus LLC are passed through to its unitholders, which after the IPO includes Focus Inc. Focus LLC has historically made tax distribution payments in accordance with its Third Amended and Restated Operating Agreement, which was replaced by the Fourth Amended and Restated Focus LLC Agreement on July 30, 2018, and Focus Inc. intends to cause Focus LLC to continue to make tax distribution payments, to the extent of available cash, in accordance with the Fourth Amended and Restated Focus LLC Agreement. Focus Inc. files income tax returns with the U.S. federal government as well as various state and local jurisdictions.
We apply the asset and liability method for deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Valuation allowances, if any, are recorded to reduce the deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We review and evaluate tax positions in our major tax jurisdictions and determine whether or not there are uncertain tax positions that require financial statement recognition. Based on this review, we have recorded no reserves for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020.
We have entered into Tax Receivable Agreements with the TRA holders. The agreements generally provide for the payment by us to each TRA holder of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income and franchise tax that we actually realize (computed using simplifying assumptions to address the impact of state and local taxes) or are deemed to realize in certain circumstances in connection with the Reorganization Transactions and in
periods after the IPO, as a result of certain increases in tax bases and certain tax benefits attributable to imputed interest. We will retain the benefit of the remaining 15% of these cash savings.
As a result of the Reorganization Transactions and the exchange of certain units of Focus LLC, as of December 31, 2020, Focus Inc. had a liability of $81.6 million relating to its obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreements. The foregoing amount of expected future payments to TRA holders is merely an estimate and the actual payments could differ materially. It is possible that future transactions or events could increase or decrease the actual tax benefits realized and the corresponding payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements as compared to the foregoing estimates.
Consolidation Considerations
ASC Topic 810, Consolidation, requires an entity to perform a qualitative analysis to determine whether its variable interests give it a controlling financial interest in a variable interest entity (“VIE”). Under the standard, an enterprise has a controlling financial interest when it has (a) the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses of the entity or the right to receive benefits from the entity that could potentially be significant to the VIE. An enterprise that holds a controlling financial interest is deemed to be the primary beneficiary and is required to consolidate the VIE.
Certain of our subsidiaries have management agreements with the respective management company, which causes these operating subsidiaries to be VIEs. We have assessed whether or not we are the primary beneficiary for these operating subsidiaries and have concluded that we are the primary beneficiary. Accordingly, the results of these subsidiaries have been consolidated.
Certain of our subsidiaries have variable interests in certain investment funds that are deemed voting interest entities. Due to substantive kick-out rights possessed by the limited partners of these funds, we do not consolidate the investment funds.
From time to time, we enter into option agreements with wealth management firms (each, an “Optionee”) and their owners. In exchange for payment of an option premium, the option agreement allows us, at our sole discretion, to acquire substantially all of the assets of the Optionee at a predetermined time and at a predetermined purchase price formula. If we choose to exercise our option, the acquisition and the corresponding management agreement would be executed in accordance with our typical acquisition structure. We have determined that the respective option agreements with the Optionees qualify the Optionees as VIEs. We have determined that we are not the primary beneficiary of the Optionees and do not consolidate the results of the Optionees.
Stock Based Compensation Costs
Compensation cost for Focus LLC incentive units and Focus Inc. stock option awards is measured based on the fair value of awards determined by the Black-Scholes option pricing model or the Monte Carlo Simulation Model on the date that the awards are granted or modified, and is adjusted for the estimated number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. Compensation cost for unvested Class A common stock and restricted stock units, as well as Focus LLC restricted common units, is measured based on the market value of the Class A common stock on the date that the awards are granted and is adjusted for the estimated number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Non-cash equity compensation expense, associated with employees and non-employees, including principals in the management companies, is included in compensation and related expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. We estimate forfeitures at the time of the respective grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ materially from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate forfeitures and record non-cash equity compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.