Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a global, patient-dedicated biotechnology company focused on discovering, developing, and delivering novel medicines for rare diseases. We have a portfolio of product opportunities led by the first, oral monotherapy for Fabry disease that has achieved widespread global approval, a differentiated biologic for Pompe disease, and an industry leading rare disease gene therapy portfolio.
The cornerstone of our portfolio is Galafold® (also referred to as "migalastat"), the first and only approved oral precision medicine for people living with Fabry disease who have amenable genetic variants. Migalastat is currently approved under the trade name Galafold® in the United States ("U.S."), European Union ("E.U."), United Kingdom ("U.K."), and Japan, with multiple additional approvals granted and applications pending in several geographies around the world.
The lead biologics program of our pipeline is Amicus Therapeutics GAA ("AT-GAA", also known as ATB200/AT2221, or cipaglucosidase alfa/miglustat), a novel, clinical-stage, potential best-in-class treatment paradigm for Pompe disease. In February 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") granted Breakthrough Therapy designation ("BTD") to AT-GAA for the treatment of late onset Pompe disease. We initiated the rolling Biologic License Application ("BLA") submission to the FDA in the fourth quarter of 2020.
We initiated ATB200-03 (or "PROPEL"), a global Phase 3 clinical study of AT-GAA in adult patients with late onset Pompe disease in December 2018 and completed last patient, last visit in December 2020. In February 2021, we reported topline results from the Phase 3 PROPEL study.
Patients enrolled in PROPEL were randomized 2:1 so that for every two patients randomized to be treated with AT-GAA, one was randomized to be treated with alglucosidase alfa. Of the Pompe patients enrolled, 77% were being treated with alglucosidase alfa (n=95) immediately prior to enrollment (“Switch”) and 23% had never been treated with any ERT (n=28) (“Naïve”). 117 patients completed the PROPEL study and all 117 voluntarily enrolled in the long-term extension study.
The primary endpoint of the study was the mean change in 6-minute walk distance as compared with baseline measurements at 52 weeks across the combined ERT Switch and ERT Naïve patient populations. In this combined population patients taking AT-GAA (n=85) walked on average 21 meters farther at 52 weeks compared to 7 meters with those treated with alglucosidase alfa (n=37). This primary endpoint in the combined population was assessed for superiority and while numerically greater, statistical significance for superiority on this combined population was not achieved for the AT-GAA arm as compared to the alglucosidase alfa arm (p=0.072).
Per the hierarchy of the statistical analysis plan, the first key secondary endpoint of the study was the mean change in percent-predicted Forced Vital Capacity (“FVC”) at 52 weeks across the combined population. In this combined population patients taking AT-GAA demonstrated a nominally statistically significant and clinically meaningful difference for superiority over those treated with alglucosidase alfa. AT-GAA significantly slowed the rate of respiratory decline in patients after 52 weeks. Patients treated with AT-GAA showed a 0.9% absolute decline in percent-predicted FVC, compared to a 4.0% absolute decline in the alglucosidase alfa arm (p=0.023).
Patients within the combined study population demonstrated statistically significant improvements on the GSGC (“Gait, Stairs, Gower’s Chair”) key secondary endpoint, which captures strength, coordination and mobility, compared to a worsening for alglucosidase alfa treated patients in the overall population (p<0.05). Additionally, lower MMT (Manual Muscle Testing), Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (“PROMIS”) physical function and PROMIS fatigue secondary endpoints favored AT-GAA treated patients over alglucosidase alfa treated patients. Results also showed improvements in the two important biomarker endpoints of Pompe disease (Hex-4 and CK), which significantly favored AT-GAA compared to alglucosidase alfa (p<0.001). AT-GAA demonstrated a similar safety profile to alglucosidase alfa.
The PROPEL Switch patients entered the study having been treated with alglucosidase alfa for a minimum of two years. More than two thirds (67%+) of those patients had been on ERT treatment for more than five years prior to entering the PROPEL study (mean of 7.4 years). A pre-specified analysis of the patients switching from alglucosidase alfa on 6-minute walk
distance showed that after 52 weeks from switching, AT-GAA treated patients (n=65) walked 16.9 meters farther than their baseline, compared to 0.0 meters for those patients who were randomized to remain on alglucosidase alfa (n=30) (p=0.046).
A pre-specified analysis of the patients switching from alglucosidase alfa on percent-predicted FVC showed that AT-GAA treated patients stabilized and slightly improved their respiratory function on this important measure while those patients remaining on alglucosidase alfa continued to significantly decline in respiratory muscle function. AT-GAA patients showed a 0.1% absolute increase in percent-predicted FVC while the alglucosidase alfa patients showed a 4.0% absolute decline over the course of the year (p=0.006).
The PROPEL Naïve patients treated with AT-GAA for 52 weeks (n=20) walked 33 meters farther than their baseline, on the 6-minute walk distance endpoint. The Naïve patients treated with alglucosidase alfa (n=7) walked 38 meters further than their baseline. The difference between the two groups was not statistically significant (p=0.60). Additionally, patients never previously treated with any ERT showed similar declines in percent-predicted FVC at 52 weeks of -4.1% for AT-GAA treated patients and -3.6% for alglucosidase alpha treated patients. The difference between the two groups was not statistically significant (p=0.57).
We have established an industry leading gene therapy portfolio of potential therapies for people living with rare metabolic diseases, through a license with Nationwide Children's Hospital ("Nationwide Children’s") and an expanded collaboration with the University of Pennsylvania ("Penn"). Our pipeline includes gene therapy programs in rare, neurologic lysosomal disorders ("LDs"), specifically: CLN6, CLN3, and CLN1 Batten disease, Pompe disease, Fabry disease, CDKL5 deficiency disorder ("CDD"), Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IIIB ("MPS IIIB"), as well as a next generation program in Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IIIA ("MPS IIIA"). Our expanded collaboration with Penn also provides us with exclusive disease-specific access and the option rights to develop potentially disruptive new gene therapy platform technologies and programs for most LDs and a broader portfolio of more prevalent rare diseases, including Rett Syndrome, Angelman Syndrome, Myotonic Dystrophy, and select other muscular dystrophies. In the first quarter of 2020, the FDA granted Fast Track designation to the CLN3 Batten disease gene therapy, AT-GTX-502, for the treatment of pediatric patients less than 18 years of age. In September 2020 and February 2021, the European Medicines Agency granted Priority Medicines ("PRIME") designation and the FDA granted Fast Track Designation, respectively, to the CLN6 Batten disease gene therapy, AT-GTX-501, for the treatment of patients with variant late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 6 ("vLINCL6").
In July 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement for a $400 million credit facility with Hayfin Capital Management (“Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026”) with an interest rate equal to 3-month LIBOR, subject to a 1% floor, plus 6.5% per annum and requires interest-only payments until mid-2024 and matures in six years in 2026. This transaction resulted in net proceeds of $385.9 million, after deducting fees and expenses. There were no warrants or equity conversion features associated with the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026. Additionally, we used $156.3 million of the proceeds to voluntarily settle the principal amount, accrued interest, and early settlement premiums of the Senior Secured Term Loan with BioPharma Credit PLC that was due in 2023 ("Senior Secured Term Loan due 2023").
Our operations have not been significantly impacted from the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic in 2020; however, we observed increased lag times between patient identification and Galafold® initiation due to the resurgence of COVID-19 in the fourth quarter. We have maintained operations in all geographies, secured our global supply chain for our commercial and clinical products, as well as maintained the operational integrity of our clinical trials, with minimum disruptions. Our ability to continue to operate without any significant disruptions will depend on the continued health of our employees, the ongoing demand for Galafold® and the continued operation of our global supply chain. We have continued to provide uninterrupted access to medicines for those in need of treatment, while prioritizing the health and safety of our global workforce. However, our results of operations in future periods may be negatively impacted by unknown future impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following section generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, which comparisons are hereby incorporated by reference.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table provides selected financial information for the Company:
Net Product Sales. Net product sales increased $78.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to continued growth in the Europe, U.S. and Japan markets.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold includes manufacturing costs as well as royalties associated with sales of our product. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net product sales was 11.9% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 12.1% during the same period in the prior year primarily due to the proportion of sales in countries subject to a higher royalty burden.
Research and Development Expense. The following table summarizes our principal product development programs for each product candidate in development, and the out-of-pocket, third-party expenses incurred with respect to each product candidate:
The $22.1 million increase in research and development costs was primarily due to increases in gene therapy programs driven by the pipeline growth, and clinical research and manufacturing costs with the advancement and enrollment of clinical studies in the Pompe program, and an increase in personnel costs primarily due to realignment with strategic priorities. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in expense associated with the ongoing regulatory requirements, approval in new geographies, and pediatric and other studies to support label expansion of Galafold® and a decrease in other costs, primarily driven by reduced employee travel and professional fees.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense. Selling, general, and administrative expense decreased $13.5 million, mainly driven by reduction in third-party professional fees and travel.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and Amortization increased $4.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the increase in fixed assets put in service in the fourth quarter of 2019 for the Philadelphia office.
Interest Income. Interest income decreased $7.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a lower average overall cash and investment balance on December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 and reduced interest rates.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $3.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by the $400 million Senior Secured Loan due 2026 in July 2020.
Loss on Exchange of Convertible Notes. During the first and second quarters of 2019, the Company entered into separate, privately negotiated Exchange Agreements with a limited number of holders of the Convertible Notes. As a result of this exchange, the Company recognized a loss on exchange of debt of $40.6 million in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. In July 2020, the Company voluntarily settled the principal amount, accrued interest, and early settlement premiums of the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2023. As a result of this early extinguishment, a loss on extinguishment of debt of $7.3 million was recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income Tax Expense. The income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.6 million. We are subject to income taxes in various jurisdictions. Our tax liabilities are largely dependent on the distributions of pre-tax earnings among the many jurisdictions in which we operate.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("U.S. GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the following discussion represents our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Our net product sales consist of sales of Galafold® for the treatment of Fabry disease. We have recorded revenue on sales where Galafold® is available either on a commercial basis or through a reimbursed early access program ("EAP"). Orders for Galafold® are generally received from distributors and pharmacies with the ultimate payor often a government authority.
We recognize revenue when our performance obligation with our customers have been satisfied, which occurs at a point in time when the pharmacies or distributors obtain control of Galafold®. The transaction price is determined based on fixed consideration in our customer contracts and is recorded net of estimates for variable consideration, which are third-party discounts and rebates. The identified variable consideration is recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time revenue from sale of Galafold® is recognized. We recognize revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in a future period. These estimates may differ from actual consideration received. We evaluate these estimates each reporting period to reflect known changes.
We elected the portfolio approach practical expedient in applying ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, to our identified revenue streams. Contracts within each revenue stream have similar characteristics and we believe the results of this approach would not differ materially than if we applied ASC Topic 606 to each individual contract.
Leases
The Company primarily enters into lease agreements for office space, equipment, and vehicles. The leases have varying terms, some of which could include options to renew, extend, and early terminate. The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at contract inception. Operating leases are included in right-of-use ("ROU") assets and lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
ROU assets represent the Company's right to control the use of an explicitly or implicitly identified fixed asset for a period of time and lease liabilities represent the Company's obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Control of an underlying asset is conveyed to the Company if the Company obtains the rights to direct the use of and to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from using the underlying asset. ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. The Company uses its incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability are comprised of fixed payments. Variable lease payments are excluded from the ROU asset and lease liability and are recognized in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. Variable lease payments are presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the same line item as expenses arising from fixed lease payments for operating leases. The Company has lease agreements that include lease and non-lease components, which the Company accounts for as a single lease component for all underlying asset categories.
The lease term for all of the Company's leases include the non-cancellable period of the lease plus any additional periods covered by either a Company option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease that the Company is reasonably certain to exercise, or an option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease controlled by the lessor.
Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company recognizes lease expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The Company applies this policy to all underlying asset categories.
The information presented for the periods prior to January 1, 2019 has not been restated and is reported under the accounting standard in effect for those periods.
Research and Development Expenses
We expect to continue to incur substantial research and development expenses as we continue to develop our product candidates. Research and development expense consists of:
•internal costs associated with our research and clinical development activities;
•fees owed to third-party contract research organizations in connection with preclinical, toxicology studies and clinical trials;
•payments we make to contract manufacturers, investigative sites, and consultants in connection with clinical trials;
•technology license costs;
•manufacturing development costs;
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and related costs for the personnel involved in drug discovery and development;
•activities relating to regulatory filings and the advancement of our product candidates through preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, facility maintenance, as well as laboratory and other supplies.
We have multiple research and development projects ongoing at any one time. We utilize our internal resources, employees, and infrastructure across multiple projects. We record and maintain information regarding external, out-of-pocket research and development expenses on a project-specific basis.
We expense research and development costs as incurred, including payments made to date under our license agreements. We believe that significant investment in product development is a competitive necessity and plan to continue these investments in order to realize the potential of our product candidates.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of our product candidates. As a result, we are not able to reasonably estimate the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows may commence from our product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the conduct, duration, and cost of clinical trials, which vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of evolving events during clinical development, including:
•the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
•the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
•the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trials;
•the results of our clinical trials; and
•any mandate by the FDA or other regulatory authority to conduct clinical trials beyond those currently anticipated.
Our expenditures are subject to additional uncertainties, including the terms and timing of regulatory approvals, and the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing any patent claims or other intellectual property rights. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay, or modify clinical trials of some product candidates or focus on others. A change in the outcome of any of the foregoing variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development, regulatory approval, and commercialization of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those which we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Drug development takes several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
Share-based Compensation
Stock Option Grants
In accordance with the applicable accounting guidance, we estimate the fair value of each equity award granted. We chose the "straight-line" attribution method for allocating compensation costs and recognized the fair value of each stock option on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the related awards.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model when estimating the grant date fair value for stock-based awards. Use of a valuation model requires management to make certain assumptions with respect to selected model inputs. Expected volatility was based on our historical volatility since our initial public offering in May 2007. We determine the average expected life using our actual historical data. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury, zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant. Forfeitures are estimated based on historical analysis of actual option forfeitures.
Restricted Stock Units and Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (collectively "RSUs")
RSUs awarded under the plan are generally subject to graded vesting and are contingent on an employee's continued service on such date. RSUs are generally subject to forfeiture if employment terminates prior to the release of vesting restrictions. We expense the cost of the RSUs, which is determined to be the fair market value of the shares of common stock underlying the RSUs at the date of grant, ratably over the period during which the vesting restrictions lapse. In addition, certain of our share-based awards are market- and performance-based and dependent upon achieving certain goals. The related share-based compensation expense is determined based on the estimated fair value of the underlying shares on the date of grant and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting term. With respect to performance-based awards, we estimate the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved.
Business Combinations
We assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their estimated fair values on the acquisition date of acquired businesses. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets and in-process research and development ("IPR&D"). In connection with the purchase price allocations for acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of contingent acquisition consideration payments utilizing a probability-based income approach inclusive of an estimated discount rate.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired businesses and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing any contingent acquisition consideration issued or which may be issued and the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•the feasibility and timing of achievement of development, regulatory, and commercial milestones;
•expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products; and
•future expected cash flows from product sales.
Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates, or actual results.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We record goodwill in a business combination when the total consideration exceeds the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. Purchased in-process research and development is accounted for as an indefinite lived intangible asset until the underlying project is completed, at which point the intangible asset will be accounted for as a definite lived intangible asset, or abandoned, at which point the intangible asset will be written off or partially impaired. Goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets are assessed annually for impairment on October 1 and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If it is determined that the full carrying amount of an asset is not recoverable, an impairment loss is recorded in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. No indicators of impairment were noted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Valuation of Contingent Consideration Payable
Contingent consideration payments in asset acquisitions are recognized when the contingency is resolved and the consideration is paid or becomes payable. This does not apply in circumstances when the contingent consideration meets the definition of a derivative, in which case the amount becomes part of the basis in the asset acquired. Upon recognition of the contingent consideration payment, the amount is included in the cost of the acquired asset or group of assets. Each period we reassess the fair value of the contingent acquisition consideration payable associated with certain acquisitions and record changes in the fair value as contingent consideration expense. Increases or decreases in the fair value of the contingent acquisition consideration payable can result from changes in estimated probability adjustments with respect to regulatory approval, changes in the assumed timing of when milestones are likely to be achieved and changes in assumed discount periods and rates. Significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of these assumptions each period. Accordingly, future business and economic conditions, as well as changes in any of the assumptions described in the accounting for business combinations above can materially impact the amount of contingent consideration expense that we record in any given period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As a result of our significant research and development expenditures, as well as expenditures to build a commercial organization to support the launch of Galafold®, we have not been profitable and have generated operating losses since we were incorporated in 2002. We have historically funded our operations through stock offerings, debt issuances, Galafold® revenues, collaborations, and other financing arrangements.
Sources of Liquidity
In July 2020, we entered into the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026. This transaction resulted in net proceeds of $385.9 million, after deducting fees and expenses. There were no warrants or equity conversion features associated with the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026. Additionally, we used $156.3 million of the proceeds to voluntarily settle the principal amount, accrued interest, and early settlement premiums of the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2023.
During the first and second quarters of 2019, we entered into separate, privately negotiated Exchange Agreements with a limited number of holders of the Convertible Notes. Under the terms of the Exchange Agreements, the limited number of holders agreed to exchange an aggregate principal amount of $247.2 million of Convertible Notes held by them in exchange for an aggregate of approximately 44.0 million shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share. Additionally, we terminated the Capped Call Confirmations related to the exchange of the Convertible Notes for cash proceeds of $19.9 million.
During the second quarter of 2019, we completed an underwritten equity offering and issued 18.7 million shares of common stock at $10.75 per share, inclusive of the fully exercised option to purchase additional shares from the initial offering. This transaction resulted in net proceeds of $189.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and offering expenses.
Cash Flow Discussion
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $483.3 million. We invest cash in excess of our immediate requirements in regard to liquidity and capital preservation in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including obligations of U.S. government agencies and money market accounts. Wherever possible, we seek to minimize the potential effects of concentration and degrees of risk. Although we maintain cash balances with financial institutions in excess of insured limits, we do not anticipate any losses with respect to such cash balances. For more details on the cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, refer to "-Note 5. Cash, Cash Equivalents, Marketable Securities, and Restricted Cash," in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $233.3 million. The components of net cash used in operations included the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $276.9 million and the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $32.1 million. The change in operating assets was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable by $11.2 million due to increased commercial sales of Galafold®, an increase in inventory of $4.6 million, and increase in prepaid and other current assets of $8.8 million to support commercial activities for Galafold® launch. The net cash used in operations was also impacted by a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $10.6 million, mainly related to program expenses and support for the commercial launch of Galafold®, and decrease in deferred reimbursement of $1.3 million.
Net cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $250.4 million. The components of net cash used in operations included the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $356.4 million, and the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $11.6 million. The change in operating assets was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable by $11.1 million due to increased commercial sales of Galafold®, an increase in prepaid and other current assets of $3.3 million to support commercial activities for Galafold® launch, and an increase in inventory of $5.1 million. The net cash used in operations was also impacted by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $46.7 million, mainly related to program expenses and support for the commercial launch of Galafold®. This was partially offset by a decrease in deferred reimbursement of $5.5 million.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.6 million. Our investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases, sales, and maturities of investments and capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities reflects $365.2 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $3.2 million for capital expenditures, partially offset by $354.8 million for the sale and redemption of marketable securities.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $95.2 million. Our investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases, sales, and maturities of investments and capital expenditures. Net cash provided by investing activities reflects $499.0 million for the sale and redemption of marketable securities. partially offset by $383.9 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $20.0 million for capital expenditures.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $262.9 million. Net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflects $385.9 million in proceeds from the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026, net of issuance costs, and $42.3 million from the exercise of stock options. This was partially offset by $155.2 million for the voluntary settlement of the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2023, and $10.0 million from the purchase of vested restricted stock units.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $217.5 million. Net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflects $189.0 million from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs paid, $19.9 million from termination of capped call and $12.3 million from the exercise of stock options and warrants, partially offset by $3.2 million from the purchase of vested restricted stock units.
Funding Requirements
We expect to incur losses from operations for the foreseeable future primarily due to research and development expenses, including expenses related to conducting clinical trials. Our future capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of our clinical trials of our drug candidates and gene therapy candidates, including but not limited to AT-GAA, CLN6 and CLN3;
•the cost of manufacturing drug supply for our clinical and preclinical studies, including the cost of manufacturing Pompe Enzyme Replacement Therapy ("ERT" or "ATB200"or "cipaglucosidase alfa") and gene therapies;
•the future results of on-going preclinical research and subsequent clinical trials for CDD, Pompe gene therapy, Fabry gene therapy, MPS IIIB, next generation MPS IIIA, and other pipeline candidates we may identify from time to time, including our ability to obtain regulatory approvals and commercialize these therapies and obtain market acceptance for such therapies;
•the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates, including AT-GAA;
•any changes in regulatory standards relating to the review of our product candidates;
•the number and development requirements of other product candidates that we pursue;
•the costs of commercialization activities, including product marketing, sales, and distribution;
•the emergence of competing technologies and other adverse market developments;
•our ability to successfully commercialize Galafold® ("migalastat HCl") and, if our regulatory filings are accepted and approved, AT-GAA;
•our ability to manufacture or supply sufficient clinical or commercial products, including Galafold®, AT-GAA and our gene therapy candidates;
•our ability to obtain reimbursement for Galafold® and, if our regulatory filings are accepted and approved, AT-GAA;
•our ability to satisfy post-marketing commitments or requirements for continued regulatory approval of Galafold®;
•our ability to obtain market acceptance of Galafold® and, if our regulatory filings are accepted and approved, AT-GAA;
•the costs of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing, and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products, and technologies;
•our ability to successfully integrate our acquired products and technologies into our business, including the possibility that the expected benefits of the transactions will not be fully realized by us or may take longer to realize than expected;
•our ability to establish collaborations, partnerships or other similar arrangements and to obtain milestone, royalty, or other payments from any such collaborators;
•our ability to adjust to changes in the European and U.K. markets in the wake of the U.K. leaving the E.U.;
•the extent to which our business could be adversely impacted by the effects of COVID-19 outbreak, including due to actions by us, governments, our customers or suppliers or other third parties to control the spread of COVID-19, or by other health epidemics or pandemics;
•fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates; and
•changes in accounting standards.
While we continue to generate revenue from product sales, in the absence of additional funding, we expect our continuing operating losses to result in increases in our cash used in operations over the next several quarters and years. We may seek additional funding through public or private financings of debt or equity. Based on current operating models, we believe that the current cash position, which includes the net proceeds from the Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026 and expected revenues is sufficient to fund our operations and ongoing research programs to achieve self-sustainability. Potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, business development collaborations, pipeline expansion, and investment in manufacturing capabilities could impact our future capital requirements.
Financial Uncertainties Related to Potential Future Payments
Milestone Payments / Royalties
Celenex - In connection with our acquisition of Celenex in 2018, we agreed to pay up to an additional $10 million in connection with the achievement of certain development milestones, $220 million in connection with the achievement of certain regulatory approval milestones across multiple programs and up to $75 million in tiered sales milestone payments.
Nationwide Children’s - Celenex has an exclusive license agreement with Nationwide Children’s. Under this license agreement, Nationwide Children’s is eligible to receive development and sales-based milestones of up to $7.8 million from us for each product.
Penn - Under our expanded collaboration agreement with Penn, Penn is eligible to receive certain milestone, royalty, and discovery research payments with respect to licensed products for each indication. Milestone payments are payable following the achievement of certain development and commercial milestone events in each indication, up to an aggregate of $88.0 million per indication. Royalty payments are based on net sales of licensed products on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis. We will provide $10.0 million each year during the five-year agreement to fund the discovery research program.
GlaxoSmithKline - In July 2012, as amended in November 2013, the Company entered into an agreement with GlaxoSmithKline ("GSK"), pursuant to which Amicus obtained global rights to develop and commercialize Galafold® as a monotherapy and in combination with ERT for Fabry disease (“Collaboration Agreement”). Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, GSK is eligible to receive post-approval and sales-based milestones up to $40 million, as well as tiered royalties in the mid-teens in eight major markets outside the U.S.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments at December 31, 2020 and the effects such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
______________________________
(1) This table does not include (a) any milestone payments which may become payable to third parties under license agreements as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known, (b) any royalty payments to third parties as the amounts of such payments, timing, and/or the likelihood of such payments are not known, (c) amounts, if any, that may be committed in the future to construct additional facilities, (d) agreements with clinical research organizations and other outside contractors who are partially responsible for conducting and monitoring our clinical trials for our drug candidates including Galafold®. These contractual obligations are not reflected in the table above because we may terminate them without penalty, and (e) contracts that are entered into in the ordinary course of business which are not material in the aggregate in any period presented above.
(2) Represents the future payments on operating leases for properties, equipment, and vehicles. For more details, refer to "- Note 13. Leases," in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) Represents the future payments of principal and interest to be made on our $2.8 million 3% unsecured Convertible Notes due 2023 (the "Convertible Notes") and our $400 million Secured Senior Term Loan due 2026 ("Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026"). The Convertible Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 3% per year, payable semiannually on June 15 and December 15 of each year, and will mature on December 15, 2023. The Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026 bears interest at a rate equal to the 3-month LIBOR, subject to a 1% floor, plus 6.5% per year, payable quarterly and requires interest-only payments until mid-2024. The Senior Secured Term Loan due 2026 will be repaid in nine quarterly payments of $44.4 million, starting on July 2024 with the final balance due on the maturity date in July 2026.
(4) Represents minimum purchase commitments due to third parties. Contracts for which our commitment is variable, based on volumes, with no fixed minimum quantities, and contracts that can be canceled without payment penalties have been excluded. The purchase obligations included above are in addition to amounts included in total recorded on our December 31, 2020 Consolidated Balance Sheet.
We have no other lines of credit or other committed sources of capital. To the extent our capital resources are insufficient to meet future capital requirements, we will need to raise additional capital or incur indebtedness to fund our operations. We cannot assure you that additional debt or equity financing will be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to "- Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.