Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
See “Item 1. Business - Overview - Evolution” with respect to the scope of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to which this disclosure relates.
Overview
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Revenues
Our revenues are derived from information products. Information product revenues are generated from both subscription based and one-time licensing of our proprietary data.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenue is generated from direct costs associated with extracting and analyzing data and configuring and supporting customers that license our information. The cost of revenue relates primarily to labor costs, hosting and infrastructure costs and client service team costs. We record the cost of direct fulfilment as cost of revenue. Infrastructure and licensed data costs, which are shared across all projects or groups of projects, are not charged to cost of revenue.
Research and Development
Our research and development costs are primarily generated from research, design, prototyping and testing and data product development activities. These costs are also comprised of labor and subcontractor costs and technology costs (software and third-party cloud access). Once our prototypes are proven and we have sufficient feedback from customers, we begin the data product and software development activities. During this phase, we capitalize costs that qualify associated with this development rather than recording those costs as research and development.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Sales and marketing expense is primarily salaries and related expenses, including commissions, for our sales, marketing and product management staff. Marketing program
costs are also recorded as sales and marketing including advertising, market research, events (such as trade shows, corporate communications, brand building, etc.). Forian plans to continue to invest in marketing and sales by expanding our selling and marketing staff, building brand awareness, attracting new clients and sponsoring additional marketing events. The timing of these marketing events will affect our marketing costs in any particular quarter.
Our general and administrative expenses include salaries and benefits and other costs of departments serving administrative functions, such as executives, finance and accounting, and human resources. In addition, general and administrative expense includes non-personnel costs, such as professional fees, legal fees, accounting and finance advisory fees and other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to cost of revenue, product and development or sales and marketing. General and administrative costs also include initial costs related to the registration and listing of Forian’s common stock on the Nasdaq.
We generally operate virtually. Personal computing equipment is essential to enable our teams to work virtually in a distributed or remote fashion. Depreciation and amortization is primarily driven by the purchase of personal computing equipment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as critical because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates - which also would have been reasonable - could have been used. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our condensed results of operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019
Revenues
Revenues increased by $544,871 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019. These revenues were from data subscription products. No revenue was recognized in 2019 as the Company was recently formed and had not yet delivered services to customers.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of Revenues increased by $38,293 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6,2019) through December 31, 2019. Cost of Revenues related to direct costs related to the delivery of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. The were no revenues or cost of revenues for 2019 as the Company was recently formed and had not yet delivered services to customers.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $1,682,192 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in staffing, contractor costs, and technology related costs (software and third-party Cloud access) to establish a technical infrastructure for the business.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $2,515,971 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of the Company continuing to scale its sales, product management and marketing teams resulting in increases in compensation related expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since the Company’s inception in 2019, most of our cash resources have been devoted to research and development and general and administrative activities. The Company’s operations have been financed primarily from the cash proceeds received from equity issuances. The Company expects to continue to fund its operations and future acquisitions through a combination of cash flow generated from operating activities, debt financing, and/or additional equity issuances. To date, the Company has generated limited revenues from the licensing of information products. The Company has incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s principal source of liquidity was cash, which totaled $665,463 and marketable securities which totaled $11,501,844.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes selected information about our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $3,218,362 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of scaling up the Company’s operations from the initial start-up phase.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $11,248,563 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in the purchase of short-term investments of $11,198,736 resulting from the cash proceeds received from equity issuances and an increase in the purchase of personal computing equipment of $49,827.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $15,131,400 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from inception (May 6, 2019) through December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to the cash proceeds received from the Company’s equity issuances.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have relationships with other organizations or process any transactions that would constitute off balance sheet arrangements.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Except as described below, the Company has considered all other recently issued accounting pronouncements and does not believe the adoption of such pronouncements will have a material impact on its financial statements.
ASC 606
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue of Contracts with Customers. For non-public companies, ASC 606 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019 with early adoption permitted. The Company elected to early adopt the standard as of its inception in May 2019. The new revenue standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
The Company is exposed to various market risks, which may result in potential losses arising from adverse changes in market rates, such as interest rates and foreign exchange rates. The Company does not enter into derivatives or other financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes and does not believe it is exposed to material market risk with respect to its cash and cash equivalents.
The Company currently has no operations outside the United States and therefore does not presently have foreign currency exchange rate risk.
The Company does not engage in any hedging activities against changes in interest rates or foreign currency exchange rates. Because of the short-term maturities of its cash and cash equivalents, the Company does not believe that an immediate 10% increase in interest rates would have any significant impact on the realized value of our investments.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” As an “emerging growth company,” the Company is electing to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” the Company is not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the business combination or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.