Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We derive revenues from subscriptions to our Research, Connect and Analytics products and services, licensing electronic “reprints” of our Research, performing consulting projects and advisory services, and hosting Events. We offer contracts for our Research, Connect and Analytics products that are typically renewable annually and payable in advance. Subscription products are recognized as revenue ratably over the term of the contract. Accordingly, a substantial portion of our billings are initially recorded as deferred revenue. Reprints include an obligation to deliver a customer-selected research document and certain usage data provided through an on-line platform, which represents two performance obligations. We recognize revenue for the performance obligation for the data portion of the reprint ratably over the license term. We recognize revenue for the performance obligation for the research document at the time of providing access to the document. Billings for licensing of reprints are initially recorded as deferred revenue. Clients purchase consulting projects and advisory services independently and/or to supplement their access to our subscription-based products. Consulting project revenues, which are based upon fixed-fee agreements, are recognized as the services are provided. Advisory service revenues, such as speeches and advisory days, are recognized when the service is complete or the customer receives the agreed upon deliverable. Billings attributable to consulting projects and advisory services are initially recorded as deferred revenue. Events revenues consist of ticket and sponsorship sales for a Forrester-hosted event. Billings for Events are also initially recorded as deferred revenue and are recognized as revenue upon completion of each Event.
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly affected us beginning in March 2020 primarily through lower contract bookings and a reduction in revenues from the conversion of our events from in-person events to virtual events. While the duration and severity of the pandemic is uncertain, we did experience a rebound in contract bookings in the fourth quarter of 2020 and expect that trend to continue in 2021. Our events business continues to be negatively affected by the pandemic, and we have announced that all events in the first half of 2021 will be held as virtual events. We hope to hold our events during the second half of 2021 as hybrid events, consisting of both in-person and virtual experiences.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity may differ from our current estimates due to inherent uncertainties regarding the duration and further spread of the outbreak, its severity, actions taken to contain the virus or treat its impact, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
During 2020, we implemented several cost-reduction measures that include reductions to travel, new hiring, and employee incentive compensation programs. These measures, excluding travel restrictions in the first half of 2021, have essentially been restored for 2021. We will continue to proactively respond to the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by governmental authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and customers.
Due to our operating segment realignments during 2020 (refer to Note 12 - Operating Segments and Enterprise Wide Reporting in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information), the revenue line items in the Consolidated Statements of Operations were updated to present Events revenues as a separate financial statement line. In the prior presentation, Events revenues were combined within the “Advisory services and events revenues” financial statement line. Prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. These reclassifications had no impact on the amount of total revenues previously reported.
On January 3, 2019, we acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of SiriusDecisions, Inc., a privately held company based in Wilton, Connecticut with approximately 350 employees globally. SiriusDecisions equips business-to-business (“B2B”) sales, marketing, and product leaders with the actionable research, frameworks, tools, operational benchmarks, and expert advice to maximize performance and drive alignment. Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, the Company paid $246.8 million at closing. Net cash paid, which accounts for the cash acquired of $7.9 million, was $237.7 million. We paid for the acquisition with $175.0 million of debt and cash on hand. See Note 2 - Acquisitions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the acquisition.
Our primary operating expenses consist of cost of services and fulfillment, selling and marketing expenses, and general and administrative expenses. Cost of services and fulfillment represents the costs associated with the production and delivery of our products and services, including salaries, bonuses, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for all personnel that produce and deliver our products and services, including all associated editorial, travel, and support services. Selling and marketing expenses include salaries, sales commissions, bonuses, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense, travel expenses, promotional costs, and other costs incurred in marketing and selling our products and services. General and administrative expenses include the costs of the technology, operations, finance, and human resources groups and our other administrative functions, including salaries, bonuses, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation expense. Overhead costs such as facilities and annual fees for cloud-based information technology systems are allocated to these categories according to the number of employees in each group.
Deferred revenue, agreement value, client retention, dollar retention, enrichment, and number of clients are metrics that we believe are important to understanding our business. We believe that the amount of deferred revenue, along with the agreement value of contracts, provide a significant measure of our business activity. We define these metrics as follows:
•
Deferred revenue - billings in advance of revenue recognition as of the measurement date.
•
Agreement value - the total revenues recognizable from all contracts to purchase our services in force at a given time (excluding contracts that consist solely of Consulting products and the value of Event sponsorships included in all contracts), without regard to how much revenue has already been recognized. No single client accounted for more than 3% of agreement value at December 31, 2020.
•
Client retention - the percentage of client companies (defined as all clients except those that only purchase web-based products such as individual reports, workshops, and Event tickets) at the prior year measurement date that have active contracts at the current year measurement date.
•
Dollar retention - the percentage of the total dollar value of client companies’ active contracts at the prior year measurement date that have active contracts at the current year measurement date.
•
Enrichment - the dollar value of client companies’ active contracts at the current year measurement date compared to the dollar value of the corresponding client companies’ active contracts at the prior year measurement date.
•
Clients - we aggregate the various divisions and subsidiaries of a corporate parent as a single client and we also aggregate separate instrumentalities of the federal, state, and provincial governments as a single client. We include only clients that purchased subscription-based products in our definition of clients.
Client retention, dollar retention, and enrichment are not necessarily indicative of the rate of future retention of our revenue base. A summary of our key metrics is as follows (dollars in millions):
Retention and enrichment metrics were not affected by the acquisition of SiriusDecisions until 2020.
Deferred revenue at December 31, 2020 remained essentially consistent compared to the prior year. Agreement value decreased 4% at December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to a reduction in contract bookings due to the negative economic effects of COVID-19. Retention, enrichment rates, and client count decreased from the prior year due to the decrease in contract bookings experienced in 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our policies and estimates, including but not limited to, those related to our revenue recognition, leases, goodwill, intangible and other long-lived assets, and income taxes. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, data available at the time the estimates are made, and various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We consider the following accounting policies to be those that require the most subjective judgment or that involve uncertainty that could have a material impact on our financial statements. If actual results differ significantly from management’s estimates and projections, there could be a material effect on our financial statements. This is not a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP, with no need for management’s judgment in its application. For a discussion of our other accounting policies, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
•
Revenue Recognition. We generate revenues from subscriptions to our Research, Connect, and Analytics products and services, licensing electronic reprints of our Research, performing consulting projects and advisory services, and hosting Events. We execute contracts that govern the terms and conditions of each arrangement. Revenues are recognized when an approved contract with a customer exists, the fees, payment terms, and rights regarding the products or services to be transferred can be identified, it is probable we will collect substantially all of the consideration for the products and services expected to be provided, and we have transferred control of the products and services to the customer. We continually evaluate customers’ ability and intention to pay by reviewing factors including the customer’s payment history, our ability to mitigate credit risk, and experience selling to similarly situated customers.
Our contracts may include either a single promise (referred to as a performance obligation) to transfer a product or service or a combination of multiple promises to transfer products or services. We evaluate the existence of multiple performance obligations within our products and services by using judgment to determine if: (1) the customer can benefit from each contractual promise on its own or together with other readily available resources; and (2) the transfer of each contractual promise is separately identifiable from other promises in a contract. When both criteria are met, each promise is accounted for as a separate performance obligation. Revenues from contracts that contain multiple products or services are allocated among the separate performance obligations on a relative basis according to their standalone selling prices. We obtain the standalone selling prices of our products and services based upon an analysis of standalone sales of these products and services. When there is an insufficient history of standalone sales, we use judgment to estimate the standalone selling price, taking into consideration available market conditions, factors used to set list prices, pricing of similar products, and internal pricing objectives.
The majority of our research revenues, including our Research, Connect, and Analytics subscription products, are recognized ratably over the term of the contract. Certain research revenues, including revenues from event tickets included with our subscription products and a portion of our reprints, are recognized as revenue when delivered. Consulting project revenues are recognized over time as the services are provided, based on an input method that calculates the total hours expended compared to the estimated hours required to satisfy the performance obligation. This input method was chosen since it closely aligns with how control of interim deliverables is transferred to the customer throughout the engagement. It is also the method used internally to price consulting services and assess operational performance. This method requires the use of judgement in determining the required number of hours to complete the project. Advisory services revenues, such as speeches and advisory days, are recognized at the point in time the service is complete or the customer receives the agreed upon deliverable. Event revenues are recognized upon completion of the Event. Reimbursed out-of-pocket expenses are recorded as consulting revenues in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Our Research subscription products include access to all or a designated portion of our research, and depending on the type of license, unlimited analyst inquiry, and unlimited participation in Forrester Webinars, all of which are delivered throughout the contract period and are accounted for as a single performance obligation. Certain of our Research subscription products also include advisory services or an Event ticket and these products are accounted for as two performance obligations: (1) the subscription; and (2) the advisory services or Event ticket. Arrangement consideration is allocated to each obligation based upon its standalone selling price, which is determined based on standalone sales of the advisory services or Event ticket and the estimated selling price of the remaining subscription services. Our Connect revenues primarily consist of annual subscriptions for Leadership Boards, which include access to the Research offering, access to a private forum with other Leadership Board member peers, access to a Forrester advisor, member-generated content, and one Event ticket. Leadership Boards are accounted for as two performance obligations: (1) the Event ticket; and (2) the remaining services that are delivered throughout the contract period. Arrangement consideration is allocated to each obligation based upon their standalone selling prices, which are determined based on standalone sales of Event tickets and the estimated selling price of the remaining services. Our Analytics subscription products include access to designated survey data products and access to an analytics client manager, which are delivered throughout the contract period and are accounted for as a single performance obligation. Certain of our Analytics subscription products also include advisory services and these products are accounted for as two performance obligations: (1) the subscription and analytics client manager; and (2) the advisory services. Arrangement consideration is allocated to each obligation based upon its standalone selling price, which is determined based on standalone sales of the advisory services and the estimated selling price of the remaining Analytics services.
We are required to estimate the amount of prepaid performance obligations that will expire unused and recognize revenue for that estimate over the same period the related rights are exercised by our customers. This assessment requires judgment, including estimating the percentage of prepaid rights that will go unexercised and anticipating the impact that future changes to products, pricing, and customer engagement will have on actual expirations. We update the estimates used to recognize unexercised rights on a quarterly basis.
•
Leases. We enter into operating leases, primarily for office space for our employees, which are recorded as operating lease right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The amounts recorded are based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. We use judgement to determine the discount rate in the present value calculation as an implicit rate in our lease agreements is generally not determinable. Currently, at lease inception or at the time of lease modification, we use our incremental borrowing rate.
Some of our lease agreements contain options to extend or terminate the lease. When determining the lease term at inception, these options are included in the measurement and recognition of the lease asset and liability when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise the option, which requires judgement. We consider various economic factors when making this determination, including, but not limited to, the significance of leasehold improvements incurred in the office space, the difficulty in replacing the asset, underlying contractual obligations, or specific characteristics unique to a particular lease. Subsequent to entering into a lease, if it becomes reasonably certain that we will exercise an option that was not included in the lease term, we account for the change in circumstances as a lease modification, which results in the remeasurement of the lease asset and liability as of the modification date. We continually evaluate whether facts or events indicate it is reasonably certain that management will exercise an option.
•
Goodwill, Intangible Assets, and Other Long-Lived Assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had $325.2 of goodwill and intangible assets with finite lives recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
When acquiring a business, as of the acquisition date, we determine the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, which may include a significant amount of intangible assets and goodwill. Goodwill is required to be assessed for impairment at least annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate that there may be an impairment. An impairment assessment requires evaluating the potential impairment at the reporting unit level using either a qualitative assessment, to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or a quantitative analysis, to determine and compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, or a combination of both. Reporting units are determined based on the components of our operating segments that constitute a business for which financial information is available and for which operating results are regularly reviewed by segment management. Judgement is required in determining the use of a qualitative or quantitative assessment, as well as in determining each reporting unit’s estimated fair value as it requires us to make estimates of market conditions and operational performance, including projected financial results, discount rates, control premium, and valuation multiples for key financial metrics.
Absent an event that indicates a specific impairment may exist, we have selected November 30th as the date to perform the annual goodwill impairment test. We completed the annual goodwill impairment testing as of November 30, 2020 utilizing a qualitative assessment to determine if it was more likely than not that the fair values of each of our reporting units was less than their respective carrying values and concluded that no impairments existed. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that goodwill associated with our acquired businesses is impaired. Any resulting impairment loss could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations.
Intangible assets with finite lives as of December 31, 2020 consist of acquired customer relationships, acquired technology, and acquired trademarks and were valued according to the future cash flows they are estimated to produce or the estimated costs to replace the assets. These assigned values are amortized on a basis which best matches the periods in which the economic benefits are expected to be realized. Tangible assets with finite lives consist of property and equipment, which are depreciated over their estimated useful lives. Other long-lived assets consist primarily of operating lease right-of-use assets as described in the Leases critical accounting policies and estimates above.
We continually evaluate whether events or circumstances have occurred that indicate the estimated remaining useful life of any of our intangible assets, tangible assets, or operating lease right-of-use assets may warrant revision, or that the carrying value of these assets may be impaired. To compute whether these assets have been impaired, the estimated undiscounted future cash flows for the estimated remaining useful life of the assets are compared to the carrying value. To the extent that the future cash flows are less than the carrying value, the assets are written down to their estimated fair value.
During 2020, we recorded $2.3 million of right-of-use asset impairments and $1.1 million of leasehold improvement impairments related to a facility lease we no longer used as a result of the integration of SiriusDecisions.
•
Income Taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between book and tax bases of assets and liabilities as well as operating loss carryforwards (from acquisitions). Such amounts are adjusted as appropriate to reflect changes in the tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred taxes to an amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. We consider future taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
As a global company, we use significant judgment to calculate and provide for income taxes in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. In the ordinary course of our business, there are transactions and calculations undertaken whose ultimate tax outcome cannot be certain. Some of these uncertainties arise as a consequence of transfer pricing for transactions with our subsidiaries and potential challenges to nexus and credit estimates. We estimate our exposure to unfavorable outcomes related to these uncertainties and record a liability based on the probability for such outcomes in accordance with current accounting guidelines.
Although we believe our estimates are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome will not be different from what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions, returns, and accruals. Such differences, or changes in estimates relating to potential differences, could have a material impact on our income tax provision and operating results in the period in which such a determination is made.
Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our Consolidated Statements of Operations as a percentage of total revenues for the years noted.
2020 compared to 2019
Revenues
Total revenues decreased 3% during 2020 compared to 2019. This includes the fair value adjustment of pre-acquisition deferred revenue, which reduced revenues during the year ended December 31, 2019, favorably impacting the comparable period in 2020 by 2%. Revenues from customers outside of the U.S. decreased 6% during 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease in revenues attributable to customers outside of the U.S. was primarily due to a decrease in revenues in Canada and the United Kingdom.
Research revenues are recognized as revenue primarily on a ratable basis over the term of the contracts, which are generally twelve-month periods. Research revenues decreased 1% during 2020 compared to the prior year period. This includes the fair value adjustment of pre-acquisition deferred revenue, which reduced revenues during the year ended December 31, 2019, favorably impacting the comparable period in 2020 by 3%. The decrease in Research revenues, after considering the deferred revenue fair value adjustment, was driven by reduced revenues for the Research, Connect, and Analytics products.
Consulting revenues increased 6% during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to strong demand for our content marketing offerings, which was partially offset by a decrease in advisory services.
Events revenues decreased 63% during 2020 compared to 2019. This includes the fair value adjustment of pre-acquisition deferred revenue, which reduced revenues during the year ended December 31, 2019, favorably impacting the comparable period in 2020 by 9%. The decrease in Events revenues was due to lower sponsorship revenues in 2020 compared to the prior year period due primarily to the change to virtual events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and, to a lesser extent, having 10 fewer events during 2020.
Refer to the “Segment Results” section below for a discussion of revenue and expenses by segment.
Cost of Services and Fulfillment
Cost of services and fulfillment expenses decreased 8% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to (1) a $10.5 million decrease in event expenses due to switching our events to virtual delivery as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as hosting 10 fewer events compared to the prior year, (2) a $7.4 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, (3) a $1.6 million decrease in facilities costs primarily as a result of a lease incentive for terminating an office lease early, and (4) a $0.5 million decrease in stock compensation expense. These decreases were partially offset by a $4.5 million increase in professional services costs primarily due to an increase in outsourced services related to revenue delivery, temporary contractors, survey costs, and product enhancements.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses decreased 4% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to (1) a $7.4 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses due to reduced travel and other related cost reduction measures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, (2) a $1.3 million decrease in facilities costs primarily as a result of a lease incentive for terminating an office lease early, (3) a $0.5 million decrease in marketing costs as a result of moving our events to virtual delivery, and (4) a $0.5 million decrease in bad debt expense. These decreases were partially offset by a $3.5 million increase in compensation and benefits costs primarily due to an increase in commissions expense, merit increases, and employee benefits.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased 5% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to (1) a $0.9 million decrease in compensation and benefit costs primarily from a decrease in incentive bonuses and other related cost-reduction measures implemented as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a decrease in headcount, (2) a $0.8 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and (3) a $0.8 million decrease in facilities costs primarily as a result of a lease incentive for terminating an office lease early.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense increased by $1.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to additional leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures, and computer software put into service.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization expense decreased by $2.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to certain technology intangible assets that were fully amortized in 2019. We expect amortization expense related to our intangible assets to be approximately $15.2 million for the year ending December 31, 2021.
Acquisition and Integration Costs
We did not have any acquisitions in 2020 and had one acquisition, SiriusDecisions, at the beginning of 2019. Acquisition and integration costs consist of direct and incremental costs to acquire and integrate acquired companies and primarily consist of certain fair value adjustments, consulting, severance, accounting and tax professional fees, and lease expense for unused leased facilities.
Acquisition and integration costs decreased by $3.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to (1) a $5.7 million decrease in professional service fees and transaction costs, (2) a $2.3 million decrease in severance, and (3) a $0.5 million decrease in integration bonuses. These decreases were partially offset by (1) a $3.4 million operating lease right-of-use asset impairment recognized in 2020, and (2) a $2.5 million increase in commissions expense as we recorded the benefit of SiriusDecisions’ deferred commissions in the year of the acquisition. We expect to incur integration costs in a range of $0.3 million to $0.5 million for the year ending December 31, 2021 related to unused leased facilities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our borrowings used to finance the acquisition of SiriusDecisions and realized gains (losses) on the related interest rate swap. Interest expense decreased by $2.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower outstanding borrowings and lower effective interest rates. We expect to incur interest expense of approximately $4.5 million for the year ending December 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of gains (losses) on foreign currency, gains (losses) on foreign currency forward contracts, and interest income. Other income (expense), net in 2020 was consistent with 2019.
Gains on Investments, Net
Gains on investments, net primarily represents our share of equity method investment gains and losses from our technology-related investment funds. Gain on investments, net increased by $2.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in investment gains generated by the underlying funds.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
The increase in the effective tax rate during 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to (1) the resolution of an audit in 2019 that did not recur in 2020, (2) utilization of valuation allowance on capital assets during 2020, (3) a decrease of non-deductible expenses during 2020, and (4) windfalls related to stock based compensation during 2019 that did not recur in 2020.
Segment Results
On January 1, 2020, we realigned our internal management and reporting as SiriusDecisions no longer operated under a separate management structure. As described in the Company’s Form 8-K filed on April 2, 2020, our Chief Product Officer resigned effective April 17, 2020. Subsequently, the Chief Product Officer position was eliminated and we reorganized our operations to reflect three lines of business: Research, Consulting, and Events. As a result of these changes, on May 1, 2020, we realigned our internal reporting into Research, Consulting, and Events. The realignments eliminated the Products and SiriusDecisions segments as the product lines and organizations supporting the related revenues began operating under the new management structure. Prior period amounts have been revised to conform to the current presentation.
The Research segment includes the revenues of the Research, Connect, and Analytics products and the cost of the organizations responsible for developing and delivering our Research, Connect, and Analytics products. In addition, this segment includes Consulting revenues from the delivery of advisory services (such as speeches and advisory days) delivered by our research and analytics analysts. The costs of the product management organization that is responsible for product pricing and packaging and the launch of new products is included in this segment.
The Consulting segment includes the revenues and the related costs of the Company’s consulting organization. The consulting organization delivers a majority of the Company’s consulting project revenue and certain advisory services.
The Events segment includes the revenues and the costs of the organization responsible for developing and hosting in-person and virtual events.
We evaluate reportable segment performance and allocate resources based on segment revenues and expenses. Segment expenses include the direct expenses of each segment organization and exclude selling and marketing expenses, general and administrative expenses, stock-based compensation expense, depreciation expense, adjustments to incentive bonus compensation from target amounts, amortization of intangible assets, interest and other expense, and gains (losses) on investments. The accounting policies used by the segments are the same as those used in the consolidated financial statements. We do not review or evaluate assets as part of segment performance. Accordingly, we do not identify or allocate assets by reportable segment.
Research segment revenues decreased 2% during 2020 compared to 2019. This includes the fair value adjustment of pre-acquisition deferred revenue, which reduced revenues during 2019, favorably impacting the comparable period in 2020 by 2%. The decrease in segment revenues, after considering the deferred revenue fair value adjustment, was due to (1) a decrease in Research product line revenues due to a decrease in our subscription revenues that was partially offset by an increase in reprint product revenues, (2) a decrease in Connect product revenues due primarily to a decrease in the leadership board product that was partially offset by an increase in the certification and executive programs products, (3) a decrease in our Analytics products, and (4) a decrease in Consulting product revenues due to a decrease in advisory delivery during the period.
Research segment expenses decreased 8% during 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in expenses was primarily due to (1) a $4.9 million decrease in compensation and benefit costs primarily due to a decrease in incentive bonuses and other related cost-reduction measures implemented as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in headcount and merit increases, and (2) a $4.6 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consulting segment revenues increased 16% during 2020 compared to 2019 due to strong demand for our content marketing offerings.
Consulting segment expenses increased 5% during 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in expenses was primarily due to a $3.2 million increase in professional services primarily due to an increase in outsourced services related to revenue delivery and an increase in survey costs, temporary contractors, and product enhancements. The increase was partially offset by a $1.5 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Event segment revenues decreased 63% during 2020 compared to 2019. This includes the fair value adjustment of pre-acquisition deferred revenue, which reduced revenues during 2019, favorably impacting the comparable period in 2020 by 9%. The decrease in Events revenues was due to lower sponsorship revenues in 2020 compared to the prior year due primarily to the change to virtual events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and, to a lesser extent, hosting 10 fewer events during 2020.
Event segment expenses decreased 57% during 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in expenses was primarily due to (1) a $10.0 million decrease in event expenses due to the change to virtual events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and hosting 10 fewer events during 2020, and (2) a $0.7 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
A detailed description and analysis of the fiscal year 2018 year-over-year changes can be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our operations primarily through funds generated from operations. Research revenues, which constituted approximately 66% of our revenues during 2020, are generally renewable annually and are typically payable in advance. We generated cash from operating activities of $47.8 million and $48.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $0.6 million decrease in cash provided from operations during 2020 was primarily due to a $19.9 million reduction in cash generated from accounts receivable and deferred revenue due to a reduction in contract bookings for the period, partially offset by the combination of an increase in net income for the period and a decrease in cash used for working capital (excluding accounts receivable and deferred revenue).
During 2020, we used cash in investing activities of $4.6 million, which consisted of $8.9 million of purchases of property and equipment primarily consisting of software and leasehold improvements, partially offset by a $4.3 million distribution received from an equity method investment. During 2019, we used cash in investing activities of $249.5 million, consisting of $237.7 million for the acquisition of SiriusDecisions, net of cash acquired, and $11.9 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily consisting of software and leasehold improvements.
During 2020, we used $23.7 million of cash from financing activities primarily due to $23.4 million of repayments of debt which consisted of $14.0 million of discretionary payments on our revolving credit facility and $9.4 million of required repayments of our term loan. During 2019, we generated $129.4 million of cash from financing activities primarily due to $171.3 million of borrowings to finance the SiriusDecisions acquisition, which reflects the face value of debt of $175.0 million less $3.7 million that was netted against the proceeds to pay debt issuance costs. This was partially offset by $42.3 million of repayments of debt which consisted of $36.0 million of discretionary payments on our revolving credit facility and $6.3 million of required repayments of our term loan. As of December 31, 2020, our remaining stock repurchase authorization was approximately $60.1 million.
In connection with the acquisition of SiriusDecisions, we entered into a $200.0 million credit agreement on January 3, 2019. The credit agreement provides for: (1) senior secured term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $125.0 million (the “Term Loans”) and, (2) a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $75.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility” and, together with the Term Loans, the “Facilities”). We utilized the full $125.0 million of the Term Loans and $50.0 million of the Revolving Credit Facility to finance a portion of the acquisition of SiriusDecisions and to pay certain fees, costs, and expenses incurred in connection with the Term Loans and Revolving Credit Facility. Additional information is provided in Note 4 - Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Facilities mature on January 3, 2024. As of December 31, 2020, we had remaining principal payments on the Facilities totaling $109.4 million, contractually due as follows: $12.5 million in 2021, $28.1 million within 2022 and 2023, and $68.8 million in 2024. We were in full compliance with the covenants as of December 31, 2020 and expect to continue to be in compliance through the next 12 months.
The Facilities contain certain customary restrictive loan covenants, including among others, financial covenants that apply a maximum leverage ratio and minimum fixed charge coverage ratio. The negative covenants limit, subject to various exceptions, our ability to incur additional indebtedness, create liens on assets, merge, consolidate, liquidate or dissolve any part of the Company, sell assets, pay dividends or other payments in respect to capital stock, change fiscal year, or enter into certain transactions with affiliates and subsidiaries.
Additional future contractual cash obligations extending over the next 12 months and beyond primarily consist of operating lease payments. We lease office space under non-cancellable operating lease agreements (refer to Note 7 - Leases in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information). The remaining duration of non-cancellable office space leases ranges from less than 1 year to 11 years. Remaining lease payments within one year, within two to three years, within four to five years, and after five years from December 31, 2020 are $15.4 million, $30.5 million, $27.4 million, and $115.6 million, respectively.
In addition to the contractual cash commitments included above, we have other payables and liabilities that may be legally enforceable but are not considered contractual commitments. See Note 13 - Certain Balance Sheet Accounts in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our payables and liabilities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $90.3 million. This balance includes $59.7 million held outside of the U.S. If the cash outside of the U.S. is needed for operations in the U.S., we would be required to accrue and pay U.S. state taxes and may be required to pay withholding taxes to foreign jurisdictions to repatriate these funds. However, our intent is to permanently reinvest these funds outside of the U.S. and our current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate these funds for our U.S. operations. We believe that our current cash balance and cash flows from operations will satisfy working capital, financing activities, and capital expenditure requirements for the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and effects on results of operations and financial condition.