Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1. Business, Item 1A. Risk Factors and our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results of operations may differ materially from those discussed in forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those included in Item 1A. Risk Factors and other portions of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a global design, marketing and distribution company that specializes in consumer fashion accessories. Our principal offerings include an extensive line of men's and women's fashion watches and jewelry, handbags, small leather goods, belts, and sunglasses. In the watch and jewelry product categories, we have a diverse portfolio of globally recognized owned and licensed brand names under which our products are marketed.
Our products are distributed globally through various distribution channels including wholesale in countries where we have a physical presence, direct to the consumer through our retail stores and commercial websites and through third-party distributors in countries where we do not maintain a physical presence. Our products are offered at varying price points to meet the needs of our customers, whether they are value-conscious or luxury oriented. Based on our range of accessory products, brands, distribution channels and price points, we are able to target style-conscious consumers across a wide age spectrum on a global basis.
The vast majority of our products are sourced internationally, with a substantial percentage of our watch and jewelry products assembled or manufactured by entities that are majority owned by us. During fiscal 2020, approximately 43% of our global watch production was assembled or sourced through wholly or majority owned factories. This vertical integration of our business allows for better flow of communication, consistent quality, product design protection and improved supply chain speed, while still allowing us to utilize non-owned production facilities for their unique capabilities and to cover production needs over internal capabilities.
We operate our business in three segments which are divided into geographies. Net sales for each geographic segment are based on the location of the selling entity and each reportable segment provides similar products and services.
Americas: The Americas segment is comprised of sales from our operations in the United States, Canada and Latin America. Sales are generated through diversified distribution channels that include wholesalers, distributors, and direct to consumer. Within each channel, we sell our products through a variety of physical point of sale, distributors and e-commerce channels. In the direct to consumer channel, we had 185 Company-owned stores as of the end of fiscal 2020 and an extensive collection of products available through our owned websites. As of the end of fiscal 2020, net sales in the Americas segment accounted for 39.8% of our consolidated revenue.
Europe: The Europe segment is comprised of sales to customers based in European countries, the Middle East and Africa. Sales are generated through diversified distribution channels that include wholesalers, distributors and direct to consumer. Within each channel, we sell our products through a variety of physical points of sale, distributors, and e-commerce channels. In the direct to consumer channel, we had 147 Company-owned stores as of the end of fiscal 2020 and an extensive collection of products available through our owned websites. As of the end of fiscal 2020, net sales in the Europe segment accounted for 32.4% of our consolidated revenue.
Asia: The Asia segment is comprised of sales to customers based in Australia, China (including Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan), India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea and Thailand. Sales are generated through diversified distribution channels that include wholesalers, distributors and direct to consumer. Within each channel, we sell our products through a variety of physical points of sale, distributors, and e-commerce channels. In the direct to consumer channel, we had 89 Company-owned stores as of the end of fiscal 2020 and an extensive collection of products available through our owned websites. As of the end of fiscal 2020, net sales in the Asia segment accounted for 26.9% of our consolidated revenue.
Our consolidated gross profit margin is influenced by our diversified business model that includes, but is not limited to: (i) a significant number of product categories we distribute, (ii) the multiple brands we offer within several product categories, (iii) the geographical presence of our businesses and (iv) the different distribution channels we sell to or through.
The components of this diversified business model produce varying ranges of gross profit margin. Generally, on a historical basis, our fashion branded watch and jewelry offerings produce higher gross profit margins than our leather goods offerings. In addition, in most product categories that we offer, brands with higher retail price points generally produce higher gross profit margins compared to those of lower retail priced brands and connected products carry relatively lower margins than traditional products. Gross profit margins related to sales in our Europe and Asia businesses are historically higher than our
Americas business, primarily due to the following factors: (i) premiums charged in comparison to retail prices on products sold in the U.S.; (ii) the product sales mix in our international businesses, in comparison to our Americas business, is comprised more predominantly of watches and jewelry that generally produce higher gross profit margins than leather goods; and (iii) the watch sales mix in our Europe and Asia businesses, in comparison to our Americas business, are comprised more predominantly of higher priced licensed brands.
Our business is subject to the risks inherent in global sourcing supply. Certain key components in our products come from limited sources of supply, which exposes us to potential supply shortages that could disrupt the manufacture and sale of our products. Any interruption or delay in the supply of key components could significantly harm our ability to meet scheduled product deliveries to our customers and cause us to lose sales. Interruptions or delays in supply may be caused by a number of factors that are outside of our and our contractor manufacturers' control.
Known or Anticipated Trends
Based on our recent operating results and current perspectives on our operating environment, we anticipate the following trends will continue to impact our operating results:
COVID-19: In March 2020, a novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization. Our business operations and financial performance for fiscal year 2020 were materially impacted by COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the global economies, disrupted global supply chains and financial markets, and led to significant travel and transportation restrictions, including mandatory closures of non-essential businesses and orders to “shelter-in-place.” We remain focused on protecting the health and safety of our employees, customers and suppliers to minimize potential disruptions and supporting the community to address challenges posed by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Despite the introduction of new vaccines to fight the virus, the time to administer vaccines on a global scale along with the emergence of new variants of the virus, continue to cast some uncertainty on global consumer behavior. As a result, we expect continuing disruptions in consumer spending patterns and traffic in traditional brick and mortar shopping centers.
Business Strategies and Outlook: Notwithstanding the COVID-19 pandemic, we plan to execute the following strategies to enhance our brands, grow our revenue and improve profitability. We believe that these strategies remain highly relevant, and are important to our long-term success. The first strategic initiative is to increase brand excitement by crafting compelling stories that build upon brand equities for both owned and licensed brands across our product categories. Key to this strategy is our ongoing effort in innovation in our product categories and marketing capabilities, where we aim to build larger communities of brand loyalists. Our second strategic initiative is to accelerate digital sales. We continue to invest in our owned e-commerce sites around the world and in third party marketplaces to enhance our direct to consumer engagement, which we believe can build long term customer value. The current operating environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic is further accelerating consumers' adoption of the digital channel for commerce and marketing. Our third strategic initiative is expanding our opportunity in mainland China and India. In these countries, we are continuing to execute against a strategy centered around localized marketing and segmented assortments. Although the impact of COVID-19 is likely to disrupt our growth trajectory in the short to intermediate term, we continue to view mainland China and India as compelling long-term opportunities. Our fourth strategic initiative is to optimize our operations. In addition to completing our New World Fossil (“NWF 1.0”) restructuring program in 2019 that delivered $200 million of run-rate savings, we initiated the New World Fossil - Transform to Grow (“NWF 2.0”) initiative in 2019 aimed to further simplify our operations and to re-allocate resources toward growth and to realize $200 million in run-rate savings over a multi-year period. In fiscal year 2019, the NWF 2.0 program achieved $50 million in savings. In fiscal year 2020, due to the expected near term impact of COVID-19, we increased the program’s goal from $200 million to $250 million in run-rate savings. In fiscal year 2020, we achieved approximately $175 million in savings and expect to complete the program’s savings plan in 2021. In addition to the Company’s NWF 2.0 program, we expect to optimize our operations with further reductions to our store footprint and increased focus on inventory management and supply chain efficiency.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to product returns, bad debt, inventories, long-lived asset impairment, impairment of trade names, income taxes, warranty costs and litigation liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies require the most significant estimates and judgments.
Product Returns. We accept limited returns from customers. We monitor returns and maintain a provision for estimated returns based upon historical experience, current information and any specific issues identified. While returns have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, future return rates may differ from those experienced in the past. In the event that our products are performing poorly in the retail market and/or we experience product damages or defects at a rate significantly higher than our historical rate, the resulting returns could have an adverse impact on the operating results for the period or periods in which such returns occur. If our allowance for product returns were to change by 10%, the impact, excluding taxes, would have been an approximate $2.4 million change to net income (loss).
Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value, including any applicable duty and freight charges. We account for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the average cost of inventory and the estimated net realizable value based upon assumptions about forecasted sales demand, market conditions and available liquidation channels. Valuation of existing connected inventory can be negatively impacted by the emergence of newer generation product. If actual future demand or market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, or if liquidation channels are not readily available, additional inventory valuation reductions may be required. We assess our off-price sales on an ongoing basis and update our estimates accordingly.
Impairment of Trade Names. We evaluate indefinite-lived trade names by comparing the fair value of the asset to its recorded value annually as of the end of the fiscal year and whenever events or conditions indicate that the carrying value of the trade name may not be recoverable. The fair value of the asset is estimated using discounted cash flow methodologies. Due to the inherent uncertainties involved in making the estimates and assumptions used in the fair value analysis, actual results may differ, which could alter the fair value of the trade names and possibly cause impairment charges to occur in future periods. Judgments and assumptions are inherent in our estimate of future cash flows used to determine the estimate of our fair values. The most significant assumptions associated with the fair value calculations include net sales growth rates and discount rates. If the actual future sales results do not meet the assumed growth rates, future impairments of trade names may be incurred.
In fiscal year 2020, as a result of a triggering event, we recorded impairment charges of $2.5 million related to the MICHELE trade name. For our annual fiscal year 2020 impairment test, a discount rate of 12.5% and a royalty rate of 5% were used to estimate the MICHELE trade name fair value. The MICHELE trade name represented approximately 68%, 71% and 34% of our total trade name balances at the end of fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. No impairment charges were recorded to the MICHELE trade name in fiscal years 2019 or 2018. As of January 2, 2021, the fair value of the MICHELE trade name exceeded its carrying value by approximately 50%.
We test our finite-lived trade name for impairment whenever events or conditions indicate that the carrying value of the asset might not be recoverable. The SKAGEN trade name is being fully amortized on a straight-line basis over its remaining estimated useful life of 5 years as of January 2, 2021. The SKAGEN trade name represented approximately 29% of our total trade name balance at the end of both fiscal years 2020 and 2019 and 66% at the end of fiscal year 2018. We recorded no impairment charges in fiscal year 2020 and impairment charges of $16.6 million and $6.2 million for fiscal years 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to the SKAGEN trade name.
Property, Plant and Equipment and Lease Impairment. We test for asset impairment of property, plant and equipment and lease assets whenever events or conditions indicate that the carrying value of an asset might not be recoverable based on expected undiscounted cash flows related to the asset. In evaluating long-lived assets for recoverability, we calculate fair value using our best estimate of future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. When undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated through the operations of our Company-owned retail stores are less than the carrying value of the underlying assets, the assets are impaired. If it is determined that assets are impaired, an impairment loss is recognized for the amount that the asset's book value exceeds its fair value. Should actual results or market conditions differ from those anticipated, additional losses may be recorded. We recorded impairment losses in selling, general, and
administrative ("SG&A") expense of $27.3 million and $7.9 million in fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to lease assets. We recorded impairment losses in SG&A expense of $4.0 million, $0.7 million and $1.9 million in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to property, plant and equipment. We recorded impairment losses in restructuring charges of $2.9 million and $1.7 million in fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to lease assets. We recorded impairment losses in restructuring charges of $1.1 million, $0.6 million and $1.7 million in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to property, plant and equipment. In fiscal year 2020, an increase of 100 basis points to the discount rate would have increased property, plant and equipment and lease impairment expense by $0.1 million. A 10% decrease in future expected cash flows would have increased impairment expense by $2.1 million. We recorded a loss on disposal related to the write off of property, plant and equipment of $0.1 million, $0.5 million and $0.6 million in fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Income Taxes. We record valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets, when necessary, in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"). Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on future taxable earnings and is therefore uncertain. At least quarterly, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax asset balance will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance against our deferred tax asset, increasing our income tax expense in the period such determination is made. The valuation allowance for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $109.3 million, $118.1 million and $95.8 million, respectively.
Our continuing practice is to recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense. We accrue an amount for our estimate of additional income tax liability which we believe we are more likely than not to incur as a result of the ultimate resolution of tax audits ("uncertain tax positions"). We review and update the estimates used in the accrual for uncertain tax positions as more definitive information becomes available from taxing authorities upon completion of tax audits, expiration of statutes of limitation, or occurrence of other events. The results of operations and financial position for future periods could be impacted by changes in assumptions or resolutions of tax audits.
The GILTI provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the "TCJ Act”) requiring the inclusion of certain foreign earnings in U.S. taxable income will continue to have an adverse impact on our effective tax rate. The GILTI impact will be accounted for as incurred under the period cost method. In addition, our valuation allowance analysis is affected by various aspects of the TCJ Act, including the limitation on the deductibility of interest expense and the impact of the GILTI. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) which was signed into law on March 27, 2020, allowed a carryback of the Company’s net operating losses for fiscal years 2019 and 2020. Valuation allowances in the amount of $23.1 million related to these loss carrybacks were released in fiscal year 2020.
Warranty Costs. Our watch products are covered by limited warranties against defects in materials or workmanship. Historically, our FOSSIL and RELIC watch products sold in the U.S. have been covered for warranty periods of 11 years and 12 years, respectively, and our SKAGEN branded watches have been covered by a lifetime warranty. Beginning in 2017, these brands are covered by a two year warranty. Generally, all other products, including leathers and jewelry, sold in the U.S. and internationally are covered by a comparable one to two year warranty.
At the time of sale, we accrue a warranty liability for estimated costs in connection with future warranty claims. We determine our warranty liability using historical warranty repair experience. We periodically assess the adequacy of our warranty liability, and as changes occur in sales volumes and warranty costs, the warranty accrual is adjusted as necessary. Actual claims could be higher or lower than amounts estimated, as the number and value of warranty claims can vary due to such factors as performance of new products, significant manufacturing or design defects not discovered until after the product is delivered to customers, product failure rates, and higher or lower than expected service costs for a repair. We believe that analysis of historical trends and knowledge of potential manufacturing or design problems provide sufficient information to establish a reasonable estimate for warranty claims at the time of sale. However, since we cannot predict with certainty future warranty claims or costs associated with servicing those claims, our actual warranty costs may differ.
Due to the nature of connected products, their warranty costs are usually more than traditional products. A shift in product mix from traditional to connected products generally results in an increase in warranty liabilities. The year-end warranty liability for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $21.9 million, $23.1 million and $22.8 million, respectively.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
See "Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements, which are contained in Item 8 of this report and are incorporated by reference herein.
Results of Operations
Executive Summary
Results for the 53 weeks ended January 2, 2021 were impacted by the challenging retail environment which was further intensified by the COVID-19 global pandemic. Net sales decreased 27% (28% in constant currency) as compared to fiscal year 2019 and generated a net loss of $96 million in fiscal year 2020, as compared to a net loss of $52 million in fiscal year 2019. Beginning in March 2020, the Company initiated several actions that were designed to reduce spending and improve liquidity in order to navigate the severity of the global pandemic. The actions, listed below, along with other actions under the NWF 2.0 program supported an overall reduction in our SG&A expenses from $1.1 billion to $866.7 million.
Board of Director and Executive Compensation: We implemented base salary reductions for each of our executive officers for an indefinite time period. Further, the cash fees for all non-employee directors serving on our Board of Directors were deferred for the first quarter of fiscal year 2020 until the end of the year, and the cash fees were reduced by 20% for the second quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Employee Actions: During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, we implemented weekly work hour reductions (e.g., from 40 hours to 32 or 24 hours) and work-reduction furloughs for certain other employees. We also have implemented base salary reductions for a substantial number of our employees globally and reduced corporate staff levels. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, we reinstated normal work week schedules. We closed all of our corporate offices at various times in 2020. We believe our employees have generally been successful in transitioning to a virtual working environment. Currently, most of our offices have reopened in some capacity, and we are following government regulations and have health and safety guidelines in place.
Office and Retail Location Expenses: We have entered into agreements, or are in discussions with, many of our retail and corporate office landlords to modify rent payments, receive other concessions or otherwise reduce our operating costs for these locations. Refer to "Note 13 - Leases" to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Marketing and Other Expenses: We have reduced marketing and other operating expenses, like time and expense and services.
Capital Expenditures: Capital expenditures for fiscal year 2020 were approximately $9 million, compared to original expectations of approximately $25 million. This reduction was made in accordance with our amended credit agreement and reflects the deferral or cancellation of certain planned investments.
Other Liquidity Improvements: We have also extended the payment terms with a number of our vendors and suppliers globally and reduced our inventory purchases to improve working capital.
Our Term Credit Agreement (as defined in "Note 10 - Debt Activity" to our consolidated financial statements) contains certain affirmative and negative covenants. In June 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 3 to our Term Credit Agreement to amend, among other things, certain of these financial covenants as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on our business. Refer to “Note 10 - Debt Activity" to our consolidated financial statements for additional details on the Term Credit Agreement. We are currently in compliance with the covenants in our debt agreements, and management believes its business plans will result in adequate cash flows to support our ongoing operations and meet our covenant requirements for one year following the date these financial statements are issued.
Constant Currency Financial Information
As a multinational enterprise, we are exposed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The translation of the operations of our foreign-based entities from their local currencies into U.S. dollars is sensitive to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and can have a significant impact on our reported financial results. In general, our overall financial results are affected positively by a weaker U.S. dollar and are affected negatively by a stronger U.S. dollar as compared to the foreign currencies in which we conduct our business.
As a result, in addition to presenting financial measures in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), our discussion contains references to constant currency financial information, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. To calculate net sales on a constant currency basis, net sales for the current fiscal year for entities reporting in currencies other than the U.S. dollar are translated into U.S. dollars at the average rates during the comparable period of the prior fiscal year. We present constant currency information to provide investors with a basis to evaluate how our underlying business performed excluding the effects of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. The constant currency financial information presented herein should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the measures of financial
performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations between constant currency financial information and the most directly comparable GAAP measure are included where applicable.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Consolidated Net Sales. Net sales decreased $604.4 million or 27.3% (27.6% in constant currency) for fiscal year 2020, as compared to fiscal year 2019. We experienced sales declines in all three geographic segments and major product categories as a result of the challenging retail environment which was further intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic with temporary store closures in our direct to consumer and wholesale channels and reduced traffic as stores re-opened. Comparable retail sales declined in the mid-twenties on a percentage basis on a 53-week calendar during the fiscal year 2020, but were partially offset by strong positive e-commerce comparable retail sales. We have reduced our store footprint by 30 stores since the end of fiscal year 2019 and expect to reduce it further during fiscal year 2021.
The following table sets forth product net sales and the changes in product net sales on both a reported and constant currency basis from period to period (dollars in millions):
The following table sets forth consolidated net sales by segment and the changes in net sales by segment on both a reported and constant currency basis from period to period (dollars in millions):
Americas Net Sales. Americas net sales decreased $307.8 million or 32.4% (32.1% in constant currency) for fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. In the region, sales declined in the U.S., Canada and Mexico. Strong sales growth in e-commerce partially offset the declines in other channels. Sales declined in nearly all brands, most notably in FOSSIL and MICHAEL KORS. Comparable retail sales declined in the mid-twenties on a percentage basis on a 53-week calendar during fiscal year 2020, driven by traffic declines due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by strong positive e-commerce comparable retail sales.
The following table sets forth product net sales and the changes in product net sales on both a reported and constant currency basis from period to period for the Americas segment (dollars in millions):
Europe Net Sales. During fiscal year 2020, Europe net sales decreased $193.1 million or 27.0% (28.6% in constant currency) in comparison to fiscal 2019. During fiscal 2020, most of the brands in the portfolio declined, with the largest sales decreases in FOSSIL and MICHAEL KORS. Sales were down in all markets, most notably in Germany and the U.K. Strong e-commerce sales growth partially offset declines in our retail store and wholesale channels. Comparable retail sales in the region decreased in the mid-twenties on a percentage basis on a 53-week calendar during fiscal 2020, driven by temporary store closures and traffic declines due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but were partially offset by strong positive e-commerce comparable retail sales.
The following table sets forth product net sales and the changes in product net sales on both a reported and constant currency basis from period to period for the Europe segment (dollars in millions):
Asia Net Sales. In fiscal year 2020, Asia net sales decreased $100.8 million or 18.8% (18.7% in constant currency) in comparison to fiscal 2019. Sales of most brands declined during fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019, most notably in FOSSIL. Strong e-commerce sales growth partially offset retail store and wholesale sales declines. Within the region, we continued to have strong sales growth in mainland China, while all other major markets declined. For fiscal 2020, comparable retail sales decreased in the low-thirties on a percentage basis on a 53-week calendar driven by temporary store closures and traffic declines due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but were partially offset by strong positive e-commerce comparable retail sales.
The following table sets forth product net sales and the changes in product net sales on both a reported and constant currency basis from period to period for the Asia segment (dollars in millions):
Stores. The following table sets forth the number of stores by concept for the fiscal years ended below:
During fiscal year 2020, we opened 15 new stores and closed 45 stores. During fiscal year 2021, we anticipate closing approximately 65 to 75 stores globally, depending on lease negotiations, and not opening any additional retail stores.
Both stores and e-commerce sites are included in comparable retail sales in the thirteenth month of operation. Stores that experience a gross square footage increase of 10% or more due to an expansion and/or relocation are removed from the comparable store sales base, but are included in total sales. These stores are returned to the comparable store sales base in the thirteenth month following the expansion and/or relocation. Comparable retail sales were adjusted to normalize the 53-week fiscal year 2020 with the 52-week fiscal year 2019. Comparable retail sales also exclude the effects of foreign currency fluctuations.
Gross Profit. Gross profit of $770.4 million in fiscal year 2020 decreased $329.1 million, or 29.9%, in comparison to $1.1 billion in fiscal year 2019 primarily due to a decline in sales. Gross profit margin rate decreased to 47.7% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 49.6% in fiscal year 2019. The gross profit margin rate contracted primarily due to heightened promotional activity, increased product costs including freight and factory cost absorption on lower sales volumes and an unfavorable currency impact of approximately 20 basis points. These costs were partially offset by favorable region and product mix and a higher mix of e-commerce sales.
Operating Expenses. For fiscal year 2020, total operating expenses decreased by $222.1 million and, as a percentage of net sales, increased to 56.1%, compared to 50.9% in fiscal year 2019. SG&A expenses were $214.9 million lower in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 mainly due to corporate and regional infrastructure reductions driven by NWF 2.0 initiatives and lower store costs as a result of store closures including a $14 million gain related to early lease terminations. During fiscal year 2020, we incurred restructuring costs of $36.5 million associated with employee costs, professional services and store closures under our NWF initiatives compared to restructuring costs of $29.6 million in fiscal year 2019. We incurred non-cash intangible asset impairment charges of $2.5 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $16.6 million in fiscal year 2019. The translation of foreign-denominated expenses during fiscal year 2020 increased operating expenses by approximately $3.4 million as a result of the weaker U.S. dollar.
Operating Income (Loss). Operating income (loss) was a loss of $135.3 million in fiscal year 2020, as compared to a loss of $28.4 million in the prior fiscal year, primarily resulting from the $604.4 million decline in net sales during fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. Within operating expenses, SG&A decreased due to corporate and regional infrastructure reductions and lower store costs due to store closures both as part of our long-term operating strategy and as a response to the global COVID-19 pandemic. The gross margin rate primarily decreased due to heightened promotional activity, increased product costs and an unfavorable currency impact, partially offset by favorable region and product mix and a higher mix of e-commerce sales. As a percentage of net sales, operating margin decreased to (8.4)% in fiscal year 2020 as compared to (1.3)% in fiscal year 2019.
Operating income (loss) by operating segment is summarized as follows (dollars in millions):
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased by $1.9 million in fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by increased debt issuance costs and original issue discount amortization as a result of our September 26, 2019 debt agreement and subsequent amendments.
Other Income (Expense)-Net. During fiscal year 2020, other income (expense) - net was a loss of $4.8 million compared to income of $27.0 million the prior fiscal year. This change was primarily driven by a $21.6 million gain on the sale of intellectual property to Google in the prior fiscal year and net foreign currency losses during fiscal year 2020 as compared to net gains in the prior fiscal year.
Provision for Income Taxes. During fiscal year 2020, there was an income tax benefit of $76.0 million, resulting in an effective tax rate of 44.2%, compared to (59.6)% in fiscal year 2019. The 2020 effective rate was favorably impacted by the net operating loss carryback provision of the CARES Act that allowed the Company to recognize the benefit of the 2019 and 2020 U.S. tax losses since these losses can be carried back to prior tax years resulting in tax refunds. Valuation allowances were released related to these carrybacks. These favorable impacts were partially offset by the accrual of valuation allowances on some foreign net deferred tax assets and net operating losses. The Company has recorded a short-term tax receivable of $37.7 million for the 2019 tax net operating loss carryback refund. A long-term tax receivable of $52.3 million was recorded for the 2020 tax net operating loss carryback refund.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Fossil Group, Inc. Fiscal year 2020 net income (loss) attributable to Fossil Group, Inc. was a net loss of $96.1 million, or $1.88 per diluted share, in comparison to a net loss of $52.4 million, or $1.04 per diluted share, in the prior fiscal year. Fiscal year 2020 included restructuring charges of $0.56 per diluted share and non-cash intangible asset impairment charges of $0.04 per diluted share. In comparison, fiscal year 2019 included restructuring charges of $0.47 per diluted share and non-cash intangible asset impairment charges of $0.25 per diluted share. Fiscal year 2020 net income (loss) attributable to Fossil Group, Inc. was negatively impacted by a decline in gross margin, partially offset by reduced operating expenses. The Company also benefited from a $21.6 million gain on the sale of intellectual property to Google in the prior fiscal year. Currencies, including both the translation impact on operating earnings and the impact of foreign currency hedging contracts, unfavorably affected the year-over-year diluted earnings (loss) per share comparison by $0.20.
Fiscal Year 2019 Compared to Fiscal Year 2018
For a discussion of our results of operations in fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018, please see Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 filed with the SEC, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash and cash equivalents balance at the end of fiscal year 2020 was $316.0 million, including $277.4 million held by foreign subsidiaries outside the U.S., in comparison to $200.2 million at the end of fiscal year 2019, including $189.7 million held by foreign subsidiaries outside the U.S. Historically, our business operations have not required substantial cash during the first several months of our fiscal year. Generally, starting in the third quarter, our cash needs begin to increase, typically reaching a peak in the September-November time frame as we increase inventory levels in advance of the holiday season. Our quarterly cash requirements are also impacted by debt repayments, restructuring charges, strategic investments such as acquisitions and other capital expenditures. We believe cash flows from operations, including our current and planned cost savings measures, combined with existing cash on hand and amounts available under our credit facilities will be sufficient to fund our cash needs for the next twelve months. Although we believe we have adequate sources of liquidity in the short-term and long-term, the success of our operations, in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors, could impact our business and liquidity.
For fiscal year 2020, we generated operating cash flow of $101.2 million. A net loss of $95.9 million was more than offset by net non-cash items of $180.6 million and an increase in working capital items of $16.6 million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of non-cash lease expense of $109.3 million and depreciation, amortization and accretion charges of $43.1 million. We increased our borrowings under the Revolving Facility as a precautionary measure to increase our cash position, provide liquidity for a sustained period and to preserve financial flexibility in light of current uncertainty in the global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Accounts receivable decreased by 20.7% to $229.8 million at the end of fiscal year 2020 compared to $289.7 million at the end of the prior fiscal year, primary driven by a decrease in sales. Average days sales outstanding for our wholesale business for fiscal year 2020 increased seven days as compared to fiscal year 2019.
Inventory at the end of fiscal year 2020 was $295.3 million, representing a decrease of 34.7% from the prior fiscal year inventory balance of $452.3 million largely reflecting accelerated inventory reduction actions, particularly of older generation connected product, and proactive management of inbound receipts to align with reduced consumer demand.
At the end of fiscal year 2020, we had working capital of $431.9 million compared to working capital of $500.3 million at the end of the prior fiscal year. Additionally, at the end of fiscal year 2020, we had approximately $41.6 million of outstanding short-term borrowings and $185.9 million in long-term debt.
For the fiscal year ending January 1, 2022, we expect total capital expenditures to be approximately $20 million. Our capital expenditure budget is an estimate, and while it is subject to change, it is also limited by the terms of our credit agreement. We believe that cash flows from operations combined with existing cash on hand and amounts available under our credit facilities will be sufficient to fund our working capital needs and planned capital expenditures for the next twelve months.
Debt Facilities
On September 26, 2019, we, as the U.S. borrower, and certain of our foreign subsidiaries, as the non-U.S. borrowers, and certain of our other subsidiaries from time to time party thereto designated as borrowers (collectively the “ABL Borrowers”), and certain of our subsidiaries from time to time party thereto as guarantors, entered into the Revolving Facility with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as administrative agent (the “ABL Agent”), J.P. Morgan AG, as French collateral agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Citizens Bank, N.A. and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association as joint bookrunners and joint lead arrangers, and Citizens Bank, N.A. and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as co-syndication agents and each of the lenders from time to time party thereto (the “ABL Lenders”). In addition, on September 26, 2019, we, as borrower, entered into the Term Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as administrative agent (the “Term Agent”), JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Citizens Bank, National Association and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, as joint bookrunners and joint lead arrangers and the lenders party thereto (the “Term Loan Lenders”).
The Revolving Facility provides that the ABL Lenders may extend revolving loans in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $275.0 million at any time outstanding (the “Revolving Credit Commitment”), of which up to $160.0 million is available under a U.S. facility, an aggregate of $70.0 million is available under a European facility, $30.0 million is available under a Hong Kong facility, $10.0 million will be available under a French facility, and $5.0 million is available under a Canadian facility, in each case, subject to the borrowing base availability limitations described below. The Revolving Facility also includes an up to $45.0 million subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit (the “Letters of Credit”). The Revolving Facility expires and is due and payable on September 26, 2024, provided that, if on the date that is the 121st day prior to the final maturity date of any class or tranche of term loans under the Term Credit Agreement, any such term loans are outstanding on such date, then the maturity date of the Revolving Facility shall be such date. Unless the maturity of the term loans is
extended beyond the current maturity date of September 26, 2024, the Revolving Facility will expire and be due and payable on May 28, 2024. The French facility includes a $1.0 million subfacility for swingline loans, and the European facility includes a $7.0 million subfacility for swingline loans. The Revolving Facility is subject to a line cap (the “Line Cap”) equal to the lesser of the total Revolving Credit Commitment and the aggregate borrowing bases under the U.S. facility, the European facility, the Hong Kong facility, the French facility and the Canadian facility. Loans under the Revolving Facility may be made in U.S. dollars, Canadian dollars, euros, Hong Kong dollars or pounds sterling.
The Revolving Facility is an asset-based facility, in which borrowing availability is subject to a borrowing base equal to: (a) with respect to us, the sum of (i) the lesser of (x) 90% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible U.S. finished goods inventory and (y) 65% of the lower of cost or market value of eligible U.S. finished goods inventory, plus (ii) 85% of the eligible U.S. accounts receivable, plus (iii) 90% of eligible U.S. credit card accounts receivable, minus (iv) the aggregate amount of reserves, if any, established by the ABL Agent; (b) with respect to each non-U.S. borrower (except for the French Borrower), the sum of (i) the lesser of (x) 90% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible foreign finished goods inventory of such non-U.S. borrower and (y) 65% of the lower of cost or market value of eligible foreign finished goods inventory of such non-U.S. borrower, plus (ii) 85% of the eligible foreign accounts receivable of such non-U.S. borrower, minus (iii) the aggregate amount of reserves, if any, established by the ABL Agent; and (c) with respect to the French Borrower, (i) 85% of eligible French accounts receivable minus (ii) the aggregate amount of reserves, if any, established by the ABL Agent. Not more than 60% of the aggregate borrowing base under the Revolving Facility may consist of the non-U.S. borrowing bases.
The Revolving Facility also includes a commitment fee, payable quarterly in arrears, of 0.250% or 0.375% determined by reference to the average daily unused portion of the overall commitment under the Revolving Facility. The ABL Borrowers will pay the ABL Agent, on the account of the issuing ABL Lenders, an issuance fee of 0.125% for any issued Letters of Credit.
The Term Credit Agreement provides for term loans to us in the aggregate principal amount of $200 million. Proceeds from the Term Credit Agreement were reduced by a $12.0 million original issue discount, which is presented as a reduction of the Term Credit Agreement on our consolidated balance sheet and is being amortized to interest expense over the life of the term loan.
On February 20, 2020, pursuant to the terms of the Amendment No. 1 (the "First Amendment") to the Term Credit Agreement, we, the administrative agent and the ABL lenders agreed to modify certain terms of the Term Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) increase the interest rate applicable to the term loans under the Term Credit Agreement (a) in the case of Eurodollar loans, from the adjusted LIBO rate plus 6.50% to the adjusted LIBO rate plus 8.00%, and (b) in the case of alternate base rate loans, from the alternate base rate plus 5.50% to the alternate base rate plus 7.00%; (ii) increase the maximum total leverage ratio permitted from 1.50 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter to (a) 2.75 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter ending April 4, 2020, July 4, 2020, October 3, 2020 and January 2, 2021, (b) 2.25 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter ending April 3, 2021, July 3, 2021 and October 2, 2021, and (c) 1.50 to 1.00 as of the last day of each subsequent fiscal quarter; (iii) limit the amount of borrowings in aggregate principal amount at any time outstanding under the Revolving Facility, to the lesser of the borrowing base thereunder and $200 million; (iv) extend the applicable periods for certain prepayment fees, so that if we voluntarily prepay the term loans prior to February 20, 2022, or if we incur certain indebtedness which results in a mandatory prepayment under the Term Credit Agreement prior to February 20, 2022, we are required to pay a prepayment fee of 2.00% with respect to the principal amount prepaid prior to February 20, 2021 and 1.00% with respect to the principal amount prepaid between February 21, 2021 and February 20, 2022; and (v) require us to pay the foregoing prepayment fee upon acceleration of the loans under the Term Credit Agreement. The First Amendment also modified the negative covenants and events of default in the Term Credit Agreement to reduce our flexibility with respect to certain matters. We incurred debt issue costs of $8.1 million in connection with the First Amendment.
On May 12, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to the Term Credit Agreement to extend the deadline for delivery of our unaudited quarterly financial statements and related deliverables for the fiscal quarter ended April 4, 2020 to the earlier of (i) July 6, 2020 and (ii) the date on which we were required to file with the SEC our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended April 4, 2020.
On June 5, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 3 (the “Third Amendment”) to the Term Credit Agreement to modify certain terms of the Term Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) increase the interest rate applicable to the term loans under the Term Credit Agreement (a) in the case of Eurodollar loans, from the adjusted LIBO rate plus 8.00% to the adjusted LIBO rate plus 8.50%, and (b) in the case of alternate base rate loans, from the alternate base rate plus 7.00% to the alternate base rate plus 7.50%; (ii) (a) require a $15.0 million principal prepayment at the time of the Third Amendment, (b) increase the quarterly amortization payment to be paid on September 30, 2020 to $8.0 million from $5.0 million, and (c) increase each quarterly amortization payment thereafter to $10.0 million; (iii) change provisions related to prepayment fees such that (a) prepayment fees will be waived for a period of 90 days following the date of the Third Amendment for prepayments in
connection with certain refinancings of the term loans and (b) prepayment fees will be 2% for a period of twelve months after such 90-day period, and 1% for next twelve-month period; (iv) reduce the minimum liquidity levels required to be maintained by us at the end of each fiscal month, through and including November 2020, from $150.0 million to $125.0 million; (v) waive the quarterly test for maximum total leverage ratio for fiscal year 2020 and the first three fiscal quarters of fiscal year 2021, and during such period require us to maintain specified minimum levels of EBITDA; and (vi) increase the amount of equity interests in certain “first tier” foreign subsidiaries that must be pledged as collateral securing the obligations under the Term Credit Agreement from 65% to 100% of such equity interests.
While the Third Amendment amended, among other things, certain of the financial covenants in the Term Credit Agreement to address the financial impact of COVID-19, any material further decreases to our revenues and cash flows, or our inability to successfully achieve its cost reduction targets, could result in us not meeting one or more of the amended financial covenants under our Term Credit Agreement within the next twelve months. The Term Credit Agreement requires an additional payment of $12.0 million in the first quarter in the fiscal year ending January 1, 2022 as an excess cash payment as calculated under the Term Credit Agreement. This payment is applied to reduce the subsequent scheduled repayment.
The ABL Borrowers have the right to request an increase to the commitments under the Revolving Facility or any subfacility in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $75.0 million in increments no less than $10.0 million, subject to certain terms and conditions as defined in the Revolving Facility, including that the Term Credit Agreement has been amended, restated or otherwise modified to permit any additional commitments.
The Revolving Facility is secured by guarantees by us and certain of our domestic subsidiaries. Additionally, we and such subsidiaries have granted liens on all or substantially all of our assets in order to secure the obligations under the Revolving Facility. In addition, the Swiss Borrower, the Hong Kong Borrower, the German Borrower and the Canadian Borrower, and the other non-U.S. borrowers from time to time party to the Revolving Facility are required to enter into security instruments with respect to all or substantially all of their assets that can be pledged under applicable local law, and certain of their respective subsidiaries may guarantee the respective non-U.S. obligations under the Revolving Facility.
The Revolving Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default, such as compliance with annual audited and quarterly unaudited financial statements disclosures. Upon an event of default, the ABL Agent will have the right to declare the revolving loans and other obligations outstanding immediately due and payable and all commitments immediately terminated or reduced, subject to cure periods and grace periods set forth in the Revolving Facility. A payment default under the Revolving Facility triggers a cross default under the Term Credit Agreement.
The Term Credit Agreement is secured by guarantees by us and certain of our domestic subsidiaries. Additionally, we and such subsidiaries have granted liens on all or substantially all of our assets in order to secure the obligations under the Term Credit Agreement.
The Term Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default such as compliance with annual audited and quarterly unaudited financial statements disclosures. Upon an event of default, the Term Agent will have the right to declare the term loans and other obligations outstanding immediately due and payable and all commitments immediately terminated or reduced, subject to cure periods and grace periods set forth in the Term Credit Agreement.
The obligations under the Revolving Facility and the Term Credit Agreement are governed by a customary intercreditor agreement (the “Intercreditor Agreement”). The Intercreditor Agreement specifies that (i) the Term Credit Agreement is secured by (a) a perfected first priority security interest in U.S. fixed assets and (b) a perfected second priority security interest in the U.S. liquid assets and accounts receivable, and (ii) the Revolving Facility is secured by (a) a perfected first priority security interest in the U.S. liquid assets and accounts receivable and (b) a perfected second priority security interest in U.S. fixed assets.
During fiscal year 2020, we had net payments of $48.0 million under the Term Credit Agreement at an average annual interest rate of 9.7%. Additionally, we had net borrowings of $70.3 million under the Revolving Facility during fiscal year 2020 at an average interest rate of 1.8%. As of January 2, 2021, we had $152.0 million outstanding under the Term Credit Agreement and $98.3 million outstanding under the Revolving Facility. As of January 2, 2021, we had unamortized debt issuance costs of $17.6 million and an unamortized original issue discount of $7.4 million, which reduce the corresponding debt liability. In addition, we had $2.7 million of outstanding standby letters of credit at January 2, 2021. Amounts available under the Revolving Facility are reduced by any amounts outstanding under standby letters of credit. As of January 2, 2021, we had $42.1 million available for borrowing under the Revolving Facility. At January 2, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt covenants related to all our debt agreements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table identifies our contractual obligations as of January 2, 2021 (in thousands):
____________________________________________
(1)Consists of borrowings, excluding contractual interest payments, unamortized debt issuance costs of $17.6 million and original issue discount of $7.4 million.
(2)Consists of estimated interest payments under the Term Credit Agreement and Revolving Facility.
(3)Consists primarily of minimum royalty commitments under exclusive licenses to manufacture watches and jewelry under trademarks not owned by us. However, these minimum royalty commitments do not include amounts owed pursuant to various license and design service agreements under which we are obligated to pay the licensors a percentage of our net sales of these licensed products.
(4)Payments shown include interest.
(5)Consists primarily of open non-cancelable purchase orders.
(6)Management has only included its current ASC 740 liability in the table above. Long-term amounts of $16.1 million have been excluded because the payment timing cannot be reasonably estimated.
(7)Pension obligations of $15.7 million and deferred compensation liabilities of $4.4 million have been excluded because the payment timing cannot be reasonably estimated.
(8)The contingent consideration liability of $1.9 million related to Fossil Accessories South Africa Pty. Ltd. has been excluded because the payment timing cannot be reasonably estimated.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are the guarantor for a 2.0 million Swiss franc credit facility agreement entered into by Swiss Technology Components Ltd. ("STC"), our equity method investee. We are obligated to pay up to 2.2 million Swiss francs in the event of default by STC.
There are no other off balance sheet arrangements other than those disclosed in Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our results for fiscal years 2020, 2019 or 2018; however, our business could be affected by inflation in the future.
Selected Quarterly Consolidated Financial Data
The table below sets forth selected quarterly consolidated financial information. The information is derived from our unaudited consolidated financial statements and includes all normal and recurring adjustments that management considers necessary for a fair statement of results for such periods. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period. Certain line items presented in the tables below, when aggregated, may not agree with the corresponding line items on our consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss) for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 due to rounding (in thousands, except percentage and per share data).
_______________________________________________
(1) Included a $2.5 million impairment charge, excluding taxes, related to our MICHELE® trade name.
(2) Included a $21.6 million gain, excluding taxes, on the sale of our intellectual property to Google, Inc.
(3) Included a $16.6 million impairment charge, excluding taxes, related to our Skagen trade name.
While the majority of our products are not seasonal in nature, a significant portion of our net sales and operating income is generally derived in the second half of the fiscal year. Our third and fourth quarters, which include the "back to school" and holiday seasons, have historically generated a significant portion of our annual operating income. Connected products appear to be more seasonal than traditional products which may further impact our operational performance in the third and fourth quarters as compared to the first half of the year. The amount of net sales and operating income generated during the first quarter is affected by the levels of inventory held by retailers at the end of the holiday season, as well as general economic conditions and other factors beyond our control. In general, lower levels of inventory held by retailers at the end of the holiday season may have a positive impact on our net sales and operating income in the first quarter of the following fiscal year as a result of higher levels of restocking orders placed by retailers.
As we expand our e-commerce business and improve productivity in our retail store base, sales from the direct to consumer distribution channel may increase as a percentage of the total sales mix. Based upon the historical seasonality of direct to consumer sales, we believe this expansion could result in higher levels of profitability in the fourth quarter and lower levels of profitability in the first and second quarters when, due to seasonality, it is more difficult to leverage retail store four
wall operating costs and back office expenses against a lower level of sales productivity. In addition, new product launches would generally augment the sales and operating expense levels in the quarter the product launch takes place. The results of operations for a particular quarter may also vary due to a number of factors, including retail, economic and monetary conditions, timing of orders or holidays, the timing of investments and the mix of products sold by us.