ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, is intended to provide a reader of our consolidated financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes and other financial data included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review Item 1A of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a leading independent provider of payment processing and technology solutions in the United States based on total volume of payments processed. We have achieved our leadership position through decades of solving business and operational challenges facing our customers. For our software partners, we offer a single integration to an end-to-end payments offering, a proprietary gateway and a robust suite of technology solutions to enhance the value of their software and simplify payment acceptance. For our merchants, we provide a seamless, unified consumer experience as an alternative to relying on multiple providers to accept payments and utilize technology in their businesses.
At the heart of our business is our payments platform. Our payments platform is a full suite of integrated payment products and services that can be used across multiple channels (in-store, online, mobile and tablet- based) and industry verticals, including:
•
end-to-end payment processing for a broad range of payment types;
•
merchant acquiring;
•
proprietary omni-channel gateway capable of multiple methods of mobile, contactless and QR code-based payments;
•
complementary software integrations;
•
full ecommerce capabilities, including web-store design, hosting, shopping cart management and fulfillment integrations;
•
integrated and mobile POS solutions;
•
security and risk management solutions; and
•
reporting and analytical tools.
In addition, we offer innovative technology solutions that go beyond payment processing. Some of our solutions are developed in-house, such as business intelligence and POS software, while others are powered by our network of complementary third-party applications. Our focus on innovation combined with our product-driven culture enables us to create scalable technology solutions that benefit from an extensive library of intellectual property.
We have a partner-centric distribution approach. We market and sell our solutions through a diversified network of over 7,000 software partners, which consists of ISVs and VARs. ISVs are technology providers that develop commerce-enabling software suites with which they can bundle our payments platform. VARs are organizations that provide distribution support for ISVs and act as trusted and localized service providers to merchants by providing them with software and services. Together, our ISVs and VARs provide us immense distribution scale and provide our merchants with front-line service and support.
Our end-to-end payments offering combines our payments platform, including our proprietary gateway and breadth of software integrations, and our suite of technology solutions to create a compelling value proposition for our merchants. Our end-to end payment volume was $24.3 billion, $22.1 billion and $16.1 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. This end-to-end payment volume contributed approximately 61%, 57% and 56% of gross revenue less network fees for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Our merchants range from small to medium sized businesses, or SMBs, to large enterprises across numerous verticals in which we have deep industry expertise, including food and beverage, lodging and leisure.
Revision of Previously Issued Financial Statements
The accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations gives effect to the revision of our previously reported consolidated financial statements for fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. See Note 2 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent acquisitions
VenueNext
On March 3, 2021, we acquired VenueNext, a leader in integrated payments solutions in sporting arenas and event complexes, for approximately $41.5 million in cash and $30.5 million in shares of our Class A common stock.
3dcart
On November 5, 2020, we completed the purchase of all the outstanding equity interest of Infomart2000 Corp., doing business as 3dcart, for $39.9 million in cash, net of cash acquired, and $19.2 million in shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, or the 3dcart Acquisition. 3dcart is an ecommerce software platform serving businesses of all sizes in a wide range of industries. Since the acquisition, 3dcart has been rebranded as Shift4Shop to align the ecommerce offering with Shift4’s existing ecosystem of services. The acquisition expands our omni-channel transaction capabilities and will enable Shift4Shop merchants to augment their ecommerce platform experience with our secure integrated payments solutions. In addition, our indirect sales distribution network will be able to offer Shift4Shop’s turnkey ecommerce capabilities to our new and existing POS and payments customers.
Hospitality technology vendor
On October 16, 2020, we acquired a hospitality technology vendor, for approximately $9.9 million in cash, net of cash acquired. This acquisition enables the boarding of the vendor’s customers on our end-to-end acquiring solution and empowers our distribution partners to sign the vendor’s customer accounts and leverage the combined expertise to handle all aspects of installation, service, and support.
Merchant Link
In August 2019, we completed the acquisition of Merchant-Link, LLC, or Merchant Link, a leading provider of payment gateway and data security solutions, and which primarily services hotels and restaurants in the United States, or the Merchant Link Acquisition. The Merchant Link Acquisition brings to us a highly complementary customer base, with a significant portion of the customers using software already integrated on our gateway. This overlap presented us with a substantial opportunity for improved share of wallet and cost efficiencies.
Recent developments
Advertising and marketing
In the first quarter of 2021, we expect to incur a significant amount of expenses related to the integration of 3dcart as it is rebranded as Shift4Shop. These expenses are anticipated to be nonrecurring in nature.
Inspiration4
In February 2021, we accepted the transfer of a seat onboard Inspiration4, the first all-civilian mission to space, from our Founder. The seat was transferred to us at no cost and will be awarded to an entrepreneur through a contest being run us in the first quarter of 2021. We are currently evaluating any impact this may have on the first quarter 2021 financial results.
SpaceX
In February 2021, we committed up to $27.5 million to purchase shares of Space Exploration Technologies Corp., or SpaceX, which designs, manufactures, and launches advanced rockets, spacecraft, and satellites.
Initial public offering and concurrent private placement
In June 2020, we completed our IPO of 17,250,000 shares of Class A common stock, including 2,250,000 shares pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a price to the public of $23.00 per share. Upon completion of the IPO, we received net proceeds of approximately $362.6 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $34.2 million. Concurrently with the IPO, we also completed a $100.0 million private placement of 4,625,346 shares of Class C common stock to Rook. The total net proceeds from the IPO and concurrent private placement were approximately $462.6 million. Shift4 Payments, Inc. used the total proceeds to purchase newly-issued LLC Interests, from Shift4 Payments, LLC. Shift4 Payments, LLC used these amounts received from Shift4 Payments, Inc. to repay certain existing indebtedness and for general corporate purposes.
Reorganization Transactions
The historical results of operations discussed in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are those of (1) Shift4 Payments, LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries for periods prior to the Reorganization Transactions on June 4, 2020 and (2) Shift4 Payments, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries for periods beginning on or following the Reorganization Transactions on June 4, 2020. The historical results of operations of Shift4 Payments, LLC prior to the completion of the Reorganization Transactions, including the IPO and concurrent private placement, do not reflect certain items that we expect will affect our results of operations and financial condition after giving effect to the Reorganization Transactions and the use of proceeds from the IPO and concurrent private placement.
The Reorganization Transactions resulted in Shift4 Payments, Inc. becoming the sole managing member of Shift4 Payments, LLC. As the sole managing member of Shift4 Payments, LLC, we operate and control all of the business and affairs of Shift4 Payments, LLC. Accordingly, we consolidate the financial results of Shift4 Payments, LLC, and report a noncontrolling interest related to the interests in Shift4 Payments, LLC held by the Continuing Equity Owners on our consolidated financial statements.
After consummation of the IPO, Shift4 Payments, Inc. became subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income of Shift4 Payments, LLC and is taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. In addition to tax expenses, we also have and will continue to incur public company expenses related to our operations, plus payment obligations under the TRA, which we expect to be significant. We intend for Shift4 Payments, LLC to make to make distributions to us in an amount sufficient to allow us to pay our tax obligations and operating expenses, including distributions to fund any payments due under the TRA.
Follow-on Offerings
In September 2020, we completed the September Follow-on Offering in which we issued and sold 2,000,000 shares of our Class A common stock, and Searchlight and a Former Equity Owner, which we refer to together as the selling stockholders, sold 7,856,373 and 143,627 shares of Class A common stock, respectively, at a price to the public of $48.50 per share. In October 2020, Searchlight and a former equity owner sold an additional 1,473,070 and 26,930 shares of Class A common stock, respectively, pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. We received net proceeds from the September Follow-on Offering of $93.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $3.9 million. Searchlight has agreed to reimburse us for its allocable share of costs of the September Follow-on Offering. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of Class A common stock by the selling stockholders. The total net proceeds from the September Follow-on Offering were used to purchase newly-issued LLC Interests directly from Shift4 Payments, LLC at a price per unit equal to the price to the public of Class A common stock in the September Follow-on Offering, less underwriting discounts and commissions. Shift4 Payments, LLC used these amounts received from Shift4 Payments, Inc. for general corporate purposes.
In connection with the September Follow-on Offering, the Company also completed the following transactions:
•
The redemption by Searchlight of 4,319,532 LLC Interests in exchange for 4,319,532 shares of Class A common stock sold, and an immediate cancellation of an equivalent number of shares of Class B common stock.
•
The conversion of 5,009,911 shares of Class C common stock held by Searchlight to 5,009,911 shares of Class A common stock sold.
In December 2020, we completed the December Follow-on Offering in which Searchlight sold 9,200,000 shares of our Class A common stock in a registered public offering at a price to the public of $55.50 per share. We did not sell any shares of Class A common stock in the December Follow-on Offering and did not receive any of the proceeds from, nor incur any expenses for, the sale of shares by Searchlight in the December Follow-on Offering. Searchlight has agreed to reimburse us for the costs of the December Follow-on Offering.
In connection with the December Follow-on Offering, we also completed the following transactions:
•
The redemption by Searchlight of 4,259,600 LLC Interests in exchange for 4,259,600 shares of Class A common stock sold, and an immediate cancellation of an equivalent number of shares of Class B common stock.
•
The conversion of 4,940,400 shares of Class C common stock held by Searchlight to 4,940,400 shares of Class A common stock sold.
Senior Notes Offering - 2026 Notes
In October 2020, Shift4 Payments, LLC and Shift4 Payments Finance Sub, Inc. issued an aggregate principal amount of $450.0 million 4.625% Senior Notes due 2026, or the 2026 Notes, in an offering to qualified institutional buyers exempt from registration under the Securities Act. We received net proceeds, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and estimated offering expenses, of approximately $442.8 million from the offering of the 2026 Notes. The net proceeds of the 2026 Notes offering, together with cash on hand, were used to repay all indebtedness outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan Facility.
The 2026 Notes will mature on November 1, 2026, and accrue interest at a rate of 4.625% per year. Interest on the 2026 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on each May 1 and November 1, commencing on May 1, 2021.
Convertible Notes Offering - 2025 Notes
In December 2020, Shift4 Payments, Inc. issued an aggregate principal amount of $690.0 million of convertible senior notes due 2025, or the 2025 Notes, in an offering to qualified institutional buyers exempt from registration under the Securities Act. We received net proceeds, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and estimated offering expenses, of approximately $673.6 million from the 2025 Notes Offering. The net proceeds of the 2025 Notes Offering, together with cash on hand, will be used for general corporate purposes. The 2025 Notes do not bear regular interest and will mature on December 15, 2025 unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. The conversion rate for the 2025 Notes will initially be 12.4262 shares of Class A common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2025 Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $80.48 per share of Class A common stock), subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of specified events.
Amended and Restated Revolving Credit Facility
On January 29, 2021, Shift4 Payments, LLC amended and restated its First Lien Credit Agreement and increased the borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility to $100.0 million. The Revolving Credit Facility matures on January 29, 2026 or, if greater than $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of Shift4 Payments, LLC’s convertible notes remains outstanding on September 15, 2025, on that date. The Revolving Credit Facility requires periodic interest payments until maturity.
Loans incurred under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at our option at either the LIBO rate plus a margin ranging from 3.00% to 3.50% per year or the alternate base rate (the highest of the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%, or the prime rate announced from time to time in The Wall Street Journal) plus a margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.50% per year, or the Applicable Rate. The Applicable Rate varies depending on the Company’s total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The alternate base rate and the LIBO rate are each subject to a zero percent floor. In addition, we are required to pay a commitment fee under the Revolving Credit Facility in respect of the unutilized commitments thereunder at a rate ranging from 0.25% per year to 0.50% per year, in each case based on the total leverage ratio. We are also subject to customary letter of credit and agency fees.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The unprecedented and rapid spread of COVID-19 as well as the shelter-in-place orders, promotion of social distancing measures, restrictions to businesses deemed non-essential, and travel restrictions implemented throughout the United States have significantly impacted the restaurant and hospitality industries - verticals in which we have predominantly focused on over the last decade.
In response to these developments, we have implemented measures to focus on the safety of our employees, including implementing remote working capabilities, and to support our merchants as they shifted to take-out and delivery operations, while at the same time seeking to mitigate the impact on our financial position and operations.
We have also implemented new programs to help ease the burden for our merchants, encourage customers to support their local small businesses and restaurants, and incentivize new merchants to enroll in our end-to-end payment platform. Specifically, we have:
•
established www.shift4.com/situation in an effort to share data to educate political leaders and advocacy groups as to where aid needs to be prioritized;
•
released a gift card funding campaign to encourage consumers to support their favorite bars or restaurants by purchasing a gift card through our Shift4Cares.com website; and
•
implemented temporary fee waivers on certain products from March 2020 through June 2020 that did not have a material impact on financial performance.
Our business was not significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic until the latter part of March 2020, at which time our end-to-end payment volumes declined 70%. At that time, we took the following actions to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position:
•
furloughed approximately 25% of our employees. During the third quarter of 2020, we reinstated substantially all of our workforce and we are hiring in certain areas to accommodate new merchant onboarding;
•
accelerated approximately $30.0 million of annual expense reduction plans related to prior acquisitions, including the Merchant Link Acquisition;
•
re-prioritized our capital projects to defer certain non-essential improvements;
•
instituted a company-wide hiring freeze, which was lifted in August 2020; and
•
reduced salaries for management across the organization, which were fully reinstated as of October 2020.
Since late March when shelter-in-place, social distancing, the closing of non-essential businesses and other restrictive measures were first put in place across the United States, we have seen a significant recovery in our end-to-end payment volumes. End-to-end payment volumes for the fourth quarter of 2020 were over 12% higher than volumes in the fourth quarter of 2019 in a pre-COVID environment. While end-to-end payment volumes for the year ended December 31, 2020 have exceeded those for the year ended December 31, 2019, the ultimate impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our consolidated results of operations in future periods remains uncertain. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of these potential impacts to our business, consolidated results of operations, and liquidity. See “Risk Factors-Business risks-The recent novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, global pandemic has had and is expected to continue to have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.”
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs for at least the next twelve months, however, we continue to evaluate and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business can continue to operate during these uncertain times. We have evaluated the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial statements including, but not limited to, the impairment of goodwill, intangible assets and equipment for lease under our software-as-a-service or SaaS arrangements.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security, or CARES, Act was signed into law. The CARES Act provides a substantial stimulus and assistance package intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including tax relief and government loans, grants and investments. The CARES Act includes, among other things, provisions relating to payroll tax credits and deferrals, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credits and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. Pursuant to the CARES Act, in June 2020, we submitted a carryback claim related to our net operating loss carryforward generated in 2018, which provided a cash tax savings of $0.6 million and is reflected in the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. We will continue to monitor any effects that may result from the CARES Act or other government relief programs that are made available in the future.
Factors impacting our business and results of operations
In general, our results of operations are impacted by factors such as adoption of software integrated payment solutions, continued investment in core capabilities, on-going pursuit of strategic acquisitions, and macro-level economic trends.
Increased adoption of software-integrated payments. We primarily generate revenue through volume-based payments and transaction fees and subscription fees for software and technology solutions. We expect to grow this volume by attracting new software partners through our market-leading and innovative solutions. These software partners have proven to be an effective and efficient way of acquiring new merchants and servicing these relationships.
Continued focus on the sale of our end-to-end payments offering and resulting revenue mix shift. Our customers utilize our comprehensive solutions to solve a variety of business challenges. Currently, a large percentage of our merchant base uses only our proprietary gateway. As these merchants adopt our end-to-end payment solutions, our revenue per merchant and merchant retention are expected to increase.
Mix of our merchant base. The revenue contribution of our merchant portfolio is affected by several factors, including the amount of payment volume processed per merchant, the industry vertical in which the merchant operates, and the number of solutions implemented by the merchant. As the size and sophistication of our merchants change, we may experience shifts in the average revenue per merchant and the weighted average pricing of the portfolio.
Ability to attract and retain software partners. A key pillar of our Shift4 Model is our partner-centric distribution approach. We work with our software partners who are essential to helping us grow and serve our merchant base. Maintaining our product leadership and continued investment in innovative technology solutions is critical to attracting and retaining software partners.
Investment in product, distribution and operations. We make significant investments in both new product development and existing product enhancement, such as mobile point-of-sale and cloud enablement for our software partners’ existing systems. New product features and functionality are brought to market through varied distribution and promotional activities including collaborative efforts with industry leading software providers, trade shows, and customer conferences. Further, we will continue to invest in operational support in order to maintain service levels expected by our merchant customers. We believe these investments in product development and software integrations will lead to long-term growth and profitability. For example, numerous new products and enhancements that we introduced throughout 2020, continue to allow our merchants the ability to enhance the customer experience in a more dynamic commerce environment through contactless payment methods and QR code based mobile payment technologies.
Pursuit of strategic acquisitions. From time to time, we may pursue acquisitions as part of our ongoing growth strategy. While these acquisitions are intended to add long-term value, in the short term they may add redundant operating expenses or additional carrying costs until the underlying value is unlocked.
Economic conditions and resulting consumer spending trends. Changes in macro-level consumer spending trends, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, could affect the amount of volumes processed on our platform, thus resulting in fluctuations to our revenue streams. Further, consumer spending habits are subject to seasonal fluctuations that could cause varied revenue results across the quarters.
Key financial definitions
The following briefly describes the components of revenue and expenses as presented in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Gross revenue consists primarily of payments-based revenue and subscription and other revenues:
Payments-based revenue includes fees for payment processing services and gateway services. Payment processing fees are primarily driven as a percentage of payment volume. They may also have a fixed fee, a minimum monthly usage fee and a fee based on transactions. Gateway services, data encryption and tokenization are primarily driven by per transaction fees as well as monthly usage fees.
Subscription and other revenues include software as a service, or SaaS, fees for point-of-sale systems provided to merchants and SaaS fees for our Shift4Shop ecommerce platform. Point-of-sale SaaS fees are assessed based on the type and quantity of point-of-sale systems deployed to the merchant. This includes statement fees, fees for our proprietary business intelligence software, annual fees, regulatory compliance fees and other miscellaneous services such as help desk support and warranties on equipment. Shift4Shop SaaS fees are assessed based upon the selected plan. Subscription and other revenues also includes revenue derived from third party residuals, automated teller machine services, and fees charged for technology support.
Cost of sales consists of interchange and processing fees, residual commissions, equipment and other costs of sales:
Interchange and processing fees represent payments to card issuing banks and assessments paid to card associations based on transaction processing volume. These also include fees incurred by third-parties for data transmission and settlement of funds, such as processors and sponsor banks.
Residual commissions represent monthly payments to software partners. These costs are typically based on a percentage of payment-based revenue.
Equipment represents our costs of devices that are purchased by the merchant.
Other costs of sales includes amortization of capitalized software development costs, capitalized software, acquired technology and capitalized customer acquisition costs. It also includes incentives, shipping and handling costs related to the delivery of devices, and through June 30, 2020, contains other contract fulfillment costs as well as equipment provided under our warranty program that is included with the monthly SaaS fee. Subsequent to June 30, 2020, other contract fulfilment costs and equipment under our warranty program included with the monthly SaaS fee were capitalized as equipment for lease. Capitalized software development costs are amortized using the straight-line method on a product-by-product basis over the estimated useful life of the software. Capitalized software, acquired technology and capitalized acquisition costs are amortized on a straight-line basis in accordance with our accounting policies.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation, benefits and other expenses associated with corporate management, finance, human resources, shared services, information technology and other activities.
Depreciation and amortization expense consists of depreciation and amortization expenses related to merchant relationships, trademarks and trade names, residual commission buyouts, equipment, leasehold improvements, and other intangible assets and property, plant and equipment. We depreciate and amortize our assets on a straight-line basis in accordance with our accounting policies. Leasehold improvements are depreciated over the lesser of the estimated life of the leasehold improvement or the remaining lease term. Maintenance and repairs, which do not extend the useful life of the respective assets, are charged to expense as incurred. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives which range from two years to twenty years.
Professional fees consists of costs incurred for accounting, tax, legal, and consulting services.
Advertising and marketing expenses relate to costs incurred to participate in industry tradeshows and dealer conferences, advertising initiatives to build brand awareness, and expenses to fulfill loyalty program rewards earned by software partners.
Restructuring expenses relate to strategic initiatives we have taken that include, but are not limited to, severance or separation costs and other exit and disposal costs. These expenses are typically not reflective of our ongoing operations.
Transaction-related expenses relate to costs that are not capitalizable associated with issuing the 2026 Notes. These expenses are typically not reflective of our ongoing operations.
Other operating (income) expense, net consists of other operating items.
Loss on extinguishment of debt represents a loss recorded for the unamortized capitalized financing costs associated with the debt prepayment made in June 2020 to the First Lien Term Loan Facility and Second Lien Term Loan Facility, as well as the debt refinancing in October 2020.
Other income, net primarily consists of other non-operating items.
Interest expense consists of interest costs incurred on our borrowings and amortization of capitalized financing costs.
Income tax benefit (provision) represents federal, state and local taxes based on income in multiple domestic jurisdictions.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests arises from net loss from the non-owned portion of businesses where we have a controlling interest but less than 100% ownership. This represents the noncontrolling interests in Shift4 Payments, LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries, which is comprised of the income allocated to Continuing LLC Owners as a result of their proportional ownership of LLC Interests.
Comparison of results for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented.
(1)
Includes the net loss for the period January 1, 2020 through June 4, 2020, the date the SEC declared effective the Company’s Registration Statement on S-1 filed in connection with its IPO. See Note 1 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Gross Revenue
Gross revenue was $766.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $731.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $35.5 million or 4.9%. Gross revenue is comprised of payments-based revenue and subscription and other revenues.
Payments-based revenue was $684.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $643.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $40.6 million or 6.3%. The increase in payments-based revenue is primarily driven by an increase in end-to-end payment volume of $2.2 billion, or 9.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic impacted our end-to-end payment volumes beginning mid-March when shelter-in-place, social distancing, the closing of non-essential businesses and other restrictive measures were first put in place across the United States. Since late March, we have seen a significant recovery in our end-to-end payment volumes, including growth during the fourth quarter of 2020 versus the prior year. In addition, the Merchant Link Acquisition in August 2019 contributed an additional $7.0 million in gateway service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Subscription and other revenues were $82.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $87.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $5.1 million or 5.8%. The decrease was due to hardware provided under our SaaS arrangements being accounted for as operating leases, effective June 30, 2020, whereby revenue is recognized monthly, resulting in lower hardware revenue of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, when it was recognized at the time of shipment. In addition, customer billing revenue declined $4.7 million primarily due to temporary fee waivers of $1.9 million on certain products from March 2020 through June 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a decline in hardware revenue and software license sales of $2.3 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was partially offset by the Merchant Link Acquisition in August 2019, which contributed $5.2 million more to subscription and other revenues in year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Network Fees
Network fees were $443.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $425.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $18.0 million or 4.2%. This increase is correlated with the increase in end-to-end payment volume as described above.
Gross revenue less network fees was $323.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $305.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $17.5 million or 5.7%. The increase in gross revenue less network fees is largely correlated with the increase in end-to-end payment volume. See “-Key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures” for a reconciliation of gross profit to gross revenue less network fees.
Other costs of sales
Other costs of sales was $145.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $132.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $13.1 million, or 9.9%. This increase was primarily a result of:
•
an increase in higher residual commissions of $8.6 million driven by gross revenue less network fees;
•
the Merchant Link Acquisition in August 2019, which contributed $6.0 million more to other costs of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019;
•
higher capitalized acquisition cost amortization of $5.5 million related to deal bonuses;
•
higher capitalized software development amortization of $1.7 million; partially offset by,
•
the impact of modifying the terms and conditions of our SaaS arrangements and updating our operational procedures to account for our hardware as operating leases, which resulted in a decline of $9.1 million in costs of sales. Effective June 30, 2020, equipment leased to merchants is capitalized as a fixed asset, whereas, prior to June 30, 2020, these arrangements were accounted for as sales-type leases and expensed when deployed.
Operating expenses
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $180.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $117.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $62.9 million or 53.7%. The increase was primarily due to equity-based compensation expense of $66.2 million, partially offset by $21.6 million in non-cash adjustments for contingent liability valuations and deferred compensation arrangements. See Note 23 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on equity-based compensation and Note 14 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on these contingent liabilities. In addition, general and administrative expenses increased $11.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the Merchant Link Acquisition in August 2019.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $51.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $40.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $11.7 million or 29.1%. The increase was primarily due to hardware provided under our SaaS arrangements being accounted for as operating leases, effective June 30, 2020, while previously they were accounted for as sales-type leases. Depreciation expense incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to these operating leases were $9.8 million. See Notes 4 and 10 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the change to the terms and conditions of our SaaS arrangements.
Professional fees. Professional fees were $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.3 million or 2.9%. The increase was due to increased fees related to public company requirements and acquisition-related costs, partially offset by higher professional fees incurred in 2019 resulting from costs associated with activities to prepare for the IPO.
Advertising and marketing. Advertising and marketing expenses were $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.3 million or 36.5%. The decrease was primarily due to postponing or cancelling trade shows in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restructuring expenses. Restructuring expenses were $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $3.4 million or 89.5%. The decrease in restructuring expenses is a result of separation costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2019 associated with the integration of the Merchant Link Acquisition in August 2019. See Note 5 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on restructuring expenses.
Transaction-related expenses. Transaction-related expenses were $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These represent financing fees incurred for the debt refinancing in October 2020, which was accounted for as a debt modification.
Other operating (income) expense, net
Other operating (income) expense, net includes the impact of modifying the terms and conditions of our SaaS arrangements and updating our operational procedures. As a result, beginning June 30, 2020, hardware provided under our SaaS agreements is accounted for as an operating
lease, whereas prior to June 30, 2020, these arrangements were accounted for as sales-type leases. An adjustment of $12.4 million was recorded in the second quarter of 2020 to reflect the impact of the lease modifications.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
A loss on extinguishment of debt, representing unamortized capitalized financing costs, was incurred of $16.6 million comprised of $7.1 million in connection with the pre-payment on the First Lien Term Loan Facility and the full repayment on the Second Lien Term Loan Facility in June 2020 and $9.5 million associated with the debt refinancing in October 2020. See Note 12 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Other income, net
Other income, net was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.0 million for year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.4 million or 40.0%. The decrease is primarily driven by unearned contingent liabilities associated with our residual commission buyout agreements.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $40.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $11.3 million or 21.9%. This decrease in interest expense was primarily due to the pre-payments for the First Lien and Second Lien Term Loan Facilities, as well as the repayment of the Revolving Credit Facility, in June 2020, which impacted interest expense by approximately $11.0 million. In addition, the debt refinancing in October 2020 reduced the interest rate on our First Lien Term Loan Facility from 5.50% to 4.625% on the 2026 Notes, which reduced interest expense by $1.3 million. This was partially offset by the amortization of the debt discount on the 2025 Notes of $1.9 million, additional borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan Facility from refinancing of our outstanding indebtedness in October 2019 and additional borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility during 2020 prior to the pre-payments.
Income tax provision
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 2.1%, compared to the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 of (3.1)%.
The 2020 income tax benefit was different than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to the loss allocated to the noncontrolling interest, changes in the valuation allowances in the U.S. and recording a tax benefit of $0.6 million for a net operating loss carryback at Shift4 Corporation which was allowed due to the CARES Act. The 2019 income tax expense was different than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to Shift4 Payments, LLC being treated as a partnership and not paying income tax. The change in the effective tax rate between the periods was primarily a result of a mix of earnings between entities, the 2020 net operating loss carryback due to the CARES Act and the change in the noncontrolling interest and valuation allowance adjustment.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests of Shift4 Payments, LLC was $(93.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. There was no net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests of Shift4 Payments, LLC for the years ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth the consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented.
Gross Revenue
Gross revenue was $731.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $560.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $170.8 million or 30.5%. Gross revenue is comprised of payments-based revenue and subscription and other revenues.
Payments-based revenue was $643.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $485.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $158.4 million or 32.6%. The increase in payments-based revenue was driven by an increase in end-to-end payment volume of $6.0 billion or 37.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Subscription and other revenues were $87.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $75.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $12.4 million or 16.4%. The increase in subscription and other revenues was driven by the Merchant Link Acquisition contributing $4.8 million in 2019, $4.4 million from enhanced services offered in 2019 and $2.6 million as a result of adopting ASC 606 as of January 1, 2019.
Network Fees
Network fees were $425.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $307.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $118.0 million or 38.3%. This increase is correlated with the increase in end-to-end payment volume as described above.
Gross revenue less network fees was $305.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $252.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $52.8 million or 20.9%. The increase in gross revenue less network fees is correlated with the increase in end-to-end payment volume. See “-Key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures” for a reconciliation of gross profit to gross revenue less network fees.
Other costs of sales
Other costs of sales was $132.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $112.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $20.1 million, or 17.9%. This increase was primarily a result of:
•
higher gross revenue less network fees driving higher residual commissions of $11.4 million;
•
the Merchant Link Acquisition, which contributed $2.9 million more to other costs of sales in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018;
•
higher capitalized acquisition cost amortization of $5.1 million related to deal bonuses;
•
as a result of the 2019 adoption of ASC 606, equipment that was previously capitalized is now expensed under the current contract terms. In 2018, amortization of equipment capitalized as acquisition costs on the consolidated balance sheets was $9.4 million, while in 2019, the equipment expensed was $13.7 million, driving an increase in cost of sales of $4.3 million; partially offset by,
•
an impairment charge of $4.8 million in 2018 for certain acquired technology that was not placed in service.
Operating expenses
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $117.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $37.3 million or 46.7%. The increase was primarily due to a change of $15.8 million in non-cash adjustments for contingent liability valuations as well as a $6.7 million increase in employee-related expenses in 2019 as a result of continued growth and expansion of the Company and in anticipation of our initial public offering. In addition, general and administrative expenses increased $12.7 million in 2019 due to the Merchant Link Acquisition.
Professional fees. Professional fees were $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $3.0 million or 40.5%. The increase was primarily due to higher professional fees incurred in 2019 resulting from nonrecurring costs associated with activities to prepare for our IPO.
Restructuring expenses. Restructuring expenses were $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $20.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $16.3 million or 81.1%. The one-time restructuring expenses incurred in 2018 were separation costs primarily associated with a historical acquisition. The restructuring expenses incurred in 2019 are separation costs associated with the integration as a result of the Merchant Link Acquisition. See Note 5 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on restructuring expenses.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $47.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $4.5 million or 9.6%. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to an increase of $90.0 million in borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan Facility and additional borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility in 2019.
Income tax provision
The income tax provision was $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to an income tax benefit of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a change of $5.8 million. This change was primarily due to a pretax book income from Shift4 Corporation of $6.7 million in 2019 compared to a pretax book loss from Shift4 Corporation of $18.7 million in 2018. The change in pretax book income of $25.4 million for Shift4 Corporation was primarily a result of restructuring charges of $18.3 million recorded in 2018.
Net loss
Net loss was $56.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $55.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures
The following table sets forth our key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures for the periods presented.
End-to-end payment volume
End-to-end payment volume is defined as the total dollar amount of card payments that we authorize and settle on behalf of our merchants. This volume does not include volume processed through our gateway-only merchants.
Gross revenue less network fees, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA
We use supplemental measures of our performance which are derived from our consolidated financial information but which are not presented in our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures include: gross revenue less network fees, which includes interchange and assessment fees; earnings before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization, or EBITDA; and adjusted EBITDA. Gross revenue less network fees represents a key performance metric that management uses to measure changes in the mix and value derived from our customer base as we continue to execute our strategy to expand our reach to serve larger, complex merchants. Adjusted EBITDA is the primary financial performance measure used by management to evaluate its business and monitor results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA further adjusted for certain non-cash and other non-recurring items that management believes are not indicative of ongoing operations. These adjustments include acquisition, restructuring and integration costs, equity-based compensation expense and other nonrecurring items.
We use non-GAAP financial measures to supplement financial information presented on a GAAP basis. We believe that excluding certain items from our GAAP results allows management to better understand our consolidated financial performance from period to period and better project our future consolidated financial performance as forecasts are developed at a level of detail different from that used to prepare GAAP-based financial measures. Moreover, we believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide our stakeholders with useful information to help them evaluate our operating results by facilitating an enhanced understanding of our operating performance and enabling them to make more meaningful period to period comparisons. There are limitations to the use of the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this report. Our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
The non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered as indicators of performance in isolation from or as a substitute for net income (loss) prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should be read only in conjunction with financial information presented on a GAAP basis. Reconciliations of gross revenue less network fees, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure are presented below. We encourage you to review the reconciliations in conjunction with the presentation of the non-GAAP financial measures for each of the periods presented. In future fiscal periods, we may exclude such items and may incur income and expenses similar to these excluded items.
Reconciliations of gross revenue less network fees, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA
The tables below provide reconciliations of gross profit to gross revenue less network fees and net loss on a consolidated basis for the periods presented to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA.
Gross revenue less network fees:
EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA:
(a)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, consists primarily of transaction expenses incurred related to the two acquisitions in the fourth quarter of 2020 of $2.1 million, change of control liabilities as a result of the IPO of $3.8 million, deferred compensation arrangements of $2.1 million, severance costs of $1.2 million, restructuring expenses of $0.4 million and transaction expenses of $0.8 million related to the October 2020 debt refinancing, partially offset by fair value adjustments to contingent liabilities of $8.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, consists primarily of adjustments to contingent liabilities of $15.5 million, one-time professional fees of $6.7 million, restructuring expenses of $3.8 million, and deferred compensation arrangements of $0.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2018, consists primarily of restructuring expenses of
$20.1 million. See Notes 5 and 14 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the restructuring expenses and contingent liability adjustments, respectively.
(b)
Represents the equity-based compensation expense for restricted stock units, including employer taxes for vested RSUs. See Note 23 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on equity-based compensation.
(c)
Effective June 30, 2020, we modified the terms and conditions of our SaaS arrangements and updated operational procedures. As a result, beginning June 30, 2020, hardware provided under our SaaS agreements is accounted for as an operating lease, whereas prior to June 30, 2020, these arrangements were accounted for as sales-type leases. This adjustment of $12.4 million represents the one-time cumulative impact of modifying the contracts effective June 30, 2020. To provide comparability and consistency, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA would have been higher by $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 if these arrangements were accounted for as operating leases for those periods.
(d)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consists of a $16.6 million in losses on the extinguishment of debt associated with the debt pre-payments and $1.6 million for temporary fee waivers given on certain products from March 2020 through June 2020 as a result of COVID-19. See Note 12 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the losses on the extinguishment of debt. Also includes fees to the Continuing Equity Owners for consulting and managing services through the date of the IPO of $0.8 million, $2.0 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These fees are not required to be paid subsequent to the IPO. See Note 17 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about these related party transactions. The year ended December 31, 2018 also includes a one-time accrual of $2.3 million for cumulative unremitted sales and use tax related to years 2017 and prior.
Liquidity and capital resources
Overview
We have historically sourced our liquidity requirements primarily with cash flow from operations and, when needed, with borrowings under our Credit Facilities. The principal uses for liquidity have been debt service, capital expenditures (including research and development) and funds required to finance acquisitions. Given the impact the COVID-19 pandemic has had on the restaurant and hospitality industries, we continue to evaluate and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure we can continue to operate during these uncertain times.
We do not intend to pay cash dividends on our Class A common stock in the foreseeable future. Shift4 Payments, Inc. is a holding company that does not conduct any business operations of its own. As a result, Shift4 Payments, Inc.’s ability to pay cash dividends on its common stock, if any, is dependent upon cash dividends and distributions and other transfers from Shift4 Payments, LLC. The amounts available to Shift4 Payments, Inc. to pay cash dividends are subject to the covenants and distribution restrictions in its subsidiaries’ agreements governing its indebtedness, including covenants in such agreements providing that the payments of dividends or other distributions are subject to annual limitations based on our market capitalization.
The following table sets forth summary cash flow information for the periods presented.
(a)
Effective June 30, 2020, we modified the terms and conditions of our SaaS arrangements and updated our operational procedures. As a result, hardware provided to our merchants is accounted for as an operating lease, whereby the cost of the equipment is included in investing activities when purchased and the depreciation of the equipment under lease is included in operating activities. Prior to June 30, 2020, this hardware was treated as a sales-type lease, in which the hardware was expensed when shipped and included in operating activities. To provide comparability, if this equipment had been accounted for as an operating lease for the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 would be higher by $13.7 million, with a corresponding decrease to investing activities. If this equipment had been accounted for as an operating lease for the period January 1, 2020 through June 29, 2020, net cash provided by operating leases for the year ended December 31, 2020 would be higher by $9.3 million, with a corresponding decrease to investing activities.
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities consists of net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in other assets and liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities of $23.4 million is primarily a result of:
•
net loss of $111.4 million adjusted for non-cash expenses, including equity-based compensation of $66.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $84.2 million, cumulative impact of modifying our lease contracts of $(12.4) million, loss on extinguishment of debt of $16.6 million, revaluation of contingent liabilities of $(6.1) million, provision for bad debts of $7.7 million and amortization of capitalized financing costs and debt discount of $5.4 million; plus,
•
changes in operating assets and liabilities of $(26.0) million, which is primarily a result of $15.5 million of funds deposited in our sponsor bank merchant settlement account to facilitate gross card transaction deposits for those customers we bill on a monthly, versus a daily basis, and a $5.6 million reduction in interest payable on our long-term debt at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by operating activities of $26.7 million is primarily a result of:
•
net loss of $56.6 million adjusted for non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization of $62.6 million, revaluation of contingent liabilities of $15.5 million, and amortization of capitalized financing costs of $4.0 million; less,
•
changes in operating assets and liabilities of $(6.0) million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, cash provided by operating activities of $25.5 million is primarily a result of:
•
net loss of $55.4 million adjusted for non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization of $70.8 million, revaluation of contingent liabilities of $(0.3) million, provision for bad debts of $2.2 million and amortization of capitalized financing costs of $3.7 million; plus,
•
changes in operating assets and liabilities of $8.9 million, which is a result of working capital fluctuations, primarily due to the timing of interest payments for our long-term debt.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities includes cash paid for acquisitions, purchases of future commission streams of our software partners, purchases of property and equipment, purchases of equipment to be leased, capitalized software development costs and upfront processing bonuses provided to software partners.
Net cash used in investing activities was $102.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3.3 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $98.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily the result of:
•
the acquisition of 3dcart in November 2020 for $40.2 million, net of cash acquired of $0.3 million; plus,
•
the acquisition of a Hospitality Technology Vendor in October 2020 for $10.5 million, net of cash acquired of $0.6 million; and
•
$14.5 million in purchases for equipment to be leased; partially offset by
•
the acquisition of Merchant Link in August 2019 for $64.0 million, net of cash acquired of $3.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $98.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $57.4 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $41.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase is primarily the result of:
•
the acquisition of Merchant Link in 2019 for $64.0 million, net of cash acquired of $3.8 million. See Note 3 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information; plus
•
an increase of $6.6 million in acquisition of property, plant and equipment driven by leasehold improvements in 2019 to our Las Vegas office; partially offset by,
•
the impact of adopting ASC 606 of $13.7 million for equipment deployed to new merchants that in 2019 is no longer capitalized and instead include within operating activities.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,002.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $931.8 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $71.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily a result of:
•
the IPO, concurrent private placement and September Follow-on Offering net proceeds of approximately $557.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs paid in the year ended December 31, 2020;
•
the net proceeds from the 2025 Notes of $673.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020;
•
the net proceeds from the 2026 Notes of $442.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020; partially offset by,
•
the repayments of our First Lien Term Loan Facility and our Second Lien Term Loan Facility during the year ended December 31, 2020, totaling $639.8 million;
•
the net repayment of $21.0 million on the Revolving Credit Facility during the year ended December 31, 2020; and
•
the net proceeds from the First Lien Term Loan Facility during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $90.0 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $71.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $59.7 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily as result of:
•
refinancings in April and October 2019 of the First Lien Term Loan Facility of approximately $90.0 million;
•
an increase in 2019 in Revolving Credit Facility borrowings of $71.0 million; partially offset by,
•
payments on the Revolving Credit Facility of $90.0 million in 2019.
Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,140.0 million total principal amount of debt outstanding, including $450.0 million of 2026 Notes and $690.0 million of 2025 Notes. The First Lien Term Loan Facility was fully repaid in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the Second Lien Term Loan Facility and the Revolving Credit Facility were fully repaid in the second quarter of 2020.
The Revolving Credit Facility has a borrowing capacity of $89.5 million, net of a $0.5 million letter of credit. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.
On January 29, 2021, Shift4 Payments, LLC amended and restated its First Lien Credit Agreement and increased the borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility to $100.0 million. The Revolving Credit Facility matures on January 29, 2026 or, if greater than $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of Shift4 Payments, LLC’s convertible notes remains outstanding on September 15, 2025, on that date. The Revolving Credit Facility requires periodic interest payments until maturity.
Loans incurred under the amended Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at our option at either the LIBO rate plus a margin ranging from 3.00% to 3.50% per year or the alternate base rate (the highest of the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%, or the prime rate announced from time to time in The Wall Street Journal) plus a margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.50% per year, or the Applicable Rate. The Applicable Rate varies depending on our total leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The alternate base rate and the LIBO rate are each subject to a zero percent floor. In addition, we are required to pay a commitment fee under the Revolving Credit Facility in respect of the unutilized commitments thereunder at a rate ranging from 0.25% per year to 0.50% per year, in each case based on the total leverage ratio. We are also subject to customary letter of credit and agency fees.
Senior Notes Offering - 2026 Notes
In October 2020, Shift4 Payments, LLC and Shift4 Payments Finance Sub, Inc., or the Issuers, issued an aggregate $450.0 million principal amount of the 2026 Notes. We received net proceeds, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and estimated offering expenses, of approximately $442.8 million from the offering of the 2026 Notes. The net proceeds of the 2026 Notes offering, together with cash on hand, were used to repay all indebtedness outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan Facility. The 2026 Notes mature on November 1, 2026, and accrue interest at a rate of 4.625% per year. Interest on the 2026 Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on each May 1 and November 1, commencing on May 1, 2021. The Issuers may redeem all or a portion of the 2026 Notes at any time prior to November 1, 2022 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes, plus the applicable “make-whole” premium as provided in the indenture governing the 2026 Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date. At any time on or after November 1, 2022, the Issuers may redeem all or a portion of the 2026 Notes at the redemption prices set forth in the indenture governing the 2026 Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to but excluding, the date of redemption. In addition, at any time prior to November 1, 2022, the Issuers may also redeem up to 40% of the original aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes (including any additional 2026 Notes) with the proceeds of certain equity offerings, at a redemption price equal to 104.625% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any to the redemption date. The Issuers may make such redemption so long as, after giving effect to any such redemption, at least 50% of the original aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes (including any additional 2026 Notes) remains outstanding (unless all 2026 Notes are redeemed concurrently) and such redemption occurs within 90 days of the closing of the applicable equity offering.
Convertible Notes Offering - 2025 Notes
In December 2020, Shift4 Payments, Inc. issued an aggregate principal amount of $690.0 million of 2025 Notes, in an offering to qualified institutional buyers exempt from registration under the Securities Act. We received net proceeds, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and estimated offering expenses, of approximately $673.6 million from the 2025 Notes Offering. The net proceeds of the 2025 Notes Offering, together with cash on hand, will be used for general corporate purposes. The 2025 Notes do not bear regular interest, and the principal amount of the 2025 Notes does not accrete and will mature on December 15, 2025 unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. The conversion rate for the 2025 Notes will initially be 12.4262 shares of Class A common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2025 Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $80.48 per share of Class A common stock), subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of specified events. Before September 15, 2025, holders will have the right to convert their 2025 Notes under the following circumstances: (1) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ended March 31, 2021 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (2) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period in which the trading price per
$1,000 principal amount of the 2025 Notes for each trading day of the 2025 Measurement Period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate in effect on each such trading day; (3) if we call any or all of the 2025 Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date; or (4) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. From and after September 15, 2025, holders may convert their 2025 Notes at any time at their election until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date. Upon conversion of the 2025 Notes, we will pay in cash the principal amount of the 2025 Notes with any excess to be paid or delivered, as the case may be, in cash or shares of our Class A common stock or a combination of both at our election. The 2025 Notes will be redeemable, in whole or in part, for cash at our option at any time, and from time to time, on or after December 20, 2023 and on or before the 40th scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date, but only if the last reported sale price per share of our Class A common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price for a specified period of time. The redemption price will be equal to the principal amount of the 2025 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid special interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date. Upon the occurrence of a “fundamental change,” which term includes certain change of control transactions, we must offer to repurchase the 2025 Notes at a price equal to 100% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid special interest, if any, to, but not including, the date of repurchase. In addition, if a “make-whole fundamental change” occurs prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 2025 Notes in connection with such make-whole fundamental change or notice of redemption, as the case may be.
Contractual obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(1)
As of December 31, 2020, we are obligated under non-cancellable operating leases for our premises, which expire through November 2028. Rent expense incurred under operating leases, which totalled $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is included in “General and administrative expenses” in our consolidated statements of operations.
In the first quarter of 2021, we expect to incur a significant amount of expenses related to the integration of 3dcart as we rebrand it as Shift4Shop. These expenses are anticipated to be nonrecurring in nature.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet financing activities other than those reflected in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10- K.
Critical accounting policies
Our discussion and analysis of our historical financial condition and results of operations for the periods described is based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these historical financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments in certain circumstances that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and contingencies as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our assumptions and estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Additionally, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown and cannot be reasonably estimated. However, we have made accounting estimates for our allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of our contingent liabilities, other intangible assets and goodwill based on the facts and circumstances available as of the reporting date. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have provided a summary of our significant accounting policies in Note 2 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. The following critical accounting discussion pertains to accounting policies management believes are most critical to the portrayal of our historical financial condition and results of operations and that require significant, difficult, subjective or complex judgments. Other companies in similar businesses may use different estimation policies and methodologies, which may impact the comparability of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows to those of other companies.
Revenue recognition
Application of the accounting principles in U.S. GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting. Specifically, the determination of whether we are a principal to a transaction or an agent can require considerable judgment. We have concluded that we are the principal in our payment processing arrangements as we control the service on our payments platform, which is transformative in nature and allows for front-end and back-end risk mitigation, merchant portability, third party software integrations, and enhanced reporting functionality. We also contract directly with our merchants and have complete pricing latitude on the processing fees charged to our merchants. As such, we bear the credit risk for network fees and transactions charged back to the merchant. For our SaaS arrangements, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price, which is based on the fair value of each product and service. Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the amount of revenue recognized.
Business combinations
Upon acquisition of a company, we determine if the transaction is a business combination, which is accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, once control is obtained of a business, the assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributed to noncontrolling interests, are recorded at fair value. We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. One of the most significant estimates relates to the determination of the fair value of these assets and liabilities. The determination of the fair values is based on estimates and judgments made by management. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Measurement period adjustments are reflected at the time identified, up through the conclusion of the measurement period, which is the time at which all information for determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is received, and is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date. We may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Additionally, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions periodically and record any adjustments to preliminary estimates to goodwill, provided we are within the measurement period. If outside of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statement of operations.
Goodwill and intangible assets
We perform a goodwill impairment test annually at October 1 and whenever events or circumstances make it more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. We have determined that our business comprises one reporting unit. We have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether events or circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, in which case a quantitative impairment test is not required.
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful life on a straight-line basis. We monitor conditions related to these assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining amortization or depreciation period. We test these assets for potential impairment whenever our management concludes events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The original estimate of an asset’s useful life and the impact of an event or circumstance on either an asset’s useful life or carrying value involve significant judgment regarding estimates of the future cash flows associated with each asset.
Tax receivable agreement
We entered into a TRA with Shift4 Payments, LLC, each of the Continuing Equity Owners and each of the Blocker Shareholders that will provide for the payment by Shift4 Payments, Inc. to the Continuing Equity Owners of 85% of the amount of certain tax benefits, if any, that Shift4 Payments Inc. actually realizes or in some circumstances is deemed to realize in its tax reporting, as a result of (1) the increases in our share of the tax basis of assets of Shift4 Payments, LLC resulting from any redemptions of LLC Interests from the Continuing Equity Owners, (2) our utilization of certain tax attributes of the Blocker Companies and (3) certain other tax benefits related to making our payments under the TRA.
In addition to tax expenses, we will also make payments under the TRA, which we expect to be significant. We will account for the income tax effects and corresponding TRA’s effects resulting from future taxable purchases or redemptions of LLC Interests of the Continuing LLC Owners by us or Shift4 Payments, LLC or the Blocker Shareholders by recognizing an increase in our deferred tax assets, based on enacted tax rates at the date of the purchase or redemption. Further, we will evaluate the likelihood that we will realize the benefit represented by the deferred tax
asset and, to the extent that we estimate that it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefit, we will reduce the carrying amount of the deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance. The amounts to be recorded for both the deferred tax assets and the liability for our obligations under the TRA will be estimated at the time of any purchase or redemption as a reduction to shareholders’ equity, and the effects of changes in any of our estimates after this date will be included in net income (loss). Similarly, the effect of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates will be included in net income (loss). Judgement is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in Shift4 Payments, Inc.’s financial statements. A change in our assessment of such consequences, such as realization of deferred tax assets, changes in tax laws or interpretations thereof could materially impact our results. As we currently do not generate taxable income, the consolidated financial statements assume that no payments under the TRA will be made.
Noncontrolling Interests
After the Reorganization Transactions, we are the sole managing member of Shift4 Payments, LLC. We have the majority of the voting interest in and control the management of Shift4 Payments, LLC. As a result, we consolidate the financial results of Shift4 Payments, LLC and report a noncontrolling interest related to the interests in Shift4 Payments, LLC held by the Continuing Equity Owners on our consolidated balance sheet.
New accounting pronouncements
For information regarding new accounting pronouncements, and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, if any, refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act, enacted on April 5, 2012. Section 102 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if as an emerging growth company we choose to rely on such exemptions, we may not be required to, among other things, (1) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our systems of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (2) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Act, (3) comply with the requirement of the PCAOB regarding the communication of critical audit matters in the auditor’s report on the financial statements, and (4) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until we no longer meet the requirements of being an emerging growth company. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (a) the last day of the fiscal year (i) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (ii) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion or (iii) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our prior second fiscal quarter, and (b) the date on which we have issued more than $1.07 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.