ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “FPAC” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Far Peak Acquisition Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For
these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on October 19, 2020. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination. We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Far Peak LLC, a Cayman Islands exempted limited liability company. The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on December 2, 2020. On December 7, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 55,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $550.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $23.7 million, inclusive of $7.5 million in underwriting commissions, approximately $15.4 million in deferred underwriting commissions (Note 6), $400,000 in deferred legal fees, approximately $4.0 million of other expenses, and net of reimbursement from the underwriters of $3.6 million. Our underwriters were granted a 45-day
option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 8,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. On December 21, 2020, the underwriters’ partially exercised the over-allotment option and purchased an additional 5,000,000 Units at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $50,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 7,000,000 warrants , at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with the sponsor and the Anchor Investor, generating gross proceeds of $10.5 million.
Upon the closing of our Initial Public Offering, the Private Placement, and the Over-Allotment Option $600.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account and invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
of the Investment Company Act.
We will have until 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or December 7, 2022 (or 27 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 7, 2023, if we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for the initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering but has not completed the initial Business Combination within such 24 month period) to consummate a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if we have not completed a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the Public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned and not previously released to us to pay our taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish the rights of the public shareholders as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining public shareholders and our Board of Directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
Proposed Bullish Transaction
On July 8, 2021, FPAC entered into the BCA with Bullish, the Merger Subs and Bullish Global. Please see the Explanatory Note at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The descriptions of each of these agreements, and each of the agreements described above, are qualified in their entirety by the agreements themselves, each of which is an exhibit to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Please refer to FPAC’s Form 8-K
filed on July 9, 2021 for more information.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the PIPE Investors entered into share subscription agreements pursuant to which the PIPE Investors have committed to subscribe for and purchase Bullish Class A ordinary shares at $10.00 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $300,000,000. The PIPE Investors include existing shareholders of Bullish Global or their respective affiliates. The Anchor Subscriber, who has subscribed for 7,500,000 Bullish Class A ordinary shares for an aggregate purchase price of $75,000,000, has also entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Bullish and our sponsor pursuant to which the Anchor Subscriber will purchase, for $1.00 per Bullish Warrant, from the sponsor or the Anchor Investor, 3,000,000 outstanding Bullish Warrants.
Concurrently with the execution of the BCA, the Sponsor, the Company, certain insiders of the Company and Bullish entered into the Letter Agreement Amendment, to be effective upon closing, with respect to certain lock-up
arrangements, which provides that the Sponsor and such Company insiders will not, within certain periods of time from the closing of the Bullish Transaction and subject to certain exceptions, sell, offer to sell, contract or agree to sell, hypothecate, pledge, grant of any option to purchase or otherwise dispose of or agree to dispose of, directly or indirectly, or establish or increase a put equivalent position or liquidate with respect to or
decrease a call equivalent position, any of the Bullish Class A ordinary shares issued in connection with the Bullish Transaction, or enter into any swap or other arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of any security, whether any such transaction is to be settled by delivery of such securities, in cash or otherwise, or publicly announce any intention to effect any such transaction
Additionally, the sponsor agreed that at the closing of the Bullish Transaction, it would (a) (i) forfeit for cancellation 1,950,000 Bullish Class A ordinary shares at the closing of the Bullish Transaction if more than 15,000,000 Class A ordinary shares of FPAC are validly tendered for redemption and not withdrawn or (ii) if no such Forfeiture occurs, be subject to additional lock-up
restrictions with respect to such 1,950,000 Bullish Class A ordinary share (including 390,000 that will be transferred to the Anchor Investor as described below), and (b) forfeit for cancellation 400,000 Bullish Warrants.
Concurrently with the execution of the BCA, each Anchor Investor has entered into a Side Letter agreement amending such Anchor Investor’s BR Subscription Agreement, which provides that such Anchor Investor will not, within certain periods of time from the closing of the Bullish Transaction and subject to certain exceptions, sell, offer to sell, contract or agree to sell, hypothecate, pledge, grant of any option to purchase or otherwise dispose of or agree to dispose of, directly or indirectly, or establish or increase a put equivalent position or liquidate with respect to or decrease a call equivalent position, any of the Bullish Class A ordinary shares issued in connection with the Bullish Transaction, or enter into any swap or other arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of any security, whether any such transaction is to be settled by delivery of such securities, in cash or otherwise, or publicly announce any intention to effect any such transaction.
Pursuant to the BR Subscription Agreements, the sponsor has agreed to transfer 1,950,000 Class B ordinary shares of FPAC (which will convert into 1,950,000 Bullish Class A ordinary shares) to the Anchor Investors at the price the sponsor originally paid for such shares (which was nominal). Pursuant to the Side Letters, the Anchor Investors agreed that (a) (i) if the Forfeiture occurs, the sponsor will convey to them 390,000 fewer Bullish Class A ordinary shares than the Anchor Investors otherwise would have received pursuant to the BR Subscription Agreements, and (ii) if no such Forfeiture occurs, such 390,000 Bullish Class A ordinary shares will be subject to additional lock-up
restrictions and (b) at the closing of the Bullish Transaction, the Anchor Investors will (i) sell an aggregate 600,000 Bullish Warrants at a purchase price of $1.00 per Bullish Warrant to the Anchor Subscriber (comprising a portion of the Bullish 3,000,000 Warrants that the Anchor Subscriber is entitled to purchase under the Securities Purchase Agreement) and (ii) forfeit for cancellation an aggregate 100,000 Bullish Warrants.
In connection with the Bullish Transaction, certain related agreements have been, or will be, entered into on or prior to the closing of the Bullish Transaction, including: the Lock-Up
Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and among Block.one and Bullish Global; the Letter Agreement Amendment; the Side Letters; the Target Voting Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and among FPAC, Block.one, Bullish Global and Bullish; the sponsor Voting Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and among FPAC, the sponsor, Bullish Global and Bullish; the Non-Competition
Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and among Block.one, Brendan Blumer, FPAC, Bullish and Bullish Global; the Standstill Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and among Bullish, Block.one, Brendan Blumer and Kokuei Yuan; the Indemnification Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and between Block.one and Bullish; and the sponsor Release, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and between the sponsor and FPAC.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2021, we had approximately $172,000 in our operating bank account and a working capital deficit of approximately $4.4 million.
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the sponsor to cover certain offering costs on behalf of the Company in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined below), the loan
under the Promissory Note (as defined below) from the sponsor of approximately $195,000 (see Note 5) to us, the reimbursement of certain offering costs from the underwriters of $3.6 million, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the trust account. We fully repaid the Note on December 7, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and Initial Shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (see Note 5). As of September 30, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans. Our sponsor and the Anchor Investor have also agreed to provide to us an aggregate of $1,000,000 of proceeds from the purchase of additional private placement warrants, at $1.50 per warrant, split between them pro rata
in relation to their holdings of private placement warrants as necessary for working capital (or in lieu of such warrant purchase, our sponsor will lend up to such amount to us).
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statement-Going Concern,” management has determined that the Company has access to funds from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception up to September 30, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from October 19, 2020 (inception) through September 30, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $4.7 million, which consisted of approximately $7.0 million in general and administrative expenses, $3.5 million loss on the sale of Private Placement Warrants and approximately $1.7 million in offering costs, offset by approximately $7.3 million in change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $209,000 income from investments held in trust account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On October 21, 2020, our sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain offering costs in consideration for 9,750,000 Class B ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”). Our sponsor agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earliest of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination and (B) subsequent to a Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions,
share dividends, rights issuances, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading
day period commencing at least 150 days after a Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the public shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Promissory Note-Related Party
On October 21, 2020, we issued a Promissory Note to our sponsor, pursuant to which we may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000. The Promissory Note was non-interest
bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed approximately $195,000 under the Promissory Note and repaid the Promissory Note in full on December 7, 2020. Subsequent to the repayment, the facility is no longer available to us.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). Such Working Capital Loans will be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes may be repaid upon completion of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of notes may be converted upon completion of a Business Combination into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Additionally, our sponsor and the Anchor Investor have agreed to provide to us an aggregate of $1,000,000 of proceeds from the purchase of additional private placement warrants, at $1.50 per warrant, split between them pro rata
in relation to their holdings of private placement warrants as necessary for working capital (or in lieu of such warrant purchase, our sponsor will lend up to such amount to us). As of September 30, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of our Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lockup period.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to a cash underwriting discount of approximately $0.14 per Unit, or $7.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred fee of approximately $0.2807 per Unit, or approximately $15.4 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Deferred Legal Fees
We entered into an engagement letter with legal counsel to obtain legal advisory services, related to our Initial Public Offering, pursuant to which the legal counsel agreed to defer their fees (“deferred legal fees”). The deferred legal fees will become payable solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the engagement letter. On December 7, 2020, we recorded deferred legal fees of $400,000 in connection with legal services received for the Initial Public Offering in the accompanying unaudited condensed balance sheet.
Lease Agreement
On January 12, 2021, we executed a lease agreement with an affiliate of our sponsor, subleasing office approximately 2,300 square feet space in New York, New York. The lease calls for monthly minimum lease payments of $12,500 during the term of the sublease, which ends on January 30, 2022. On July 27, 2021, we amended the lease agreement to a lease payment of $37,500 during the term of the sublease, which ends April 30, 2022.
Litigation
From time to time, we may be subject to legal proceedings and claims that arise in the search for a potential target business; however, we are not aware of any pending or threatened litigation that it believes is reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on its results of operations, financial position, or cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our unaudited condensed financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these unaudited condensed financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our unaudited condensed financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Derivative warrant liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40.
Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Binomial Lattice simulation model. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. As the transfer of Private Placement Warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the Private Placement Warrants having substantially the same terms as the Public Warrants, we determined, through use of a Binomial Lattice model, that the fair value of each Private Placement Warrant is equivalent to that of each Public Warrant. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of Initial Public Offering, 60,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option), we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share. We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net loss per ordinary shares does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option) and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 27,000,000 ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period from October 19, 2020 (inception) through September 30, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncement
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s unaudited condensed financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of September 30, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a
result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.