Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Application of Critical Accounting Policies:
Disclosure of the Corporation’s significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. These policies are particularly sensitive requiring significant judgments, estimates and assumptions to be made by Management. Senior management has discussed the development of such estimates, and related Management Discussion and Analysis disclosure, with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
The following accounting policy is identified by management to be critical to the results of operations: Allowance for Loan Losses and the Annual Goodwill Impairment Evaluation.
GAAP versus non-GAAP Presentations - The Corporation supplements its traditional GAAP measurements with certain non-GAAP measurements to evaluate its performance and to eliminate the effect of intangible assets. By eliminating intangible assets, the Corporation believes it presents a measurement that is comparable to companies that have no intangible assets or to companies that have eliminated intangible assets in similar calculations. However, not all companies may use the same calculation method for each measurement. The Efficiency Ratio measures the cost to generate one dollar of revenue. The non-GAAP measurements are not intended to be used as a substitute for the related GAAP measurements. The following table shows the calculation of the non-GAAP measurements.
Results of Operations:
Management’s Overview
The following discussion and analysis is intended to assist the reader in reviewing the financial information presented and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and other financial data presented elsewhere herein.
Summary
Franklin Financial Services Corporation reported consolidated earnings $12.8 million ($2.93 per diluted share) for 2020 compared with $16.1 million ($3.67 per diluted share) for the same period in 2019.
·Net interest income was $42.0 million in 2020, compared to $42.1 million in 2019 and the net interest margin fell from 3.68% in 2019 to 3.21% in 2020. The year-to-date yield on earning assets fell by 0.78% from 4.29% in 2019 to 3.51% in 2020 as all asset classes had lower yields in 2020 as market rates decreased during the year. The cost of interest-bearing deposits fell from 0.77% in 2019 to 0.35% in 2020 as the Bank reduced deposit rates to offset lower asset yields. The cost of total deposits fell from 0.64% in 2019 to 0.28% in 2020.
‎
·Earning assets year-to-date 2020 averaged $1.4 billion compared to $1.2 billion for the same period in 2019. The average balance of the investment portfolio increased $141.6 million, primarily in the municipal bond portfolio. The year-to-date average balance of the loan portfolio increased from $964.6 million in 2019 to $992.0 million in 2020. The average balance of the commercial loan portfolio increased $19.3 million over 2019. The increase is primarily due to the addition of Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans which totaled $52.3 million at December 31, 2020 and increased the average balance of the commercial loan portfolio $41.3 million year-to-date. The average balance of deposits for 2020 increased $142.9 million over the prior year average with every deposit category increasing except for time deposits.
·The provision for loan loss expense for the was $4.6 million. This compared $237 thousand in 2019. The increase in the 2020 provision expense compared to 2019 is the result of an increase in several qualitative factors in the allowance for loan loss calculation due to the economic effects and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The allowance for loan loss ratio was 1.66% of gross loans as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1.28% at December 31, 2019. Excluding the PPP loans, the allowance for loan loss ratio was 1.75% at year-end 2020.
‎
· Noninterest income totaled $15.1 million, down $340 thousand compared to 2019. Year-to-date, gains on the sale of mortgages totaled $1.5 million, an increase of $1.1 million over 2019 and gains on bank-owned life insurance policies increased $645 thousand year-over-year. However, these increases were offset by a decrease in gains on the sale of other real estate, bank premises, securities and lower deposit fees in 2020.
‎
·Noninterest expense was $39.4 million in 2020, $1.1 million more than $38.3 million in the prior year. Year-to-date, the largest expense increases occurred in data processing ($425 thousand), FDIC insurance ($359 thousand) and salaries and benefits ($249 thousand). In the second quarter of 2020, the Bank made a $100 thousand contribution to various social service and first responder organizations in our local communities.
‎
·The Corporation recorded a reversal of $1.1 million to its income tax expense in the second quarter of 2020 due to a benefit from the passage of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) in March 2020. The CARES Act allows for net operating losses (NOL) incurred in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to be carried back to offset taxable income earned
during the five-year period prior to the year in which the NOL was incurred. The Corporation incurred an NOL in 2018 that it is able to carryback to prior periods when the statutory rate for the Corporation was 34% as compared to the current rate of 21%.
Total assets at December 31, 2020 were $1.535 billion compared $1.269 billion at December 31, 2019. Significant balance sheet changes since December 31, 2019 include:
·Short-term interest-bearing deposits in other banks decreased $26.7 million while the investment portfolio increased $209.5 million.
‎
·The net loan portfolio increased $70.3 million (7.6%) during 2020 over the year-end 2019 balance. Growth in the portfolio occurred primarily in commercial loans from PPP activity, and to a lesser extent, in commercial real estate and home equity lines of credit. The Bank held $52.3 million of PPP loans (5.18% of gross loans) at December 31, 2020. The PPP is administered by the Small Business Administration (SBA) and loans issued under the program are fully guaranteed by the SBA. These loans have an interest rate of 1%, plus the Bank earned an origination fee ranging from 3% to 5% of the originated loan balance. The Bank is recognizing the PPP fees over the contractual life of the PPP loans (two years or five years). As PPP loans are granted forgiveness by the SBA, fee recognition will accelerate. The Bank had $1.3 million of PPP fees remaining to be recognized at December 31, 2020.
‎
·At December 31, 2020, the Bank had $67.6 million of modified loans compared to $82.5 million at September 30, 2020 and $196.5 million at June 30, 2020. The current balance is comprised primarily of 20 unrelated loans to hotels for $46.5 million, three unrelated loans in the entertainment sector for $14.1 million and one loan for $4.7 million in rental real estate.
‎
·Deposits increased $229.2 million (20.3%) from year-end 2019, with all deposit products showing an increase except time deposits. Based on current information known to Management, it appears that the increases seem to stem from government stimulus payments to consumers and businesses, lower spending as economic activity was limited by the pandemic and the sense of security offered by bank deposits in uncertain economic times.
‎
·In the third quarter of 2020, the Corporation issued $20.0 million of subordinated notes, $15.0 million at 5.00% and $5.0 million at 5.25%. At December 31, 2020, the Corporation was well-capitalized with a total risk-based capital ratio of 17.69% and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 8.69%
‎
·Shareholders’ equity increased $17.6 million, from the end of 2019, due primarily to an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income from an increase in the value of the investment portfolio. Retained earnings increased $7.6 million from the end of 2019. The book value of the Corporation’s common stock increased from $29.30 at December 31, 2019 to $33.07 per share at year-end 2020. The Corporation suspended activity in its 2019 stock repurchase plan on March 19, 2020. In December 2020, an open market repurchase plan was approved to repurchase 150,000 shares over a one-year period.
Other key performance measurements are presented in Item 6 of this report.
A more detailed discussion of the areas that had the greatest effect on the reported results follows.
Net Interest Income
The most important source of the Corporation’s earnings is net interest income, which is defined as the difference between income on interest-earning assets and the expense of interest-bearing liabilities supporting those assets. Principal categories of
interest-earning assets are loans and securities, while deposits, short-term borrowings and long-term debt are the principal categories of interest-bearing liabilities. For the purpose of this discussion, balance sheet items refer to the average balance for the year and net interest income is adjusted to a fully taxable-equivalent basis. This tax-equivalent adjustment facilitates performance comparisons between taxable and tax-free assets by increasing the tax-free income by an amount equivalent to the Federal income taxes that would have been paid if this income were taxable at the Corporation’s 21% Federal statutory rate. The components of net interest income are detailed in Tables 1, 2 and 3.
Tax equivalent net interest income decreased $147 thousand in 2020. The decrease was driven almost equally by a $3.3 million decrease in interest income, primarily from lower yields on earning assets, and a $3.1 million decrease in interest expense due to lower rates in 2020. The yield on earning assets (Table 3) declined from 4.29% for 2019 to 3.51% for 2020, driven by a decrease in the yield on portfolio loans and the investment portfolio. The benefit provided by tax-exempt income increased from 2019 to 2020 due to a larger tax-free asset portfolio. Table 2 shows the affect volume and rate had on the change in tax equivalent net interest income in 2020.
Table 1. Net Interest Income
Table 2 identifies increases and decreases in tax equivalent net interest income to either changes in average volume or to changes in average rates for interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Numerous and simultaneous balance and rate changes occur during the year. The amount of change that is not due solely to volume or rate is allocated proportionally to both.
Table 2. Rate-Volume Analysis of Tax Equivalent Net Interest Income
The following table presents average balances, tax-equivalent (T/E) interest income and expense, and yields earned or rates paid on the assets or liabilities. Nonaccrual loans are included in the average loan balances.
Table 3. Analysis of Net Interest Income
Provision for Loan Losses
In 2020, the Bank recorded gross loan charge-offs $645 thousand, which were more than offset by $843 thousand of recoveries, resulting in net loan recovery of $198 thousand. For 2020, the provision for loan loss expense was $4.6 million. The allowance for loan losses was $16.8 million at year-end 2020 (1.66% of total loans), compared to $12.0 million at year-end 2019 (1.28% of total loans). Management closely monitors the credit quality of the portfolio in order to ensure that an appropriate ALL is maintained. As part of this process, Management performs a comprehensive analysis of the loan portfolio considering delinquencies trends and events, current economic conditions, and other relevant factors to determine the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses and the provision for loan losses. For more information, refer to the Loan Quality discussion and Tables 11 - 15.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents a comparison of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Table 4. Noninterest Income
The most significant changes in noninterest income are discussed below:
Investment and Trust Service fees: These fees are comprised of asset management fees, estate administration and settlement fees, employee benefit plans, and commissions from the sale of insurance and investment products. Asset management fees are recurring in nature and are affected by the fair value of assets under management at the time the fees are recognized. Asset management fees totaled $5.6 million for 2020, an increase of $93 thousand over 2019. The fair value of trust assets under management was $836.4 million at year-end, compared to $790.9 million at the end of 2019. By the nature of an estate settlement, these fees are considered nonrecurring. Estate fees decreased by $171 thousand, to $194 thousand in 2020. Commissions from the sale of insurance and investment products decreased by $23 thousand compared to 2019.
Loan service charges: This category includes primarily commercial letter of credit fees, commercial loan prepayment penalties, mortgage servicing fees and consumer debt protection fees. The primary cause of the increase was prepayment penalties on commercial loans.
Gain on sale of loans: This category is comprised of fees for originating mortgages for sale in the secondary market. The increase of $1.1 million was due to a higher volume of originations in 2020, $105.3 million, compared to originations of $30.7 million in 2019.
Deposit fees: This category is comprised primarily of fees from overdrafts, an overdraft protection program, service charges, and account analysis fees. The decrease of $442 thousand in this category was due to lower fees from the usage of the Bank’s overdraft protection program.
Other service charges and fees: The most significant items in this category include fees from the Bank’s merchant card program and ATM fees. Merchant card fees decreased $9 thousand while ATM fees decreased $62 thousand, due to lower usage as a result of shutdowns caused by the pandemic.
Debit card income: Debit card fees are comprised of both a retail and business card program. Retail fees increased by $47 thousand while business card fees increased $9 thousand, a 5% increase over the prior year. The business debit card offers a cash back rewards program based on usage.
Bank owned life insurance gain: The Bank received death benefits from two bank-owned life insurance policies in 2020 compared to one policy in 2019.
Other: The decrease in 2020 was due primarily to the recovery of prior year legal fees from a legal settlement in 2019.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents a comparison of noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Table 5. Noninterest Expense
The most significant changes in noninterest expense are discussed below:
Salaries and benefits: This category is the largest noninterest expense category and includes expenses for salaries, health benefits, insurance, pension service, taxes and other employee programs. This category increased by $249 thousand compared to the prior year from salary increases of $1.4 million, due to merit increases, and a $448 thousand increase in mortgage commissions, which were partially offset by a decrease of $269 thousand in health insurance expense and an increase in deferred loan origination costs due to an increase in loan originations. See Note 16 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on benefit plans.
Net Occupancy: This category includes all of the expense associated with the properties and facilities used for bank operations such as depreciation, leases, maintenance, utilities and real estate taxes. Equipment maintenance contracts and depreciation increased during 2020 but were offset by a decrease in building maintenance due to less snow removal expenses and lower utility costs.
Legal and professional fees: This category consists of fees paid to outside legal counsel, consultants, and audit fees. Legal fees increased $93 thousand due to services provided in the normal course of business. Internal and external audit fees decreased by $169 thousand, due to fees expensed in 2019 for a consent letter from the prior external audit firm.
Data processing: The largest cost in this category is the expense associated with the Bank’s core processing system and related services and accounted for $1.8 million of the total data processing costs, unchanged from the prior year. An increase in software expense contributed $179 thousand to the total increase in this category.
FDIC insurance: This category consists of the total fees paid to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). The expense for 2020 increased compared to prior year due to $270 thousand in premium credits in 2019 from the FDIC Small Bank Assessment Credits. This credit was fully utilized in 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Corporation recorded a Federal income tax expense of $258 thousand compared to $2.9 million in 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 and 2019 was 2.0% and 15.2%, respectively. The Corporation recorded an income tax benefit of $1.1 million in the second quarter of 2020. This benefit was available due to the passage of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) in March 2020. The CARES Act allows for net operating losses (NOL) incurred in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to be carried back to offset taxable income earned during the five-year period prior to the year in which the NOL was incurred. The Corporation incurred an NOL in 2018 that it was able to carryback to prior periods when the statutory rate for the Corporation was 34% as compared to the current rate of 21%. Without the benefit of the NOL carryback, the effective tax rate for 2020 would have been 10.5% compared to 15.2% in 2019. Excluding the benefit of the NOL, the Corporation’s 2020 effective tax rate was lower than its statutory rate due to the effect of tax-exempt income from certain investment securities, loans, and bank owned life insurance. For a more comprehensive analysis of Federal income tax expense refer to Note 14 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Financial Condition
One method of evaluating the Corporation’s condition is in terms of its sources and uses of funds. Assets represent uses of funds while liabilities represent sources of funds. At December 31, 2020, total assets increased 21.0% over the prior year to $1.54 billion from $1.27 billion at the end of 2019.
Interest Bearing Deposits in Other Banks:
This asset decreased to $52.8 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $77.2 million at December 31, 2019, as the Bank reinvested excess cash in the investment and loan portfolio. The average balance for 2020 decreased slightly to $75.1 million compared to $75.6 million in 2019. At year-end, $12.7 million was in the form of long-term certificates of deposit and $39.9 million was held in an interest-bearing account at the Federal Reserve.
Investment Securities:
AFS Securities
The investment portfolio serves as a mechanism to invest funds if funding sources out pace lending activity, to provide liquidity for lending and operations, and provide collateral for deposits and borrowings. The mix of securities and investing decisions are made as a component of balance sheet management. Debt securities include U.S. Government Agencies, U.S. Government Agency mortgage-backed securities, non-agency mortgage-backed securities, state and municipal government bonds, and trust preferred securities, and corporate debt in the form of bank-issued subordinated debt. The average life of the portfolio is 7.3 years and $137.4 million (fair value) is pledged as collateral for deposits. The Bank has no investments in a single issuer that exceeds 10% of shareholders equity. All securities are classified as available for sale and all investment balances refer to fair value, unless noted otherwise. The following table presents the amortized cost and estimated fair value of investment securities by type at December 31 for the past three years:
Table 6. Investment Securities at Amortized Cost and Estimated Fair Value
The following table presents investment securities at December 31, 2020 by maturity, and the weighted average yield for each maturity presented. The yields presented in this table are calculated using tax-equivalent interest and the amortized cost.
Table 7. Maturity Distribution of Investment Portfolio
Table 3 shows the two-year trend of average balances and yields on the investment portfolio. The yield on the portfolio decreased from 2.84% in 2019 to 2.36% in 2020. U.S. Agency mortgage-backed securities and municipal bonds continue to comprise the largest sectors by fair value of the portfolio, approximately 18% and 62% respectively. The Bank expects that the portfolio will continue to remain concentrated in these investment sectors. The portfolio produced $41.7 million in cash flows in 2020 while $240.7 million was invested into the portfolio during the year.
Municipal Bonds: This sector holds $247.1 million or 62% of the total portfolio and the amortized cost increased by $145.4 million year over year. The Muni sector is the best risk vs. reward bond sector because the yield is substantially higher to justify the risk, the credit remains strong and they provide protection from long-term low rates. The Bank’s municipal bond portfolio is well diversified geographically and is comprised of both tax-exempt (39% of the portfolio) and taxable (61% of the portfolio) municipal bonds. Sixty-two percent of the portfolio are general obligation bonds and thirty-eight percent are revenue bonds. The portfolio holds bonds from 228 issuers within 35 states. The largest dollar exposure is in the states of Texas (16%) and California (12%). When purchasing municipal bonds, the Bank looks primarily to the underlying credit of the issuer as a sign of credit quality and then to any credit enhancement. The entire portfolio is rated “A” or higher by a nationally recognized rating agency.
Trust Preferred and Corporate Bonds: Trust preferred securities are typically issued by a subsidiary grantor trust of a bank holding company, which uses the proceeds of the equity issuance to purchase deeply subordinated debt issued by the bank holding company. All of the Bank’s trust preferred securities are single issuer bonds and the Bank holds 5 different issues. The bank also owns $16.1 million of subordinated debt from 34 different issuers.
Mortgage-backed Securities (MBS): This sector holds $80.7 million or 20% of the total portfolio. The majority of this sector ($72.2 million) is comprised of U.S. Government Agency MBS. The Government MBS sector is comprised of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations, both fixed and variable rate. In addition, the Bank holds four private-label mortgage-backed securities (PLMBS) with a fair value of $313 thousand and an amortized cost of $293 thousand. The Bank’s private-label mortgage-backed securities (PLMBS) portfolio is comprised primarily of Alt-A loans. Alt-A loans are first-lien residential mortgages that generally conform to traditional “prime” credit guidelines; however, loan factors such as the loan-to-value ratio, loan documentation, occupancy status or property type cause these loans not to qualify for standard underwriting programs. See Note 4 of the accompanying financial statements for more information on the mortgage-backed securities.
Asset-backed Securities (ABS): This sector holds $36.3 million, or 9%, of the total portfolio. FFELP (Federal Family Education Loan Program) bonds make up the maturity of this sector and have a 97% guarantee from the US Department of Education. The FFELP bonds are all rated AAA.
Impairment: Table 8 reflects the temporary impairment in the investment portfolio, aggregated by investment category, length of time that individual securities have been in a continuous unrealized loss position and the number of securities in each category as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The condition of the portfolio at year-end 2020, as measured by the dollar amount of temporarily impaired securities, has improved over year-end 2019. The Municipal sector recorded the largest unrealized loss and had the greatest number of securities with an unrealized loss.
For securities with an unrealized loss, Management applies a systematic methodology in order to perform an assessment of the potential for other-than-temporary impairment. In the case of debt securities, investments considered for other-than-temporary impairment: (1) had a specified maturity or repricing date, (2) were generally expected to be redeemed at par, and (3) were expected to achieve a recovery in market value within a reasonable period of time. In addition, the Bank considers whether it intends to sell these securities or whether it will be forced to sell these securities before the earlier of amortized cost recovery or maturity. The impairment identified on debt securities and subject to assessment at December 31, 2020, was deemed to be temporary and required no further adjustments to the financial statements, unless otherwise noted. The following table presents the temporary impairment in the security portfolio for the years presented:
Table 8. Temporary Impairment
The unrealized loss in the trust preferred and corporate sector increased by $25 thousand compared to the prior year-end. All of the Bank’s trust preferred securities are variable rate notes with long maturities (2027-2028). The credit ratings on this portfolio are similar to the prior year and no bonds have missed or suspended any payments. At December 31, 2020, the Bank believes it will be able to collect all interest and principal due on these bonds and that it will not be forced to sell these bonds prior to maturity. Therefore, no other-than-temporary-impairment charges were recorded.
The municipal securities portfolio had a $778 thousand decrease in unrealized losses since the end of 2019. The change in value in this sector is driven by market interest rates since these bonds have very low credit risk.
Equity securities at Fair Value
The Corporation owns one equity investment with a readily determinable fair value. At December 31, 2020, this investment was reported at fair value ($391 thousand) with changes in value reported through income in 2020.
Restricted Stock at Cost
The Bank held $468 thousand of restricted stock at the end of 2020 of which $438 thousand is stock in the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh (FHLB). FHLB stock is carried at a cost of $100 per share. FHLB stock is evaluated for impairment primarily based on an assessment of the ultimate recoverability of its cost. As a government sponsored entity, FHLB has the ability to raise funding through the U.S. Treasury that can be used to support it operations. There is not a public market for FHLB stock and the benefits of FHLB membership (e.g., liquidity and low-cost funding) add value to the stock beyond purely financial measures. If FHLB stock were deemed to be impaired, the write-down for the Bank could be significant. Management intends to remain a member of the FHLB and believes that it will be able to fully recover the cost basis of this investment.
Loans:
The loan portfolio increased by 8.0% ($75.1 million) in 2020, due primarily to approximately $65 million in PPP loan originations and an increase in junior liens and lines of credit from the Bank’s FlexLOC program. Average gross loans for 2020 increased by $27.3 million to $992.0 million compared to $964.6 million in 2019. Commercial, mortgage and home equity loans and lines all showed an increase in average balances during the year, which was partially offset by a decline in consumer loans. The yield on the portfolio decreased in 2020 to 4.05% from 4.67% in 2019. Table 3 presents detail on the average balances and yields earned on loans for the past two years.
The following table shows loans outstanding, by primary collateral, as of December 31 for the past 5 years.
Table 9. Loan Portfolio
Residential real estate: This category is comprised of first lien loans and, to a lesser extent, junior liens and lines of credit secured by residential real estate. Total residential real estate loans increased $12.0 million in 2020 from 2019, primarily in consumer junior lien and lines of credit. In 2020, the Bank originated $125.4 million in mortgages compared to $43.7 million in 2019, including approximately $105.3 million for sale in the secondary market. The Bank does not originate or hold any loans that would be considered sub-prime or Alt-A and does not generally originate mortgages outside of its primary market area.
Commercial purpose loans in this category represent loans made for various business needs but are secured with residential real estate. In addition to the real estate collateral, it is possible that additional security is provided by personal guarantees or UCC filings. These loans are underwritten as commercial loans and are not originated to be sold.
Residential real estate construction: The largest component of this category represents loans to residential real estate developers of $9.6 million, while loans for individuals to construct personal residences totaled $6.8 million at December 31, 2020. The Bank’s exposure to residential construction loans is concentrated primarily in south central Pennsylvania. Real estate construction loans, including residential real estate and land development loans, occasionally provide an interest reserve in order to assist the developer during the development stage when minimal cash flow is generated.
Commercial real estate (CRE): This category includes commercial, industrial, farm and agricultural loans, where real estate serves as the primary collateral for the loan. This loan category increased by $9.7 million over the prior year. The largest sectors (by collateral) in CRE are: hotel & motel ($72.1 million), land development ($60.3 million), office buildings ($54.2 million), manufacturing ($37.4 million) and shopping centers ($35.6 million). The majority of the Bank’s hotel exposure is located along the Interstate 81 (I-81) corridor through south-central Pennsylvania. The portfolio is comprised of properties operating under 17 flagged brands and 3 independent operators.
Also included in CRE are real estate construction loans totaling $89.3 million. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had $28.7 million in real estate construction loans funded with an interest reserve and capitalized $915 thousand of interest in 2020 from these reserves
on active projects for commercial construction. Real estate construction loans are monitored on a regular basis by either an independent third-party inspector or the assigned loan officer depending on loan amount or complexity of the project. This monitoring process includes, at a minimum, the submission of invoices or AIA documents (depending on the complexity of the project) detailing costs incurred by the borrower, on-site inspections, and a signature by the assigned loan officer for disbursement of funds. All real estate construction loans are underwritten in the same manner, regardless of the use of an interest reserve.
Commercial: This category includes commercial, industrial, farm, agricultural, and tax-free loans. Collateral for these loans may include business assets or equipment, personal guarantees, or other non-real estate collateral. Commercial loans increased $51.3 million over the 2019 ending balance, primarily due to PPP originations. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had approximately $145 million of tax-free loans in its portfolio. The largest sectors (by industry) are: public administration ($57.6 million), utilities ($54.5 million), educational services ($20.7 million) and real estate rental and leasing ($11.4 million). This category also includes $52.3 million of PPP loans that are 100% guaranteed by the SBA.
Participations: At December 31, 2020, the outstanding commercial participations accounted for 8.7%, or $68.7 million, of commercial purpose loans compared to 9.4%, or $67.7 million, at the prior year-end. The Bank’s total exposure (including unfunded commitments) to purchased participations was $84.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The commercial loan participations are comprised of $14.7 million of commercial loans and $54.0 million of CRE loans, reported in the respective loan segment. The Bank expects that commercial lending will continue to be the primary area of loan growth in the future via in-market lending.
Consumer loans: This category is mainly comprised of unsecured personal lines of credit and showed a decrease of $863 thousand in 2020 over 2019 ending balances.
Table 10. Maturities and Interest Rate Terms of Selected Loans
The following table presents the stated maturities (or earlier call dates) of selected loans as of December 31, 2020. Consumer purpose residential mortgages and consumer loans are excluded from the presentation.
Loan Quality:
Management utilizes a risk rating scale ranging from 1-Prime to 9-Loss to evaluate loan quality. This risk rating scale is used primarily for commercial purpose loans. Consumer purpose loans are identified as either a pass or substandard rating based on the performance status of the loans. Substandard consumer loans are loans that are 90 days or more past due and still accruing. Loans rated 1 - 4 are considered pass credits. Loans that are rated 5-Pass Watch are credits that have been identified as credits that are likely to warrant additional attention and monitoring. Loans rated 6-Other Asset Especially Mentioned (OAEM) or worse begin to receive enhanced monitoring and reporting by the Bank. Loans rated 7-Substandard or 8-Doubtful exhibit the greatest financial weakness and present the greatest possible risk of loss to the Bank. Nonaccrual loans are rated no better than 7-Substandard. The following factors represent some of the factors used in determining the risk rating of a borrower: cash flow, debt coverage, liquidity, management, and
collateral. Risk ratings, for pass credits, are generally reviewed annually for term debt and at renewal for revolving or renewing debt. The Bank monitors loan quality by reviewing three primary measurements: (1) loans rated 6-OAEM or worse (collectively “watch list”), (2) delinquent loans, and (3) net-charge-offs.
Watch list loans exhibit financial weaknesses that increase the potential risk of default or loss to the Bank. However, inclusion on the watch list, does not by itself, mean a loss is certain. The watch list includes both performing and nonperforming loans. Watch list loans totaled $66.1 million at year-end compared to $11.6 million one year earlier. The increase from 2019 is the result of a $40.8 million increase in 6-OAEM rated loans and a $13.7 million increase in 7-Substandard rated loans. During 2020, the Bank downgraded its hotel portfolio due to the pandemic and this action was the primary reason for the increase in watch-list loans. At year-end 2020, the Bank had $32.7 million of hotel loans rated 6-OAEM and $14.5 million rated 7-Substandard. Included in the watch list are $8.7 million of nonaccrual loans. The composition of the watch list (loans rated 6, 7 or 8), by primary collateral, is shown in Note 6 of the accompanying financial statements.
Delinquent loans are a result of borrowers’ cash flow and/or alternative sources of cash being insufficient to repay loans. The Bank’s likelihood of collateral liquidation to repay the loans becomes more probable the further behind a borrower falls, particularly when loans reach 90 days or more past due. Management monitors the performance status of loans by the use of an aging report. The aging report can provide an early indicator of loans that may become severely delinquent and possibly result in a loss to the Bank. See Note 6 in the accompanying financial statements for information on the aging of payments in the loan portfolio.
Nonaccruing loans generally represent Management’s determination that the borrower will be unable to repay the loan in accordance with its contractual terms and that collateral liquidation may or may not fully repay both interest and principal. It is the Bank’s policy to evaluate the probable collectability of principal and interest due under terms of loan contracts for all loans 90-days or more, nonaccrual loans, or impaired loans. Further, it is the Bank’s policy to discontinue accruing interest on loans that are not adequately secured and in the process of collection. Upon determination of nonaccrual status, the Bank subtracts any current year accrued and unpaid interest from its income, and any prior year accrued and unpaid interest from the allowance for loan losses. Management continually monitors the status of nonperforming loans, the value of any collateral and potential of risk of loss. Nonaccrual loans are rated no better than 7-Substandard.
The Bank’s Loan Management Committee reviews these loans and risk ratings on a quarterly basis in order to proactively identify and manage problem loans. In addition, a committee meets monthly to discuss possible workout strategies for all credits rated 7-Substandard or worse and OREO. Management also tracks other commercial loan risk measurements including high loan to value loans, concentrations, participations and policy exceptions and reports these to the Credit Risk Oversight Committee of the Board of Directors. The Bank also uses a third-party consultant to assist with internal loan review with a goal of reviewing 80% of commercial loans each year. The FDIC defines certain supervisory loan-to-value lending limits. The Bank’s internal loan-to-value limits are all equal to or less than the supervisory loan-to-value limits. However, in certain circumstances, the Bank may make a loan that exceeds the supervisory loan-to-value. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had loans of $23.3 million (2.3% of gross loans) that exceeded the supervisory loan-to value limit, compared to 2.6% at the prior year end.
Nonaccrual loans increased $4.9 million over year-end 2019 due to an increase in commercial real estate nonaccrual loans of $5.0 million, the result of placing a $5.7 million hotel loan on nonaccrual in September 2020. This hotel is on a CARES Act Section 4013 deferral of principal and interest payments through May 2021. The hotel is operating under a national hotel flag. Potential problem loans, defined as watch list loans less loans on nonaccrual or past due more than 90 days, at December 31, 2020 totaled $53.2 million compared to $7.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in potential problem loans is also the result of downgrading the hotel portfolio in 2020. As a result of these changes, the ratio of nonperforming loans to total gross loans increased from 0.42% at December 31, 2019 to 0.87% at year-end 2020.
The following table presents a five-year summary of nonperforming assets as of December 31 of each year:
Table 11. Nonperforming Assets
The following table provides information on the most significant nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2020. These two nonaccrual loans account for 80% of the total nonaccrual balance.
Table 12. Significant Nonaccrual Loans
In addition to monitoring nonaccrual loans, the Bank also closely monitors impaired loans and troubled debt restructurings (TDR). A loan is considered to be impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Bank will be unable to collect all interest and principal payments due according to the originally contracted terms of the loan agreement. Nonaccrual loans (excluding consumer purpose loans) and TDR loans are considered impaired.
A loan is considered a troubled debt restructuring (TDR) if the creditor (the Bank), for economic or legal reasons related to the debtor’s financial difficulties, grants a concession to the debtor that it would not otherwise consider. These concessions may include lowering the interest rate, extending the maturity, reamortization of payment, or a combination of multiple concessions. The Bank reviews all loans rated 6-OAEM or worse when it is providing a loan restructure, modification or new credit facility to determine if the action is a TDR. If a TDR loan is placed on nonaccrual status, it remains on nonaccrual status for at least six months to ensure performance.
Loans that have been modified on a good-faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were classified as current prior to any relief are not TDRs as outlined in the March 22, 2020 Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus or Section 4013 of the CARES Act. Loans may be modified under Section 4013 until the earlier of January 1, 2022 or the 60th day after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency declared by the President.
In accordance with financial accounting standards, TDR loans are always considered impaired until they are paid-off or in certain circumstances refinanced. However, an impaired TDR loan can be a performing loan under its modified terms. Impaired loans totaled $17.3 million at year-end compared to $12.2 million at the prior year end. The increase is due the nonaccrual hotel loan previously discussed. This loan carries a $228 thousand specific reserve. Included in the impaired loan totals are $11.0 million of TDR loans.
COVID 19 Pandemic Effect on Loan Quality: The pandemic, and governmental responses thereto, has the potential to affect the credit quality of the loan portfolio in future periods. The pandemic has resulted in certain federal, state and local governmental authorities taking action to stop the spread of the pandemic or mitigate its impact. These actions have included stay-at-home orders, restrictions on business activity, and proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of the pandemic by restricting the movement of people, products and services in the economy. As a result of these actions, the economic activity of the Bank’s market area has been curtailed, businesses have been shut down and unemployment has dramatically increased. Many of these restrictions, to some level, remained in place at December 31, 2020. The repayment of every loan is dependent, in some way, on an efficiently functioning economy. Any action that has the effect of restricting economic activity has the potential to reduce cash flow available to repay loans. At this time, the length of this economic downturn is uncertain, as is the effect on the Bank’s loan portfolio. See the Allowance for Loan Losses (ALL) section that follows for the effect of the pandemic on the ALL and provision for loan loss expense.
COVID 19 Loan Deferrals. As the economy contracted in 2020 as the result of the pandemic, the Bank began to receive requests for payment modifications. Unlike past economic downturns, bank regulators provided favorable guidance for banks allowing them wide latitude to make modifications. Under guidance provided by the CARES Act and a joint regulatory agency statement issued by banking agencies, banks could, under certain circumstances, avoid reporting loan modifications as delinquent, nonperforming or as a trouble debt restructuring. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank has granted approximately $68 million loan deferrals or modifications (approximately 7% of gross loans) down from $82 million (8% of gross loans) at September 30, 2020 and $196 million (19% of gross loans) as of June 30, 2020. These modifications include the deferral of principal and interest payments, deferral of interest payments for interest only lines of credit or providing for an interest only payment. Any interest that is deferred is due and payable at the end of the deferral period. Principal that is deferred will be added to the end of the loan as an extension of the maturity date or as a balloon payment, depending on the loan structure. The Bank will continue to accrue interest during the deferral period. The majority of deferrals were for an initial period of 3 months with the potential for additional deferrals after a credit review. If a borrower requested additional deferrals, the Bank required a review of updated financial reports and forecast prior to granting an approval.
The following table shows the loan deferrals made as of December 31, 2020 by North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code and type of collateral.
‎
The following tables show the type of modifications by industry as of December 30, 2020, and the same sectors one quarter earlier at September 30, 2020.
The performance of these loans as they come out of the deferral period will be critical in predicting the credit quality of the loans in the future.
Industry Exposure. The Bank believes its greatest risk exposure to modified loans is in the hotel sector. The following table presents additional information on the modified hotel loans.
*Daily occupancy and average daily rate represent data reported for the primary markets in which the hotels operate and may or may not represent the experience of any specific property in the portfolio.
Paycheck Protection Program. In March 2020, Congress passed the CARES Act to provide economic relief to small business and consumers affect by the COVID-19 pandemic. Included in this Act was the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) administered by the Small Business Administration (SBA). The PPP is a small business loan program designed to assist in allowing small businesses to keep workers on the payroll during the COVID-19 pandemic. When workers are kept on the payroll for the qualifying period, the loan could be forgiven if the small business incurs eligible expenses. The PPP loans are 100 percent guaranteed by the SBA and have a maturity of two-years or five-years with a fixed interest rate of 1% for the life of the loan. Borrowers of PPP loans do not have to make payments on the loan for the first six months, and the loans will fully amortize for the remainder of the two- or five-year terms.
In December 2020, Congress passed a second stimulus package that provided for a second round of funding for small business, that meet certain eligibility requirements, through the PPP. PPP loans under the second round of funding are for a 5-year term with a fixed interest rate of 1% and initial principal payments deferred for up to 10 months under certain circumstances.
The SBA paid originating banks a processing fee ranging from 1% to 5% of the loan, depending on the loan balance for round 1 of PPP funding. The SBA will pay processing fees to originating banks for round 2 of PPP funding at levels similar to those paid in round 1. The Bank will recognize these fees in interest income over the contractual life (two or five years) of the loan. As PPP loans are granted forgiveness by the SBA, fee recognition will accelerate. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had $1.3 million of PPP fees remaining to be recognized.
At December 31, 2020 the Bank held $52.2 million in PPP loans, $46.9 million with a 5-year maturity $5.4 million with a 2-year maturity. The Bank began accepting round 2 PPP applications in January 2021.
The PPP loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA, thereby presenting no credit risk to the Bank once the SBA guarantee is fulfilled, if necessary. However, the PPP loan is only designed to cover short-term operating needs of the borrower. If the economy does not recover quickly from the pandemic and the borrower experiences long-term operational problems beyond the PPP funding, the performance of other loans to these customers could begin to deteriorate.
Allowance for Loan Losses:
Management monitors loan performance on a monthly basis and performs a quarterly evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses (ALL). The ALL is determined by segmenting the loan portfolio based on the loan’s collateral. When calculating the ALL, consideration is given to a variety of factors in establishing this estimate including, but not limited to, current economic conditions, diversification of the loan portfolio, delinquency statistics, results of internal loan reviews, historical charge-offs, the adequacy of the underlying collateral (if collateral dependent) and other relevant factors. The Bank begins enhanced monitoring of all loans rated 6-OAEM or worse and obtains a new appraisal or asset valuation for any loans placed on nonaccrual and rated 7 - Substandard or worse. Management, at its discretion, may determine that additional adjustments to the appraisal or valuation are required. Valuation adjustments will be made as necessary based on factors, including, but not limited to: the economy, deferred maintenance, industry, type of property/equipment, age of the appraisal, etc. and the knowledge Management has about a particular situation. In addition, the cost to sell or liquidate the collateral is also estimated and deducted from the valuation in order to determine the net realizable value to the Bank. When determining the allowance for loan losses, certain factors involved in the evaluation are inherently subjective and require material estimates that may be susceptible to significant change, including the amounts and timing of future cash flows expected to be received on impaired loans. Management monitors the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses on an ongoing basis and reports its adequacy quarterly to the Credit Risk Oversight Committee of the Board of Directors. Management believes that the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 is adequate.
The analysis for determining the ALL is consistent with guidance set forth in generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and the Interagency Policy Statement on the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses. The analysis has three components: specific, general and unallocated. The specific component addresses specific reserves established for impaired loans. A loan is considered to be impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Bank will be unable to collect all interest and principal payments due according to the originally contracted terms of the loan agreement. Collateral values discounted for market conditions and selling costs are used to establish specific allocations for impaired loans. However, it is possible that as a result of the credit analysis, a specific reserve is not required for an impaired loan. Commercial loans with a balance less than $250 thousand, and all consumer purpose loans are not included in the specific reserve analysis as impaired loans but are added to the general allocation pool. Loans that are evaluated for a specific reserve, but not needing a specific reserve are not added back to the general allocation pool. The balance of impaired loans increased $5.1 million over the year-end 2019 balance to $17.3 million at December 31, 2020. The increase is due to a $5.7 million hotel loan placed on nonaccrual in 2020. This loan has a $228 thousand specific reserve established for it. Note 6 of the accompanying financial statements provides additional information about the ALL established for impaired loans.
The general allocation component addresses the reserves established for pools of homogenous loans. The general component includes a quantitative and qualitative analysis. When calculating the general allocation, the Bank segregates its loan portfolio into the following segments based primarily on the type of supporting collateral: residential real estate, commercial, industrial or agricultural real estate; commercial and industrial (commercial non-real estate), and consumer. Each segment may be further segregated by type of collateral, lien position, or owner/nonowner occupied properties. PPP loans, because of the SBA guarantee, were excluded from the quantitative analysis. The allowance established as a result of the quantitative analysis was $3.65 million compared to $3.79 million at year-end 2019.
The quantitative analysis uses the Bank’s twenty quarter rolling historical loan loss experience as determined for each loan segment to determine a loss factor applicable to each loan segment. The qualitative analysis utilizes a risk matrix that incorporates four primary risk factors: economic conditions, delinquency, classified loans, and level of risk, and assigns a risk level (as measured in basis points) to each factor. In determining the risk level for these primary factors, consideration is given to operational factors such as: loan volume, management, loan review process, credit concentrations, competition, and legal and regulatory issues. The level of risk (as measured in basis points) for each primary factor is set for five risk levels ranging from minimal risk to very high risk and is determined independently for commercial loans, residential mortgage loans and consumer loans. During 2020, as a result of the negative effects of the pandemic on the economy, the Bank increased the basis point risk factor for certain qualitative components. In addition, the Bank carved out the portfolio of modified loans for a qualitative assessment separate from the overall commercial loan portfolio. This allowed for assignment of a higher qualitative risk score on this portfolio. PPP loans, because of the SBA guarantee, were excluded from the qualitative analysis. Year-to-date, these changes resulted in a $4.4 million increase in the qualitative component of the ALL to $12.1 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $7.7 million at December 31, 2019.
The unallocated component is maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect Management’s estimate of probable loss. The unallocated component of the ALL reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating specific and general losses in the portfolio. The unallocated allowance was $775 thousand at December 31, 2020.
Real estate appraisals and collateral valuations are an important part of the Bank’s process for determining potential loss on collateral dependent loans and thereby have a direct effect on the determination of loan reserves, charge-offs and the calculation of the allowance for loan losses. As long as the loan remains a performing loan, no further updates to appraisals are required. If a loan or relationship migrates to nonaccrual and a risk rating of 7-Substandard or worse, an evaluation for impairment status is made based on the current information available at the time of downgrade and a new appraisal or collateral valuation is obtained. We believe this practice complies with the regulatory guidance.
In determining the allowance for loan losses, Management, at its discretion, may determine that additional adjustments to the fair value obtained from an appraisal or collateral valuation are required. Adjustments will be made as necessary based on factors, including, but not limited to the economy, deferred maintenance, industry, type of property or equipment etc., and the knowledge Management has about a particular situation. In addition, the cost to sell or liquidate the collateral is also estimated and deducted from the valuation in order to determine the net realizable value to the Bank. If an appraisal is not available, Management may make its best estimate of the real value of the collateral or use last known market value and apply appropriate discounts. If an adjustment is made to the collateral valuation, this will be documented with appropriate support and reported to the Loan Management Committee.
The following table shows, by loan segment, the activity in the ALL, the amount of the allowance established in each category and the loans that were evaluated for the ALL under a specific reserve (individually) and those that were evaluated under a general reserve (collectively) as of December 31, 2020.
‎
Table 13. Allowance for Loan Losses by Segment
The following table shows the allocation of the allowance for loan losses as of December 31 for 2020 and 2019:
Table 14. Allocation of the Allowance for Loan Losses
The allocation of the allowance for loan losses is based on estimates and is not intended to imply limitations on the usage of the allowance. The entire allowance is available to absorb any losses without regard to the category in which the loan is classified.
The following table shows the percentage of the loans to total gross loans as of December 31 for 2020 and 2019:
The following table presents details on activity in the ALL as well as key ratios at December 31:
Table 15. Historical Allowance for Loan Losses
Goodwill:
The Bank has $9.0 million of goodwill recorded on its balance sheet as the result of corporate acquisitions. Goodwill is not amortized, nor deductible for tax purposes. However, goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually in accordance with ASC Topic 350. Goodwill was tested for impairment as of August 31, 2020. The 2020 impairment test was conducted using several quantitative methods, including an income approach, market value approach and a change of control acquisition approach. Each of these quantitative approaches included different scenarios with different assumptions. These scenarios were weighted based upon Management’s judgement. Based upon this assessment, the estimated fair value of the Corporation exceeded its carrying value by 24% and Management determined the Bank’s goodwill was not impaired. The 2019 impairment test was conducted using a qualitative assessment method and Management determined the Bank’s goodwill was not impaired in 2019. At December 31, 2020, Management subsequently considered certain qualitative factors affecting the Corporation and determined that it was not likely that the results of the prior test had changed, and it determined that goodwill was not impaired at year-end.
Deposits:
The Bank depends on deposits generated by its community banking offices as its primary source of funds. The Bank offers numerous deposit products including demand deposits (noninterest and interest-bearing accounts), savings, money management accounts, and time deposits (certificates of deposits/CDs). Table 16 shows a comparison of the major deposit categories over a three-year period at December 31, including balances and the percentage change in balances year-over-year. Table 3, presented previously, shows the average balance of the major deposit categories and the average cost of these deposits over a two-year period.
Table 16. Deposits
Noninterest-bearing checking: This category increased year over year by $67.0 million, primarily in commercial accounts, while the average balance increased by $42.9 million for the year. As a noninterest bearing account, these deposits contribute approximately 9 basis points to the net interest margin.
Interest-bearing checking: This category saw an increase in both the ending and average balance for the year compared to prior year-end, while the cost of these accounts decreased year over year. Both commercial and retail accounts grew during 2020.
Money management: The year over year balance increased $71.8 million, in both retail and commercial accounts and the average balance increased $38.3 million compared to the 2019 average balance. The cost of this product decreased during the year as market rates decreased.
Savings: Savings accounts increased $26.3 million during the year and represents the twelfth consecutive year of growth, mostly in regular savings accounts in 2020. The cost of this product decreased during the year as market rates decreased.
Time deposits: Time deposits decreased in 2020, as customers moved funds to more liquid accounts and rates decreased.
Reciprocal deposits: At year-end 2020, the Bank had $175.0 million placed in the IntraFi Network deposit program ($127.5 million in interest-bearing checking and $47.5 million in money management) and $5.0 million of time deposits placed into the CDARS program. These programs allow the Bank to offer full FDIC coverage to large depositors, but with the convenience to the customer of only having to deal with one bank. The Bank solicits these deposits from within its market and it believes they present no greater risk than any other local deposit. Only reciprocal deposits that exceed 20% of liabilities are considered brokered deposits. At December 31, 2020, the Bank’s reciprocal deposits were 12.9% of total liabilities.
The Bank continually reviews different methods of funding growth that include traditional deposits and other wholesale sources. Competition from other local financial institutions, internet banks and brokerages will continue to be a challenge for the Bank in its efforts to attract new and retain existing deposit accounts. This competition is not expected to lessen in the future.
Table 17. Time Deposits of $100,000 or More
Borrowings:
Short-term Borrowings: Short-term borrowings from the FHLB are in the form of a revolving term commitment. The short-term FHLB borrowings are used as overnight borrowings to fund the short-term liquidity needs of the Bank. These borrowings reprice on a daily basis and the interest rate fluctuates with short-term market interest rates. The Bank’s maximum borrowing capacity with the FHLB at December 31, 2020 was $387.7 million with $387.7 million available to borrow.
Table 18. Short-Term Borrowings
Long-term Debt: On August 4, 2020, the Corporation completed the sale of a subordinated debt note offering. The Corporation sold $15.0 million of subordinated debt notes with a maturity date of September 1, 2030. These notes are noncallable for 5 years and carry a fixed interest rate of 5% per year for 5 years and then convert to a floating rate of SOFR plus 4.93% per year for the remainder of the term. The notes can be redeemed at par beginning 5 years prior to maturity. The Corporation also sold $5.0 million of subordinated debt notes with a maturity date of September 1, 2035. These notes are noncallable for 10 years and carry a fixed interest rate of 5.25% per year for 10 years and then convert to a floating rate of SOFR plus 4.92% per year for the remainder of the term. The notes can be redeemed at par beginning 5 years prior to maturity. The notes are structured to qualify as Tier 2 capital for the Corporation and any funds it invests in the Bank qualify as Tier 1 capital at the Bank. The Corporation paid an issuance fee of 2% of the total issue that will be amortized to the call date of each issue on a pro-rata basis. The proceeds are intended to be used for general corporate purposes. The Corporation had no borrowings at December 31, 2019 or 2018.
Shareholders’ Equity:
Shareholders’ equity increased by $17.6 million to $145.2 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was the result of 2020 net income of $12.8 million, offset by $5.2 million in dividends ($1.20 per share), and an increase of $9.2 million in accumulated other comprehensive income due primarily to an increase in fair value of the investment portfolio. The dividend payout ratio was 40.8% in 2020 compared to 31.7% in 2019.
The Board of Directors frequently authorizes the repurchase of the Corporation’s $1.00 par value common stock. Information regarding stock repurchase plans in place during the year are included in Item 5 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Shareholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities. Additional information on Shareholders’ Equity is reported in Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The Corporation’s dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP) allows for shareholders to purchase additional shares of the Corporation’s common stock by reinvesting cash dividends paid on their shares or through optional cash payments. The Dividend Reinvestment Plan (DRIP) added $1.8 million to capital during 2020. This total was comprised of $868 thousand from the reinvestment of quarterly dividends and $968 thousand of optional cash contributions.
A strong capital position is important to the Corporation as it provides a solid foundation for the future growth of the Corporation, as well as instills confidence in the Bank by depositors, regulators and investors, and is considered essential by Management. The Corporation is continually exploring other sources of capital as part of its capital management plan for the Corporation and the Bank.
Common measures of adequate capitalization for banking institutions are capital ratios. These ratios indicate the proportion of permanently committed funds to the total asset base. Guidelines issued by federal and state regulatory authorities require both banks and bank holding companies to meet minimum leverage capital ratios and risk-based capital ratios.
The leverage ratio compares Tier 1 capital to average assets while the risk-based ratio compares Tier 1 and total capital to risk-weighted assets and off-balance-sheet activity in order to make capital levels more sensitive to the risk profiles of individual banks. Tier 1 capital is comprised of common stock, additional paid-in capital, retained earnings and components of other comprehensive income, reduced by goodwill and other intangible assets. Total capital is comprised of Tier 1 capital plus the allowable portion of the allowance for loan losses.
The Corporation, as a bank holding company, is required to comply with the capital adequacy standards established by Federal Reserve Board. The Bank is required to comply with capital adequacy standards established by the FDIC. In addition, the Pennsylvania Department of Banking also requires state-chartered banks to maintain a 6% leverage capital level and 10% risk-based capital, defined substantially the same as the federal regulations.
The Corporation and the Bank are subject to the capital requirements contained in the regulation generally referred to as Basel III. The Basel III standards were effective for the Corporation and the Bank, effective January 1, 2015. Basel III imposes significantly higher capital requirements and more restrictive leverage and liquidity ratios than those previously in place. The capital ratios to be considered “well capitalized” under Basel III are: (1) Common Equity Tier 1(CET1) of 6.5%, (2) Tier 1 Leverage of 5%, (3) Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital of 8%, and (4) Total Risk-Based Capital of 10%. The CET1 ratio is a new capital ratio under Basel III and the Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 8% has been increased from 6%. The rules also included changes in the risk weights of certain assets to better reflect credit and other risk exposures. In addition, a capital conservation buffer of 2.50% is applicable to all of the capital ratios except for the Tier 1 Leverage ratio. The capital conservation buffer is equal to the lowest value of the three applicable capital ratios less the regulatory minimum (“adequately capitalized”) for each respective capital measurement. The Bank’s capital conservation buffer at December 31, 2020 was 7.33% compared to the regulatory buffer of 2.50%. Compliance with the capital conservation buffer is required in order to avoid limitations certain capital distributions. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank was “well capitalized’ under the Basel III requirements. The minimum capital ratios (shown as “adequately capitalized”) and the “well capitalized” capital ratios are reported on Note 2 of the accompanying financial statements.
On August 4, 2020, the Corporation completed the sale of a $20 million subordinated debt note offering (see Table 17). The notes are structured to qualify as Tier 2 capital for the Corporation and any funds it invests in the Bank qualify as Tier 1 capital at the Bank.
In 2019, the Community Bank Leverage Ratio (CBLR) was approved by federal banking agencies as an optional capital measure available to Qualifying Community Banking Organizations (QCBO). If a bank qualifies as a QCBR and maintains a CBLR of 9% or greater, the bank would be considered “well-capitalized” for regulatory capital purposes and exempt from complying with the Basel III risk-based capital rule. The CBLR rule was effective January 1, 2020 and banks could opt-in through an election in the first quarter 2020 regulatory filings. The Bank meets the criteria of a QCBO but did not opt-in to the CBLR.
The Bank is participating in the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) and the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) to fund PPP Loans. In accordance with regulatory guidance, PPP loans pledged as collateral for PPPLF, and PPPLF advances, are excluded from leverage capital ratios. PPP loans will also carry a 0% risk-weight for risk-based capital rules. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had no PPP loans pledged as collateral for PPPLF advances.
The consolidated asset limit on small bank holding companies is $3 billion and a company with assets under that limit is not subject to the consolidated capital rules but may file reports that include capital amounts and ratios. The Corporation has elected to file those reports.
The following table presents capital ratios for the Corporation at December 31:
Table 19. Capital Ratios
For additional information on capital adequacy refer to Note 2 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Local Economy
The Corporation’s primary market area includes Franklin, Fulton, Cumberland and Huntingdon County, PA. This area is diverse in demographic and economic makeup. County populations range from a low of approximately 15,000 in Fulton County to over 250,000 in Cumberland County. Unemployment in the Bank’s market area increased during 2020 over 2019 as the local economy was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The market area has a diverse economic base and local industries include, warehousing, truck and rail shipping centers, light and heavy manufacturers, health care, higher education institutions, farming and agriculture, and a varied service sector. The market area provides easy access to the major metropolitan markets on the east coast via trucking and rail transportation. Because of this, warehousing and distribution companies continue to find the area attractive. The local economy is not overly dependent on any one industry or business and Management believes that the Bank’s primary market area continues to be well suited for growth. The following provides selected economic data for the Bank’s primary market at December 31:
Economic Data
The assets and liabilities of the Corporation are financial in nature, as such, the pricing of products, customer demand for certain types of products, and the value of assets and liabilities are greatly influenced by interest rates. As such, interest rates and changes in interest rates may have a more significant effect on the Corporation’s financial results than on other types of industries. Because of this, the Corporation watches the actions of the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee (FOMC) as it makes decisions about interest rate changes and monetary policy. In the Spring of 2020, the U.S. economy was hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. A surge in cases during the fall of 2020 and renewal of restrictions in many states may limit economic growth nationally early in 2021. The distribution of vaccines will likely begin to ease the medical necessity of restrictions, although the U.S. may not feel the full benefits from their availability until the second half of 2021. Despite the expected GDP growth (3 to 4 percent for 2021), unemployment nationally will remain elevated-especially in service sectors such as hospitality, food service and retail. The path to economic recovery will depend significantly on the course of the virus. The ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. In January 2021, the FOMC announced its intention to keep rates near zero until the labor market has achieved full employment and to maintain more broadly accommodative monetary policy conditions until inflation averages 2%.
Liquidity
The Corporation conducts substantially all of its business through its bank subsidiary. The liquidity needs of the Corporation are funded primarily by the bank subsidiary, supplemented with liquidity from its dividend reinvestment plan.
The Bank must meet the financial needs of the customers that it serves, while providing a satisfactory return on the shareholders’ investment. In order to accomplish this, the Corporation must maintain sufficient liquidity in order to respond quickly to the changing level of funds required for both loan and deposit activity. The goal of liquidity management is to meet the ongoing cash flow requirements of depositors who want to withdraw funds and of borrowers who request loan disbursements. The Bank regularly reviews it liquidity position by measuring its projected net cash flows (in and out) at a 30 and 90-day interval. The Bank stress tests this measurement by assuming a level of deposit out-flows that have not historically been realized. In addition to this forecast, other funding sources are reviewed as a method to provide emergency funding if necessary. The objective of this measurement is to identify the amount of cash that could be raised quickly without the need to liquidate assets. The Bank also stresses its liquidity position utilizing different longer-term scenarios. The varying degrees of stress create pressure on deposit flows in its local market, reduce
access to wholesale funding and limit access of funds available through brokered deposit channels. In addition to stressing cash flow, specific liquidity risk indicators are monitored to help identify risk areas. This analysis helps identify and quantify the potential cash surplus/deficit over a variety of time horizons to ensure the Bank has adequate funding resources. Assumptions used for liquidity stress testing are subjective. Should an evolving liquidity situation or business cycle present new data, potential assumption changes will be considered. The Bank believes it can meet all anticipated liquidity demands.
Historically, the Bank has satisfied its liquidity needs from earnings, repayment of loans, amortizing and maturing investment securities, loan sales, deposit growth and its ability to access existing lines of credit. All investment securities are classified as available for sale; therefore, securities that are unencumbered (approximately $276.8 million fair value) as collateral for borrowings are an additional source of readily available liquidity, either by selling the security or, more preferably, to provide collateral for additional borrowing. The Bank also has access to other wholesale funding via the brokered CD market.
The FHLB system has always been a major source of funding for community banks. There are no indicators that lead the Bank to believe the FHLB will discontinue its lending function or restrict the Bank’s ability to borrow. If either of these events were to occur, it would have a negative effect on the Bank, and it is unlikely that the Bank could replace the level of FHLB funding in a short time. The Bank has also established credit at the Federal Reserve Discount Window an unsecured line of credit at a correspondent bank.
The following table shows the Bank’s available liquidity at December 31, 2020.
Pandemic Effect on Liquidity: The Bank is closely monitoring its liquidity needs as loans are modified and delinquencies are expected to increase. The Bank expects to see a reduction in monthly cash flow from loan deferrals, as discussed in the Loan Quality section. The Bank expects to be able to absorb this reduction through its current liquidity resources. To support its liquidity position, the Bank is participating in the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) established by the Federal Reserve to fund loans made through the Paycheck Protection Program sponsored by the Small Business Administration. The PPPLF is a term financing facility with a fixed interest rate of 0.35% and a maturity equal to the maturity date of the PPP loans (2 years or 5 years). Loans made through the PPP are used as collateral for PPPLF funding. The PPPLF will allow the Bank to fully fund its PPP loans at a low fixed rate without having to access its normal liquidity sources described above. The Bank believes it can meet all anticipated liquidity demands of the pandemic through its current liquidity sources and the government sponsored programs. At December 31, 2020 the Bank had no PPPLF advances outstanding.
Off Balance Sheet Commitments
The Corporation’s financial statements do not reflect various commitments that are made in the normal course of business, which may involve some liquidity risk. These commitments consist mainly of unfunded loans and letters of credit made under the same standards as on-balance sheet loans and lines of credit. Because these unfunded instruments have fixed maturity dates and many of them will expire without being drawn upon, they do not generally present any significant liquidity risk to the Corporation. Unused commitments and standby letters of credit totaled $357.9 million and $22.3 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020, compared to $310.2 million and $26.4 million, respectively, at December 31, 2019. In the second quarter of 2018, the Bank established a $2.4 million allowance against letters credit of issued in connection with a commercial borrower that declared bankruptcy. In the first quarter of 2020, the Bank reversed $250 thousand of this reserve as one letter of credit was cancelled. At December 31, 2020, this reserve was $2.1 million.
Management believes that any amounts actually drawn upon can be funded in the normal course of operations. The Corporation has no investment in or financial relationship with any unconsolidated entities that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on liquidity.