Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Item 1. Business,” and our audited consolidated and combined financial statements and notes thereto. For purposes of this section, “Whole Earth Brands,” the “Company,” “we,” or “our” refer to (i) Mafco Worldwide & Merisant and their subsidiaries (“Predecessor”) for the period from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020 and the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (each referred to herein as a “Predecessor Period”) prior to the consummation of the Business Combination and (ii) Whole Earth Brands, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Successor”) for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 (the “Successor Period”) after the consummation of the Business Combination, unless the context otherwise requires.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a number of forward looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and other factors described throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K and particularly in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a global food company enabling healthier lifestyles and providing access to high-quality plant-based sweeteners, flavor enhancers and other foods through our diverse portfolio of trusted brands and delicious products. We operate a proven platform organized into two reportable segments.
•Branded CPG, comprised of our Merisant division of operating companies and Swerve, is a global CPG business focused on building a branded portfolio oriented toward serving customers seeking zero-calorie, low-calorie, natural, no-sugar-added and plant-based products. Our Branded CPG business operates leading brands in the low- and zero-calorie sweetener market, such as Whole Earth®, Swerve®, Equal®, Canderel® and Pure Via®, and existing branded adjacencies.
•Flavors & Ingredients, comprised of our Mafco Worldwide division of operating companies, is our global, business-to-business focused operations with a long history as a trusted supplier of essential, functional ingredients to some of the CPG industry’s largest and most demanding customers. Our Flavors & Ingredients segment operates our licorice-derived products business.
Significant Acquisitions
On June 24, 2020, we domesticated into a Delaware corporation and changed our name from “Act II Global Acquisition Corp.” to “Whole Earth Brands, Inc.” On June 25, 2020, we consummated the Business Combination of (i) all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Merisant Company, Merisant Luxembourg Sarl (“Merisant Luxembourg”), Mafco Worldwide LLC, Mafco Shanghai LLC (“Mafco Shanghai”), EVD Holdings LLC (“EVD Holdings”), and Mafco Deutschland GmbH (together with Merisant Company, Merisant Luxembourg, Mafco Worldwide LLC, Mafco Shanghai, and EVD Holdings, and their respective direct and indirect subsidiaries, “Merisant and Mafco Worldwide”), and (ii) certain assets and liabilities of Merisant and Mafco Worldwide included in the Transferred Assets and Liabilities (as defined in the Purchase Agreement (as hereafter defined)), from Flavors Holdings Inc. (“Flavors Holdings”), MW Holdings I LLC (“MW Holdings I”), MW Holdings III LLC (“MW Holdings III”), and Mafco Foreign Holdings, Inc. (“Mafco Foreign Holdings,”) and together with Flavors Holdings, MW Holdings I, and MW Holdings III, the “Sellers”), pursuant to that certain Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) entered into with the Sellers dated as of December 19, 2019, as amended.
As a result of the Business Combination, Act II was deemed to be the acquirer for accounting purposes, and Merisant and MAFCO, which is the business conducted prior to the closing of the Business Combination, was deemed to be the acquiree and accounting Predecessor. The Business Combination was accounted for as a business combination using the acquisition method of accounting, and the Successor’s financial statements reflect a new basis of accounting that is based on the fair value of net assets acquired. As a result of the application of the acquisition method of accounting as of the effective time of the Business Combination, the financial statements for the Predecessor Period and for the Successor Period are presented on different bases. The historical financial information of Act II prior to the Business Combination has not been reflected in the Predecessor Period financial statements.
On November 10, 2020, we executed and closed the Swerve Purchase Agreement. Swerve is a manufacturer and marketer of a portfolio of zero sugar, keto-friendly, and plant-based sweeteners and baking mixes. Upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Swerve Purchase Agreement, at the closing we purchased all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of both Swerve LLC and Swerve IP from RF Development, and both Swerve LLC and Swerve IP became wholly-owned subsidiaries of Whole Earth Brands. The transaction was structured to simultaneously sign and close, was not subject to any closing conditions.
Pursuant to the terms of the Swerve Purchase Agreement, we paid RF Development $80 million in cash for all of the issued and outstanding membership interests of both Swerve LLC and Swerve IP, which is subject to customary post-closing adjustments.
To finance a portion of the Swerve transaction, we utilized approximately $47.9 million under our $50 million revolving loan facility with Toronto Dominion (Texas) LLC.
Covid-19 Impact
COVID-19 surfaced in Wuhan, China in late 2019, and has since spread throughout the rest of the world. In March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the U.S. Government. The pandemic has negatively affected the U.S. and global economies, disrupted global supply chains and financial markets, and resulted in significant travel restrictions, including mandated facility closures and shelter-in-place orders.
We have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees and implemented work from home arrangements, where possible, social distancing where working from home is not feasible including in our manufacturing facilities, deep cleaning protocols at all of our facilities and travel restrictions, among other measures. We have also taken appropriate measures to work with our customers to minimize potential disruption and to support the communities that we serve to address the challenges posed by the pandemic.
While we have experienced a net increase in the overall demand for our products and have no supply disruptions, we are unable to fully determine the future impact of COVID-19 on demand for our products or our ability to supply our products. The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related containment and mitigation actions taken by national, state and local government officials across the world to prevent disease spread. The extent of the pandemic’s impact on us will also depend upon our employees’ ability to work safely in our facilities, our customers’ ability to continue to operate or receive our products, the ability of our suppliers to continue to operate, and the level of activity and demand for the ultimate product and services of our customers or their customers.
Recent Developments
On December 17, 2020, we entered into a stock purchase agreement (the “Wholesome Purchase Agreement”) with WSO Investments, Inc. (“WSO Investments” and together with its subsidiaries “Wholesome”), WSO Holdings, LP (“WSO Partnership”), Edwards Billington and Son, Limited (“EBS”), WSO Holdings, LLC (“WSO LLC,” and together with WSO Partnership and EBS, the “WSO Sellers”), and WSO Partnership, in its capacity as representative for the WSO Sellers. WSO Investments is the direct parent of its wholly-owned subsidiary Wholesome Sweeteners, Incorporated, which was formed to import, market, distribute, and sell organic sugars, unrefined specialty sugars, and related products.
On February 5, 2021, pursuant to the terms of the Wholesome Purchase Agreement, (i) the Company (acting through its direct wholly-owned subsidiary, Project Taste Intermediate LLC, as its designee) purchased and acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of WSO Investments from the WSO Sellers, for (x) an initial cash purchase price of $180 million (subject to customary post-closing adjustments), plus (y) as more thoroughly described below, up to an additional $55 million (the “Earn-Out Amount”) upon the satisfaction of certain post-closing financial metrics by Wholesome; and (ii) WSO Investments became an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (collectively, the “Wholesome Transaction”). Subject to the terms and conditions of the Wholesome Purchase Agreement, and as more thoroughly described therein, payment of the Earn-Out Amount, in whole or in part, is subject to Wholesome achieving certain EBITDA thresholds at or above approximately $30 million during the period beginning August 29, 2020, and ending December 31, 2021. A portion of the Earn-Out Amount (up to $27.5 million) may be paid, at the Company’s election, in freely tradeable, registered shares of Company common stock. Calculation of the achievement of the Earn-Out Amount is subject to certain adjustments more thoroughly described in the Wholesome Purchase Agreement. While the Earn-Out Amount, if any, is currently expected to be payable in the first quarter of 2022, the payment could accelerate upon the breach by the Company of certain covenants more thoroughly described in the Wholesome Purchase Agreement.
In connection with the closing of the Wholesome Transaction, on February 5, 2021, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries entered into an amendment and restatement agreement (the “Amendment Agreement”) with Toronto Dominion (Texas) LLC, as administrative agent, and certain lenders signatory thereto, which amended and restated its existing senior secured loan agreement dated as of June 25, 2020 (as amended on September 4, 2020, the “Existing Credit Agreement,” and as further amended by the Amendment Agreement, the “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”), by and among Toronto Dominion (Texas) LLC, as administrative agent, certain lenders signatory thereto and certain other parties. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for a further description of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
Stock Repurchase Plan
On September 8, 2020, we announced that the Company’s board of directors had authorized a stock repurchase plan of up to $20 million of shares of our common stock. The shares may be repurchased from time to time over a 12-month period expiring on September 15, 2021 (or upon the earlier completion of all purchases contemplated by the repurchase plan or the earlier termination of the repurchase plan), in open market transactions at prevailing market prices, in privately negotiated transactions, or by other means in accordance with U.S. federal securities laws.
The timing and actual number of shares of common stock repurchased under the stock repurchase plan will depend on a number of factors, including the market price of our common stock, general market and economic conditions, applicable legal requirements, compliance with the terms of our outstanding indebtedness, alternate uses for capital and other factors. There is no guarantee as to the number of shares that will be repurchased, and the repurchase plan may be extended, suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice at our discretion.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no repurchases of our common stock under the stock repurchase plan.
Results of Operations
Consolidated
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Product revenues, net. Product revenues, net were $147.2 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $128.3 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Product revenues, net for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 were $275.5 million, an increase of $3.4 million, or 1.2%, from $272.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to an $11.7 million increase in product revenues at Branded CPG driven by strong growth in retail and e-commerce channels, $4.3 million of revenue from the acquisition of Swerve, partially offset by declines in the foodservice channel at Branded CPG and a decline in product revenues of $8.4 million at Flavors & Ingredients, as further discussed below.
Cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold was $101.6 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $77.6 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Cost of goods sold for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was $179.2 million, an increase of $15.6 million, or 9.5%, from $163.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by $12.1 million of purchase accounting adjustments related to inventory, $3.3 million from the acquisition of Swerve (which includes $0.5 million of purchase accounting adjustments related to inventory) and higher volumes in the Branded CPG segment, partially offset by lower volumes in the Flavors & Ingredients segment.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) were $44.6 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $43.4 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 were $88.0 million, an increase of $22.1 million, or 33.5%, from $65.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to Predecessor contracted transaction bonuses and related payroll taxes of $11.2 million in 2020, $5.1 million of acquisition related transaction expenses, $9.1 million for public company costs including both one-time costs as well as ongoing costs to operate as a public company, $1.0 million for stock-based compensation expense and $1.3 million from the acquisition of Swerve, partially offset by lower bonus expense of $2.0 million primarily due to certain employees receiving a one-time grant of restricted stock units on September 30, 2020 in lieu of an annual cash bonus for 2020, productivity initiatives and lower expenses such as travel and entertainment due to COVID-19.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets was $6.0 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $4.9 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Amortization of intangible assets for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.9 million, an increase of $0.2 million, or 2.1%, from $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Asset impairment charges. Asset impairment charges were $40.6 million in the Predecessor period and for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 and included an impairment charge of $22.9 million related to indefinite-lived intangible assets and a goodwill impairment charge of $17.7 million. The goodwill impairment charge of $17.7 million was the result of the Flavors & Ingredients and Branded CPG reporting units carrying value exceeding their fair value by $6.6 million and $11.1 million, respectively. The asset impairment charges were recorded in the first quarter of 2020.
Restructuring and other expenses. Restructuring and other expenses were $1.1 million for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to lower facility closure costs.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net was $4.4 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $0.2 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Interest expense, net for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.6 million, an increase of $4.1 million from $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to interest expense under our new credit facilities and the amortization of debt issuance costs.
Other (expense) income, net. Other (expense) income, net was expense of $0.6 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and income of $0.8 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Other (expense) income, net for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was income of $0.2 million, a change of $1.1 million from expense of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was the result of lower foreign exchange losses.
Benefit for income taxes. The income tax benefit was $2.6 million, $3.5 million and $2.5 million for the periods from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020, January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020, and for the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively.
The effective tax rate for the Successor period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 is 23.7%. The effective tax rate differs from the statutory federal rate of 21% primarily due to the U.S. tax effect of international operations, state and local taxes and tax rate differences related to our foreign operations. The effective rate for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to June 25, 2020 was 9.3% and differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impairment of non-deductible goodwill, the U.S. effect of foreign operations and a decrease in our uncertain tax position liability. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was an income tax benefit of 8.7% which differs from the statutory federal rate of 21% primarily due to the U.S. tax effect of international operations and state and local taxes.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Product revenues, net. Product revenues, net was $272.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $18.8 million, or 6.5%, compared to $291.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 due to decreases in product revenues at both Branded CPG and Flavors & Ingredients of $7.9 million and $10.9 million, respectively, as further described below.
Cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold was $163.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $4.2 million, or 2.5%, compared to $167.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to a $3.6 million favorable impact of foreign currency fluctuations. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of products revenue, net increased to 60.1% in 2019, from 57.7% in 2018. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency fluctuations, the increase in cost of goods sold as a percentage of product revenue was driven by Branded CPG North America.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. SG&A was $65.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decline of $8.9 million, or 11.9%, from $74.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in SG&A was primarily due to lower brand marketing as the Company elected to increase trade marketing and incentives in 2019, which are recorded net of sales, and lower compensation expense. The decrease was partially offset by a favorable $3.2 million impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets remained relatively flat, $10.7 million in 2019 compared to $11.1 million in 2018.
Restructuring and other expenses. Restructuring and other expenses decreased $7.3 million to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is primarily related to lower employee termination costs and a decrease in facility closure costs.
Interest (expense) income, net. Interest expense, net was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to interest income of $0.05 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other expense, net. Other expense, net was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to lower foreign exchange losses in 2019.
(Benefit)/provision for income taxes. (Benefit)/provision for income taxes decreased $7.8 million to a benefit of $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to a provision of $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The effective tax rate for 2019 was an income tax benefit of 8.7% compared to an effective tax rate for 2018 of 20.3%. The decrease in 2019 was predominantly due to the tax benefit related to the impact of foreign restructuring and the change in tax rates enacted during the year.
Results of Operations by Segment
Branded CPG
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Segment Product Revenues, net. Product revenues, net for Branded CPG were $96.9 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $80.7 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Product revenues, net for Branded CPG for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 were $177.6 million, an increase of $11.7 million, or 7.1%, from $165.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to strong growth in retail and e-commerce channels globally and $4.3 million of revenue as a result of the acquisition of Swerve, partially offset by declines in the foodservice channel as a result of COVID-19.
Segment Operating (Loss) Income. Operating loss for Branded CPG was $3.5 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and an operating loss of $14.5 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Operating loss for Branded CPG for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was $17.9 million, a change of $28.2 million as compared to operating income of $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline was primarily due to a goodwill impairment charge of $11.1 million recorded during the Predecessor Period in the first quarter of 2020, Predecessor contracted transaction bonuses and related payroll taxes of $7.5 million, $5.1 million of acquisition related transaction expenses, $9.1 million for public company costs including one-time public company readiness costs and $4.0 million of purchase accounting adjustments related to inventory (which includes $0.5 million related to the acquisition of Swerve), partially offset by increased sales, SG&A productivity initiatives and a decline in amortization expense of $2.5 million primarily due to the valuation of intangible assets from the Business Combination.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Segment Product Revenues, net. Product revenues, net for Branded CPG decreased approximately 4.5%, or $7.9 million, to $165.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $173.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Excluding the $9.0 million unfavorable impact of foreign currency fluctuations, product revenues increased by 0.6% or $1.1 million. The increase in net revenue was driven by strong growth from Whole Earth in North America, growth in Asia Pacific and Latin America partially offset by higher trade marketing investments in North America and by the discontinuing of sales in the Middle East and Germany.
Segment Operating (Loss) Income. Operating income for Branded CPG was $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.0 million, or 24.1%, as compared to operating income of $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to higher sales and lower SG&A.
Flavors & Ingredients
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Segment Product Revenues, net. Product revenues, net for Flavors & Ingredients was were $50.3 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $47.6 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Product revenues, net for Flavors & Ingredients for the combined twelve months ended December 31, 2020 were $97.9 million, a decrease of $8.4 million, or 7.9%, from $106.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by a $9.6 million decline in international tobacco revenues as well as some revenue decline due to the effects of COVID-19, partially offset by growth in the remainder of the licorice derivatives business.
Segment Operating (Loss) Income. Operating loss for Flavors & Ingredients was $2.6 million for the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and $23.7 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Operating loss for Flavors & Ingredients for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.4 million, a decrease of $45.8 million as compared to operating income of $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline was primarily due to asset impairment charges totaling $29.5 million recorded during the Predecessor Period in the first quarter of 2020, $8.6 million of purchase accounting adjustments related to inventory, $2.7 million of higher amortization expense due to purchase accounting valuations, Predecessor contracted transaction bonuses and related payroll taxes of $4.2 million in 2020, and lower revenues, partially offset by a $1.3 million decline in bonus expense.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Segment Product Revenues, net. Product revenues, net for Flavors & Ingredients decreased approximately 9.3%, or $10.9 million, to $106.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by the decline in international tobacco revenues.
Segment Operating (Loss) Income. Operating income for Flavors & Ingredients was $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.1 million as compared to operating income of $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decline was primarily due lower revenues largely offset by productivity gains.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Predecessor has historically funded operations with cash flow from operations and, when needed, with borrowings, which are described below.
We believe our cash flow from operations and other sources of liquidity and capital, including our new Loan Agreement, will be sufficient to finance our continued operations, growth strategy and additional expenses we expect to incur for at least the next twelve months.
The following table shows summary cash flow information for the periods from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020, January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020 and the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $9.4 million in the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities was $19.9 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities for the combined year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.5 million compared to $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower cash flow from operating results, unfavorable working capital changes and higher interest payments.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $282.1 million in the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 which included cash paid of $376.7 million, net of cash acquired, related to the Business Combination, $178.9 million of cash transferred from the trust account, $79.8 million related to the Swerve acquisition and capital expenditures of $4.5 million. Net cash used in investing activities was $3.5 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020 and was entirely related to capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities was $4.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 and was entirely related to capital expenditures.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $252.2 million in the period from June 26, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and reflects $140.0 million of proceeds from the Loan Agreement (as defined and described below), net of debt issuance costs of $7.1 million, proceeds from the revolving credit facility of $47.9 million proceeds from the sale of common stock and warrants of $75.0 million and repayments of long-term debt of $3.5 million. Net cash used in financing activities was $16.9 million from January 1, 2020 through June 25, 2020 due to $8.5 million of repayments, offset by $3.5 million of borrowings related to the prior revolving credit facility and $11.9 million due to funding to the parent. Net cash used by financing activities was $23.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 due to funding to the parent of $25.4 million, partially offset by $1.5 million of proceeds from a revolving credit facility.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $2.1 million to $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease was due primarily to a decrease in deferred income taxes, offset by an increase in net income.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities increased $1.9 million to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was largely driven by proceeds from the sale of certain fixed assets in 2018.
Financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities decreased $4.6 million to $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease is due to reduced funding to parent offset by a decrease in net borrowing.
Indebtedness
Loan Agreement
In connection with the Business Combination, on June 25, 2020, we entered into a senior secured loan agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) which contained a Revolving Credit Facility and a Term Loan Facility with Toronto Dominion (Texas) LLC, as administrative agent, BofA Securities Inc., as Syndication Agent, BMO Capital Markets Corp. and Truist Bank, as documentation agents, and the other lenders party thereto.
The Loan Agreement provides for a term loan facility of $140 million and a revolving credit facility of up to $50 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were $2.1 million outstanding letters of credit that reduced our availability under the revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had term loan borrowings of $131.8 million, net of debt issuance costs of $4.7 million under the Loan Agreement and were in compliance with the related financial covenants. Additionally, there were $47.9 million in borrowings under the revolving credit facility as of December 30, 2020.
The Loan Agreement requires us to make certain mandatory prepayments, with (i) 100% of net cash proceeds of all non-ordinary course asset sales or other dispositions of property in excess of $5,000,000 in any fiscal year, subject to the ability to reinvest such proceeds and certain other exceptions, (ii) 100% of the net cash proceeds of any debt incurrence, other than debt permitted under the definitive agreements (but excluding debt incurred to refinance the Loan Agreement) and (iii) 50% of “Excess Cash Flow,” as defined in the Loan Agreement with a reduction to 25% if the total net leverage ratio for the fiscal year is less than or equal to 2.50 to 1.00 but greater than 2.00 to 1.00, and a reduction to 0% if the total net leverage ratio for the fiscal year is less than or equal to 2.00 to 1.00. We are also required to make quarterly amortization payments equal to (i) 1.25% per annum of the original principal amount of the Term Loan Facility during the first, second and third years after the closing date of the Credit Facilities, commencing after the first full fiscal quarter after the closing date of the Loan Agreement, and (ii) 2.50% per annum of the original principal amount of the term loan facility during the fourth and fifth years after the closing date of the Loan Agreement (subject to reductions by optional and mandatory prepayments of the loans). We may prepay the term loan facility at any time without premium or penalty, subject to payment of customary breakage costs.
The Loan Agreement contains financial covenants and a number of traditional negative covenants including negative covenants related to the following subjects: consolidations, mergers, and sales of assets; limitations on the incurrence of certain liens; limitations on certain indebtedness; limitations on the ability to pay dividends; and certain affiliate transactions.
The Loan Agreement also contains certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default. If an event of default occurs, the lenders under the Loan Agreement are entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the loan and all actions permitted to be taken by a secured creditor. The Company was in compliance with its covenants under the Loan Agreement on December 31, 2020.
In connection with the Wholesome Transaction, on February 5, 2021, we entered into the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, which provides for senior secured financing consisting of the following credit facilities: (a) a senior secured term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of $375 million (the “Term Loan Facility”); and (b) a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $75 million (the “Revolving Facility,” and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Credit Facilities”). The Revolving Facility has a $15 million subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $15 million sublimit for swing line loans. The Company used the proceeds under the Term Loan Facility to (i) repay and refinance existing indebtedness of Wholesome; (ii) pay the cash consideration for the Wholesome Transaction; (iii) repay and refinance outstanding borrowings under the Existing Credit Agreement; and (iv) pay fees and expenses incurred in connection with the foregoing. The proceeds of the Revolving Facility can be used to finance working capital needs, for general corporate purposes, and for working capital adjustments payable under the Wholesome Purchase Agreement.
Loans outstanding under the Credit Facilities will accrue interest at a rate per annum equal to (i) with respect to the Revolving Facility and letters of credit, (A) 2.75%, in the case of base rate advances, and (B) 3.75% in the case of LIBOR advances, and (ii) with respect to the Term Loan Facility, (A) 3.50%, in the case of base rate advances, and (B) 4.50% in the case of LIBOR advances, with a LIBOR floor of 1.00% with respect to the Term Loan Facility, and 0.00% with respect to Revolving Facility and letters of credit, and base rate based on the highest of the prime rate, the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, LIBOR for a one-month interest period plus 1.00%, and with respect to the Revolving Facility and letters of credit, 0.00%, or with respect to the Term Loan Facility, 2.0%, and undrawn amounts under the Revolving Facility will accrue a commitment fee at a rate per annum equal to 0.50% on the average daily undrawn portion of the commitments thereunder.
The obligations under the Credit Facilities are guaranteed by certain direct or indirect wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries of the Company, other than certain excluded subsidiaries, including, but not limited to, immaterial subsidiaries and foreign subsidiaries. The Credit Facilities are secured by substantially all of the personal property of the Company and the guarantor subsidiaries (in each case, subject to certain exclusions and qualifications).
The Credit Facilities require us to make certain mandatory prepayments, with (i) 100% of net cash proceeds of all non-ordinary course asset sales or other dispositions of property in excess of $5 million in any fiscal year, subject to the ability to reinvest such proceeds and certain other exceptions, (ii) 100% of the net cash proceeds of any debt incurrence, other than debt permitted under the definitive agreements (but excluding debt incurred to refinance the Credit Facilities) and (iii) 50% of “Excess Cash Flow,” as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with a reduction to 25% if the total net leverage ratio for the fiscal year is less than or equal to 3.50 to 1.00 but greater than 3.00 to1.00, and a reduction to 0% if the total net leverage ratio for the fiscal year is less than or equal to 3.00 to 1.00. We are also required to make quarterly amortization payments equal to 0.25% per annum of the original principal amount of the Term Loan Facility (subject to reductions by optional and mandatory prepayments of the loans).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, income or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes certain of our obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the estimated timing and effect that such obligations are expected to have on liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
(1) Calculated based on debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and the interest rates as of that date.
(2) Minimum lease obligations have not been reduced by sublease rental income.
In addition, as of December 31, 2020, Mafco Worldwide had obligations to purchase $29.6 million of raw materials; however, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the timing of such payments and, therefore, the related commitments have been excluded from the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to our audited consolidated and combined financial statements. These policies conform with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) and reflect practices appropriate to our businesses. The preparation of our consolidated and combined financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated and combined financial statements and accompanying notes thereto. Actual results could differ from these estimates. We evaluate our policies, estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis.
Our critical accounting policies and estimates relate to revenue recognition, goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, impairment review of long-lived assets, income taxes and pension benefits. Management continually evaluates the development, selection and disclosure of our critical accounting policies and estimates and the application of these policies and estimates. In addition, there are other items within the consolidated and combined financial statements that require the application of accounting policies and estimation, but are not deemed to be critical accounting policies and estimates. Changes in the estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on our consolidated and combined financial statements.
Revenue Recognition-Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, and all related amendments, which provides updated accounting guidance on recognizing revenue. This updated accounting guidance outlines a single comprehensive model for entities to utilize to recognize revenue when they transfer goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that will be received in exchange for the goods or services.
The Company adopted this new accounting guidance using the modified retrospective method. There was no impact to the combined balance sheets or the combined statements of operations and comprehensive income as of January 1, 2018 for the adoption of the standards update.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The Company made an accounting policy election to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price sales taxes and all other items of a similar nature, and also elected to account for shipping and handling activities as a fulfillment of the promise to transfer the goods. Accordingly, shipping and handling costs are included in cost of sales.
The terms and conditions of sale under the supply agreements and/or purchase orders for Merisant call for FOB Destination and FOB Origin shipping terms with its customers. The customer payment terms are usually 40 days from invoice date. The terms and conditions of sale under the supply agreements and/or purchase orders for Mafco Worldwide have various shipping terms with its customers depending upon the customer requests. The customer payment terms range from 30 - 120 days from invoice date based upon geographic location of the customer.
Merisant usually offers promotional activities (e.g. coupons, trade discounts and other promotional activities) to the customers. These variable consideration amounts are estimated for each customer based on specific arrangement/agreement, an analysis of historical volume and/or current activity with that customer. Reassessment of variable consideration estimates is done at each reporting date throughout the contract period until the uncertainty is resolved (e.g. promotional campaign is closed and settled with customer).
Historically, the Company has encountered limited instances whereby customers rejected products as a result of orders being materially inaccurate and/or products being defective. The Company tracks the reason codes for those customer returns. Based on that, the materiality of such returns is assessed. A return reserve is calculated (based on historical data as described above) every month to record an adjustment to net sales: these adjustments have not been significant.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets-We review goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset may be impaired, in accordance with ASC Topic 350, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other.” Under ASC Topic 350, the impairment review of goodwill and other intangible assets not subject to amortization must be based on estimated fair values.
Our annual impairment review measurement date is in the fourth quarter of each year. In performing the annual assessment, we have the option of performing a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that a reporting unit has been impaired. As part of the qualitative assessment for the reporting units, we evaluate the factors that are specific to the reporting units as well as industry and macroeconomic factors (including changes in interest and discount rates). The reporting unit specific factors may include cost factors, a comparison of current year results to prior year, current year budget and future projected financial performance. We also consider the change in the overall enterprise value of the Company compared to the date of the Business Combination.
If we determine that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired or if we elect not to perform the optional qualitative assessment, a quantitative assessment is performed utilizing both the income and market approaches to estimate the fair value of its reporting units. The income approach involves discounting future estimated cash flows. The discount rate used is the value-weighted average of the reporting unit’s estimated cost of equity and debt (“cost of capital”) derived using both known and estimated customary market metrics. We perform sensitivity tests with respect to growth rates and discount rates used in the income approach. In applying the market approach, valuation multiples are derived from historical and projected operating data of selected guideline companies; evaluated and adjusted, if necessary, based on the strengths and weaknesses of the reporting unit relative to the selected guideline companies; and applied to the appropriate historical and/or projected operating data to arrive at an indication of fair value. We weight the results of the income and market approaches equally. If the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value, then an impairment is recorded for the difference, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
We typically evaluate impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets, including our product formulations, by first performing a qualitative assessment. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment or we determine that it is more likely that not that the fair value of the product formulations is less than its carrying value, a quantitative assessment is then performed using the relief from royalty method under the income approach to estimate the fair value. Some of the more significant assumptions inherent in estimating the fair value include the estimated future annual sales, royalty rates (as a percentage of sales that would hypothetically be charged by a licensor of the brand to an unrelated licensee), income tax considerations and a discount rate that reflects the level of risk.
Impairment Review of Long-Lived Assets-In accordance with ASC Topic 360, “Property, Plant and Equipment,” we evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets to be held and used whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset or asset group may be impaired. When such events occur, we compare the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the asset or asset group over its remaining depreciable life to the carrying value. If this comparison indicates that there is an impairment, the carrying amount of the long-lived asset would then be reduced to the estimated fair value, which generally approximates discounted cash flows. We also evaluate the amortization periods of assets to determine whether events or circumstances warrant revised estimates of useful lives. Our applicable long-lived assets include property, plant and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets.
Income Taxes-The provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes”. The asset and liability method provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and for operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
For the Predecessor period, income taxes as presented herein are attributable to current and deferred income taxes of the Company’s financial statements in a manner that is systematic, rational, and consistent with the asset and liability method described by ASC 740. Accordingly, the Company’s income tax provision during the predecessor period was prepared following the separate return method. The separate return method applies ASC 740 to the stand-alone financial statements of each member of the combined group as if the group member were a separate taxpayer and a stand-alone enterprise. Use of the separate return method may result in differences when the sum of the amounts allocated to stand-alone tax provisions are compared with amounts presented in the combined financial statements. In that event, the related deferred tax assets and liabilities could be significantly different from those presented herein. The combined financial statements reflect the Company’s portion of income taxes payable as if the Company had been a separate taxpayer.
The Company made a policy election to treat the income tax due on U.S. inclusion of the global intangible low taxed income (“GILTI”) provisions as a period expense when incurred.
Uncertainty in Income Taxes-The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued under ASC 740, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company provides loss contingencies for federal, state and international tax matters relating to potential tax examination issues, planning initiatives and compliance responsibilities. The development of these reserves requires judgements about tax issues, potential outcomes and timing, which if different, may materially impact the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. The Company classifies interest and penalties associated with income taxes as a component of the provision (benefit) for income taxes in the consolidated and combined statements of operations.
Pension Benefits-Retirement benefits are provided to certain current and former employees through qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension plans sponsored by us. It is our policy to fund the minimum for our company-sponsored pension plans as required by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (“ERISA”). The expected cost of providing the qualified pension plan benefits was accrued over the years that the employees render services, until the plan was frozen on December 31, 2019. The expected cost of providing the non-qualified pension plan benefits is accrued over the years that the employees rendered services. It is our policy to fund non-qualified pension benefits as payments are due. Accounting for pension benefits requires the use of several assumptions and estimates. Actual experience or changes to these assumptions and other estimates could have a significant impact on our consolidated and combined results of operations and financial position. See Note 11 to our audited consolidated and combined financial statements for a summary of all of the key assumptions related to pension benefits as well as a description of our defined benefit pension plans as well as additional disclosures.
We recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of our defined benefit pensions as an asset or liability in our consolidated and combined balance sheets and recognize changes in that funded status in the year in which changes occur through comprehensive income (loss).
We utilize the Aon Hewitt AA-Only Bond Universe Yield Curve (the “Aon Hewitt Yield Curve”) for discounting future benefit obligations and calculating interest cost. The Aon Hewitt Yield Curve represents the yield on high quality (AA and above) corporate bonds that closely match the cash flows of the estimated payouts for our benefit obligations. As of December 31, 2020, a 0.5% decrease in our discount rate assumptions of 2.85% for our qualified pension plan and 2.64% for our non-qualified pension plans would result in a $0.05 million increase in our pension income for the qualified pension plan and a nominal decrease in our pension expense for our non-qualified pension plans for the period of June 26, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
We used a multi-pronged approach to determine our 5.25% assumption for the long-term expected rate of return on pension plan assets. This approach included a review of actual historical returns achieved and anticipated long-term performance of each asset class. As of December 31, 2020, a 0.5% decrease in our long-term rate of return assumption would result in a less than $0.1 million decrease in the pension income of our qualified pension plan for the period of June 26, 2020 to December 31, 2020. Our pension plan assets earned a return of 13.9% in 2020 and 21.5% in 2019. The asset returns are net of administrative expenses.
Our pension actuarial valuation also incorporates other factors such as mortality rates. The actuarial assumptions used by us may differ materially from actual results due to, among other things, longer or shorter life spans of plan participants. Differences in these assumptions could significantly impact the actual amount of net periodic benefit cost and pension liability recorded by us.
Foreign Currency Translation-The Company has determined that the functional currency for each combined subsidiary is its local currency, except for certain entities whose functional currency is the U.S. dollar. Assets and liabilities of entities outside the U.S. are translated into U.S. dollars at the exchange rates in effect at the end of each period; income and expense items are translated at each period’s average exchange rate; and any resulting translation difference is reported and accumulated as a separate component of combined statements of net parent investment, except for any entities which may operate in highly inflationary economies. Gains and losses resulting from transactions in other than functional currencies are reflected in operating results, except for transactions of a long-term nature.
Remeasurements of European entities whose functional currency is the U.S. dollar as well as translation adjustments for entities operating in highly inflationary economies and impacts of foreign currency transactions are recognized currently in other expense (income), net.
Beginning January 1, 2019, the Company was required to apply highly-inflationary accounting to its Argentinian subsidiary. This accounting treatment requires a change in the subsidiary’s functional currency from the local currency (Argentinian Peso) to the parent’s reporting currency (USD). This highly-inflationary classification results from the fact that the cumulative inflation rate for the preceding 3 year period exceeded 100 percent as of June 30, 2018. When the Company changed the functional currency, it revalued the subsidiary’s financial statements as if the new functional currency (USD) were the reporting currency. Accordingly, effective January 1, 2019, all Argentinian Peso denominated monetary assets and liabilities are considered foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities and are revalued to USD (the functional currency) with remeasurement adjustments in the period recorded in the statement of operations. The USD will be the functional currency until the economic environment in Argentina ceases to be considered highly-inflationary.
As of the date of the Business Combination, the assets and liabilities of the Argentinian subsidiary were adjusted to fair value. Certain non-monetary assets and liabilities that were previously recorded at the applicable historical exchange rates are recorded in USD using the exchange rate as of June 25, 2020. Argentinian Peso denominated monetary assets and liabilities continue to be revalued to USD (the functional currency) with remeasurement period adjustments in the period recorded in the statement of operations.
New Accounting Standards
See Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.