Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “Motive Capital Corp.” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Motive Capital Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on September 28, 2020 under the name of MCF2 Acquisition Corp. On November 5, 2020 our name was changed to Motive Capital Corp. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (a “Business Combination”). We are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination. We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on December 10, 2020. On December 15, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 41,400,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”) which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 5,400,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $414,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,386,667 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to Motive Capital Funds Sponsor, LLC (our “Sponsor”), generating gross proceeds of $11,080,000. Transaction costs amounted to approximately $23,700,000, consisting of approximately $8,300,000 of underwriting fees, $14,500,000 of deferred underwriting fees and approximately $880,000 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on December 15, 2020, an amount of $414,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”), and invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earliest of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account to our shareholders, as described below.
We will have until December 15, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if we have not completed a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned and not previously released to us to pay our taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish the rights of the Public Shareholders as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining Public Shareholders and our Board of Directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2020 relates to our formation, the Initial Public Offering and, since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, a search for a business combination candidate. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from September 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $14,000, which consisted of approximately $21,000 in interest income and unrealized gain on marketable securities held in Trust Account, offset by approximately $35,000 in general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1,700,000 in our operating bank accounts, working capital of approximately $1,900,000, and approximately $21,000 of interest income available in the Trust Account to pay for our tax obligations, if any.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we will repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On October 2, 2020, our Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain of our offering and formation costs in consideration for 11,500,000 Class B ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”). On November 24, 2020, our Sponsor surrendered 2,875,000 Founder Shares, which we canceled. On November 24 and December 8, 2020, our Sponsor transferred 30,000 founder shares to each of the independent directors. On December 10, 2020, we issued a dividend of 1,725,000 Class B ordinary shares, resulting in 10,350,000 Founder Shares outstanding. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share cancellation.
The Founder Shares included an aggregate of up to 1,350,000 shares that are subject to forfeiture depending on the extent to which the underwriters’ over-allotment option is exercised, so that the number of Founder Shares will equal, on an as-converted basis, approximately 20% of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares after the Proposed Public Offering. As a result of the underwriters’ election to fully exercise their over-allotment option, 1,350,000 Founder Shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
Our Sponsor has agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earliest of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination and (B) subsequent to a Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share dividends, rights issuances, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after a Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Units
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, our Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 7,386,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, for an aggregate purchase price of $11,080,000, in a private placement. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. A portion of the proceeds from the Private Placement Warrants were added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
Related Party Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Promissory Note - Related Party
On October 1, 2020, we issued an unsecured promissory note (the “Promissory Note”) to our Sponsor, pursuant to which we may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000. The Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) December 31, 2020 and (ii) the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed an aggregate of approximately $130,000 under the Promissory Note. The Promissory Note matured on the closing date of the Initial Public Offering and the outstanding balance under the Promissory Note of $130,492 was repaid in full on December 16, 2020.
Administrative Support Agreement
We entered into an agreement, commencing on December 15, 2020 the effective date of the Initial Public Offering through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, to pay our Sponsor or its affiliate a monthly fee of up to $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative services. The Sponsor has waived such fees and such fees will not be payable until the Sponsor determines that such fees should be paid.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration and Shareholders’ Rights
Pursuant to a registration and shareholders rights agreement entered into on December 10, 2020, the holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) will have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of our securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 14,490,000 Over-Allotment Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less underwriting discounts and commissions.
The underwriters were entitled to underwriting discounts of $0.35 per unit, or $14,490,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Forward Purchase Agreement
We entered into a forward purchase agreement with affiliates of our Sponsor pursuant to which the affiliates intend to purchase an aggregate of 14,000,000 of forward purchase units, consisting of one Class A ordinary share (the “forward purchase shares”) and one-third of one redeemable warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share (the “forward purchase warrant”), for a purchase price of $10.00 per forward purchase unit, or an aggregate amount of $140,000,000, in a private placement to close concurrently with the closing of a Business Combination. The affiliates’ commitment under the forward purchase agreement is subject to, among other conditions, investment committee approval and sufficiency of capital to purchase.
The obligations under the forward purchase agreements will not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the Public Shareholders. The forward purchase shares will be identical to the shares of Class A ordinary stock included in the Units being sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that they will be subject to transfer restrictions and registration rights. The forward purchase warrants will have the same terms as the public warrants. The affiliates' commitment under the forward purchase agreement is subject to, among other conditions, investment committee approval and sufficiency of capital to purchase.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events, Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 7,386,667 of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares are calculated by dividing the interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and investments held in the Trust Account, net of amounts available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account to pay the Company’s income taxes, for the period presented, by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our balance sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.