ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of financial condition and results of operations ("MD&A") is written to help the reader understand our company. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Any reference to restaurants refers to company-owned restaurants unless otherwise indicated.
We use a 52- or 53-week fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to December 31. The fiscal years ended December 29, 2019; December 30, 2018; December 31, 2017; and January 1, 2017, each contained 52 weeks. The fiscal year ended January 3, 2021 contained 53 weeks. The next fiscal year to contain 53 weeks will be the fiscal year ending January 3, 2027.
Company Overview
We own, operate and franchise two restaurant brands, Pollo Tropical® and Taco Cabana®, which have over 30 and 40 years, respectively, of operating history and loyal customer bases. Our Pollo Tropical restaurants feature fire-grilled and crispy citrus marinated chicken and other freshly prepared menu items, while our Taco Cabana restaurants specialize in Mexican-inspired food with most items made fresh. We believe that both brands offer distinct and unique flavors with broad appeal at a compelling value, which differentiates them in the competitive fast-casual and quick-service restaurant segments. Nearly all of our restaurants offer the convenience of drive-thru windows. As of January 3, 2021, our restaurants included 138 Pollo Tropical restaurants in Florida and 143 Taco Cabana restaurants in Texas for a total of 281 restaurants.
We franchise our Pollo Tropical restaurants primarily in international markets, and as of January 3, 2021, we had 23 franchised Pollo Tropical restaurants located in Puerto Rico, Panama, Guyana, Ecuador, and the Bahamas, and five on college campuses and one at a hospital in Florida. We have agreements for the continued development of franchised Pollo Tropical restaurants in certain of our existing franchised markets.
As of January 3, 2021, we had six franchised Taco Cabana restaurants located in New Mexico.
Events Affecting Our Results of Operations
COVID-19 Pandemic
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has affected and is continuing to affect the restaurant industry and the economy. In response to COVID-19 and in compliance with governmental restrictions, we closed the dining room seating areas in all Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants, limiting service to take-out, drive-thru, and delivery operations beginning in mid-March 2020. We also temporarily closed three Pollo Tropical locations due to the impact of the restrictions on sales, one of which was reopened during the second quarter of 2020 and two of which were subsequently permanently closed in August 2020. We began opening certain dining rooms at 50% capacity with the easing of municipality restrictions during the second quarter of 2020; however, we temporarily closed all dining rooms on July 12, 2020, in response to increased COVID-19 infection rates in both Texas and Florida. We began re-opening certain dining rooms and patios with limited capacity and hours at both brands and the state of Florida removed restaurant capacity restrictions at the end of September 2020. We opened approximately 25 dining rooms with limited hours and capacity at both brands and opened approximately 75 patios at Taco Cabana in the fourth quarter of 2020. We are evaluating opening additional dining rooms with limited hours at Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana. Comparable restaurant sales at both Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants declined in 2020 compared to the prior year as a result of the pandemic. However, both brands experienced sequential comparable restaurant sales improvement in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to the second quarter of 2020.
As we continue to prioritize the well-being of our team members and guests during this pandemic, we believe we are also creating a better business model that is easier and safer for our consumers. We currently do not expect sales trends to significantly deteriorate further, although there can be no assurance that sales trends will not deteriorate further, and we have implemented measures to control costs. We have also implemented a number of changes to maximize sales, maintain service, and improve liquidity:
•We have adjusted our operating model to better meet our customers' needs during the COVID-19 crisis. We have also adjusted staffing models to match shifting traffic and channel patterns of our guests and to improve efficiency.
•We are maximizing off-premise sales opportunities. We significantly increased the number of delivery service providers that offer our brands during the first quarter of 2020, modified our menus, and worked with a third party to
enhance our online ordering and mobile apps including curbside pickup features. We launched curbside pickup for both brands in July 2020.
•We reduced our 2020 capital expenditures to $18.4 million as compared to $41.2 million in 2019.
•We terminated or furloughed and subsequently terminated approximately 55 support personnel positions representing annualized general and administrative savings of approximately $4.1 million. Additionally, the salaries for all vice-presidents and executives were reduced by 10% to 35% for the second quarter of 2020.
•We sold six restaurant properties and completed seven sale-leaseback transactions in 2020. We have completed one sale-leaseback transaction in the first quarter of 2021 through March 4, 2021, and currently have offers or contracts in place for the sale or sale-leaseback of our two remaining owned properties, although there can be no assurance that any such sale will be consummated. Net proceeds from the transactions that occurred prior to November 23, 2020, were used to reduce the outstanding revolving credit borrowings and availability under our former amended senior credit facility (as defined below).
•We repaid and terminated our former amended senior credit facility and entered into a new senior credit facility with a five-year maturity and a minimum liquidity covenant (as defined in the new senior credit facility) until January 3, 2022, which we believe provides us with more flexibility.
We incurred additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic totaling an estimated $4.3 million during the year ended January 3, 2021, including additional labor costs such as COVID-19 special incentive pay, quarantine pay and overtime to cover for employees in quarantine, as well as COVID-19 testing costs and additional operating expenses for safety related supplies including masks, cleaning supplies and sanitizer. Although we discontinued COVID-19 special incentive pay after the second quarter of 2020, we expect many of the other COVID-19 related costs to continue during the pandemic.
Restaurant Closures
As a result of restaurant portfolio reviews, we closed 19 underperforming Taco Cabana restaurants in January 2020, all of which were impaired in prior years. Additionally, we closed one Pollo Tropical restaurant as a result of landlord redevelopment that was not compatible with our use in the first quarter of 2020, two underperforming Pollo Tropical restaurants in the third quarter of 2020, and one Taco Cabana restaurant at the end of its lease term in the fourth quarter of 2020. In addition, we closed and sold one owned Pollo Tropical restaurant and two owned Taco Cabana restaurants in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 to generate additional cash to reduce our outstanding borrowings under our former amended senior credit facility.
New Senior Credit Facility
On November 23,2020, we entered into a new senior secured credit agreement (the "new senior credit facility") that provides for a term loan of $75.0 million and a revolving credit facility of $10.0 million. The new senior credit facility matures on November 23, 2025. We borrowed $75.0 million in term loan borrowings subject to a 2.0% original issue discount on November 23, 2020, and the revolving credit facility is undrawn as of January 3, 2021. Revolving credit borrowings under our former amended senior credit facility were fully repaid using proceeds from the term loan borrowings. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements and Senior Credit Facility under Liquidity and Capital Resources in this MD&A for a further discussion.
Executive Summary-Consolidated Operating Performance for the Year Ended January 3, 2021
Our fiscal year 2020 results include the following:
•We recognized a net loss of $(10.2) million in 2020, or $(0.40) per diluted share, compared to a net loss of $(84.4) million, or $(3.18) per diluted share in 2019, due in part to a $67.9 million goodwill impairment charge for the Taco Cabana reporting unit and a $13.5 million charge to establish a valuation allowance on our deferred income tax assets in 2019, as well as an income tax benefit in 2020 related to adjusting our deferred tax asset valuation allowance and reclassifying certain assets as qualified improvement property and other changes to depreciation methods for certain assets in conjunction with filing our 2019 federal income tax return in 2020. Lower advertising and repair and maintenance expense in 2020 and the extra week in our 2020 fiscal year contributed to the reduction in net loss in 2020, partially offset by the impact of declines in comparable restaurant sales at both brands in 2020, higher delivery fees in 2020, and additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, gains from the sale-leaseback and sale of property, lower general and administrative expenses and other impairment charges, as well as favorable operating and labor efficiencies at both brands in 2020, positively contributed to the reduction of the net loss in 2020.
•Total revenues decreased 16.1% in 2020 to $554.8 million from $660.9 million in 2019, driven primarily by a decrease in comparable restaurant sales at both brands (including as a result of the impact of COVID-19), and the impact of closing 19 underperforming Taco Cabana restaurants in the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by the extra week in our 2020 fiscal year. Comparable restaurant sales decreased 14.7% for our Pollo Tropical restaurants resulting from a decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 22.1% and an increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 7.4%. Comparable restaurant sales decreased 14.4% for our Taco Cabana restaurants resulting from a decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 22.1% and an increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 7.7%.
•Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA decreased $13.5 million for the twelve months ended January 3, 2021, to $45.0 million compared to $58.4 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019, driven primarily by the impact of lower restaurant sales and higher delivery fee expense and additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, partially offset by lower advertising and general and administrative expenses, favorable operating and labor efficiencies, the impact of the closure of unprofitable restaurants in the first quarter of 2020, and the additional week in 2020. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance. For a discussion of our use of Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation from net income (loss) to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, see "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
•The COVID-19 pandemic had the largest impact on our first and second quarters. Comparable restaurant sales improved sequentially in the third and fourth quarters. In addition, we made changes that resulted in improved Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA margins in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to the same periods in the prior year. Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. For a discussion of our use of Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation from net income (loss) to Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, see "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the changes in the number and mix of Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana Company-owned and franchised restaurants in each fiscal year:
The following table sets forth, for the years ended January 3, 2021; December 29, 2019; and December 30, 2018, selected consolidated operating results as a percentage of consolidated restaurant sales and selected segment operating results as a percentage of applicable segment restaurant sales:
Consolidated Revenues. Revenues include restaurant sales and franchise royalty revenues and fees. Restaurant sales consist of food and beverage sales, net of discounts, at our restaurants. Franchise royalty revenues and fees represent ongoing royalty payments that are determined based on a percentage of franchisee sales and the amortization of initial franchise fees and area development fees associated with the opening of new franchised restaurants. Restaurant sales are influenced by new restaurant openings, closures of restaurants and changes in comparable restaurant sales.
Total revenues decreased 16.1% to $554.8 million in 2020 from $660.9 million in 2019, while the 2019 total revenues represent a decrease of 4.0% from $688.6 million in 2018. Restaurant sales decreased 16.0% to $552.8 million in 2020 from $658.3 million in 2019, while 2019 restaurant sales represent a decrease of 4.0% from $685.9 million in 2018.
The following table presents the primary drivers of the increase or decrease in restaurant sales for both Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana (in millions):
Restaurants are included in comparable restaurant sales after they have been open for 18 months. Restaurants are excluded from comparable restaurant sales for any fiscal month in which the restaurant was closed for more than five days. Comparable restaurant sales are compared to the same period in the prior year. For comparative purposes, the calculation of the changes in comparable restaurant sales is based on a 52-week fiscal year. Restaurant sales for the extra week in the fiscal year ended January 3, 2021 have been excluded for purposes of calculating the change in comparable company-owned restaurant sales. Comparable restaurant sales in 2020 for both brands were negatively impacted by COVID-19. However, both brands experienced sequential comparable restaurant sales improvement in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to comparable restaurant sales in the second quarter of 2020. We believe our significant mix of dine-in sales prior to the pandemic had a negative impact on comparable restaurant sales.
Comparable restaurant sales decreased 14.7% and 14.4% for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants, respectively, in 2020. Increases or decreases in comparable restaurant sales result primarily from an increase or decrease in comparable restaurant transactions and in average check. Changes in average check are primarily driven by changes in sales channel and sales mix, and to a lesser extent, menu price increases net of discounts and promotions.
For Pollo Tropical, a decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 22.1% was partially offset by an increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 7.4% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in product/channel mix and pricing was driven primarily by increases in delivery and drive-thru average check and sales channel penetration, and menu price increases of 0.4%.
For Taco Cabana, a decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 22.1% was partially offset by an increase in the net impact of product/channel mix and pricing of 7.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in product/channel mix and pricing was driven primarily by increases in drive-thru and delivery sales channel penetration and growth in average check for drive-thru compared to last year due in part to an increase in transactions that include alcohol and menu price increases of 0.9%.
Comparable restaurant sales decreased 1.8% and 4.1% for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants, respectively, in 2019.
For Pollo Tropical, a decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 2.4% was partially offset by an increase in average check of 0.6% in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in average check was driven primarily by menu price increases of 1.6%, partially offset by discounted pricing for Pollo Time. As a result of new restaurant openings, sales cannibalization of existing restaurants negatively impacted comparable restaurant sales for Pollo Tropical by 0.9% in 2019 compared to 2018. In addition, we estimate that Hurricane Dorian negatively impacted comparable restaurant sales for Pollo Tropical by approximately 0.4%.
For Taco Cabana, a decrease in comparable restaurant transactions of 5.7% was partially offset by an increase in average check of 1.6% in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in average check was driven primarily by menu price increases of 2.0% and the introduction of higher priced shareables in 2019 partially offset by sales mix. We simplified the Taco Cabana menu in the fourth quarter of 2019 to improve execution. The menu simplification efforts included removal of certain menu items and limited other items to certain dayparts. While the menu simplification improved guest satisfaction and reduced order cycle times, the reduced menu resulted in a greater than anticipated transaction decline. We re-introduced select items to the menu
and expanded dayparts in the first quarter of 2020 to increase sales while maintaining the operational improvements provided by the menu simplification.
Franchise revenues decreased $0.7 million to $2.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower sales at franchised restaurants as a result of COVID-19. Franchise revenues remained flat in 2019 compared to 2018.
Operating costs and expenses. Operating costs and expenses include cost of sales, restaurant wages and related expenses, other restaurant expenses and advertising expenses. Cost of sales consists of food, paper and beverage costs including packaging costs, less rebates and purchase discounts. Cost of sales is generally influenced by changes in commodity costs, the sales mix of items sold and the effectiveness of our restaurant-level controls to manage food and paper costs. Key commodities, including chicken and beef, are generally purchased under contracts for future periods of up to one year.
Restaurant wages and related expenses include all restaurant management and hourly productive labor costs, employer payroll taxes, restaurant-level bonuses and related benefits. Payroll and related taxes and benefits are subject to inflation, including minimum wage increases and changes in costs for health insurance, workers' compensation insurance and state unemployment insurance.
Other restaurant operating expenses include all other restaurant-level operating costs, the major components of which are utilities, repairs and maintenance, general liability insurance, sanitation, supplies and credit card and delivery fees. In addition, for periods prior to fiscal 2019, other restaurant operating expenses include real estate taxes related to our leases characterized as operating leases.
Advertising expense includes all promotional expenses including television, radio, billboards and other sponsorships and promotional activities and agency fees.
Pre-opening costs include costs incurred prior to opening a restaurant, including restaurant employee wages and related expenses, travel expenditures, recruiting, training, promotional costs associated with the restaurant opening and rent, including any non-cash rent expense recognized during the construction period. Pre-opening costs are generally incurred beginning four to six months prior to a restaurant opening.
The following tables present the primary drivers of the changes in the components of restaurant operating margins for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana. All percentages are stated as a percentage of applicable segment restaurant sales.
(1) Includes costs related to the Strategic Renewal Plan (the "Plan") in 2018.
(2) Other consists of any other driver with an impact of less than 20 basis points.
(3) Primarily includes the impact of COVID-19 related special incentive pay and quarantine pay, which is partially offset (0.1%) by lower incentive bonus resulting from the special incentive pay.
(4) Includes the impact of higher wage rates and overtime due to labor shortages in 2019.
(5) Due to the adoption of ASC 842, real estate taxes are included in rent expense in 2020 and 2019 and in other operating expenses in 2018.
(1) Includes costs related to the Plan in 2018.
(2) Primarily includes the impact of COVID-19 related special incentive pay and quarantine pay, which is partially offset (0.1%) by lower incentive bonus resulting from the special incentive pay.
(3) Due to the adoption of ASC 842, real estate taxes are included in rent expense in 2020 and 2019 and in other operating expenses in 2018.
Consolidated Restaurant Rent Expense. Beginning in fiscal 2019, restaurant rent expense includes base rent, contingent rent and common area maintenance and property taxes related to our leases characterized as operating leases. For periods prior to the adoption of ASC 842 at the beginning of fiscal 2019, restaurant rent expense included base rent and contingent rent on our leases characterized as operating leases, reduced by amortization of gains on sale-leaseback transactions. Restaurant rent expense, as a percentage of total restaurant sales, increased to 8.2% in 2020 from 7.3% in 2019, due primarily to the impact of lower comparable restaurant sales. Restaurant rent expense, as a percentage of total restaurant sales, was 7.3% in 2019 compared to 5.3% in 2018, due primarily to a $3.3 million increase in rent expense as a result of no longer amortizing gains on
sale-leaseback transactions, the inclusion of property taxes and common area maintenance costs related to our leases characterized as operating leases, and the impact of lower comparable restaurant sales.
Consolidated General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses are comprised primarily of (1) salaries and expenses associated with the development and support of our Company and brands and the management oversight of the operation of our restaurants; and (2) legal, auditing and other professional fees, corporate system costs, and stock-based compensation expense.
General and administrative expenses decreased to $53.1 million in 2020 from $56.2 million in 2019, and as a percentage of total revenues, were 9.6% in 2020 and 8.5% in 2019 due primarily to the impact of lower total revenues partially offset by lower management support costs primarily as a result of headcount reductions in the second quarter of 2020, reduced travel and other cost savings initiatives. General and administrative expenses in 2020 also included $1.1 million related to severance costs associated with positions eliminated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, $0.8 million related to digital and brand repositioning costs, and $0.1 million related to search fees for senior executive positions. General and administrative expense in 2019 included $1.0 million related to restructuring costs due to eliminated or relocated positions, $0.4 million related to digital and brand repositioning costs and $0.5 million related to search fees for senior executive positions.
General and administrative expenses increased to $56.2 million in 2019 from $54.5 million in 2018, and as a percentage of total revenues, were 8.5% in 2019 and 7.9% in 2018 due primarily to the impact of lower total revenues on higher general and administrative expenses including investments in off-premise support in 2019. General and administrative expense in 2019 also included $1.0 million related to restructuring costs due to eliminated or relocated positions, $0.4 million related to digital and brand repositioning costs and $0.5 million related to search fees for senior executive positions. General and administrative expenses in 2018 included $0.5 million related to the Strategic Renewal Plan restructuring costs and retention bonuses, $0.4 million related to discontinuing certain services, $1.0 million related to system implementation and project-oriented advisory services and $1.0 million related to severance costs and executive and board member searches, partially offset by the benefit of fee reductions and final insurance recoveries totaling $0.6 million related to 2017 shareholder activism matters and reductions to final settlement amounts related to a litigation matter of $0.2 million.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is the primary measure of segment profit or loss used by our chief operating decision maker for purposes of allocating resources to our segments and assessing their performance and is defined as earnings attributable to the applicable segment before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairment and other lease charges, goodwill impairment, closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income, stock-based compensation expense, other expense (income), net, and certain significant items that management believes are related to strategic changes and/or are not related to the ongoing operation of our restaurants.
Adjusted EBITDA may not necessarily be comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to differences in methods of calculation Adjusted EBITDA for each of our segments includes an allocation of general and administrative expenses associated with administrative support for executive management, information systems and certain finance, legal, supply chain, human resources, development, and other administrative functions. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance. For a discussion of our use of Adjusted EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation from net income (loss) to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, see the heading entitled "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical restaurants decreased to $36.5 million, or 11.6% of total revenues, in 2020 from $50.6 million, or 13.9% of total revenues, in 2019 due primarily to the impact of lower restaurant sales, including the impact of COVID-19, higher delivery fee expense, and additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by lower advertising expense, labor costs as a percentage of restaurant sales due to labor efficiencies, certain other operating expenses, and general and administrative expenses. Adjusted EBITDA for our Taco Cabana restaurants increased to $8.5 million, or 3.5% of total revenues, in 2020 from $7.9 million, or 2.7% of total revenues, in 2019 due primarily to lower cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant sales, advertising expenses, certain other operating expenses, labor costs as a percentage of restaurant sales due to labor efficiencies, the impact of the closure of unprofitable restaurants in the first quarter of 2020 and lower general and administrative expenses, partially offset by the impact of lower restaurant sales, including the impact of COVID-19, higher delivery fee expense and additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we estimate the additional week of sales in our fiscal 2020 had a $1.7 million and $1.2 million favorable impact on Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana, respectively, in 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical restaurants decreased to $50.6 million (which includes the negative impact of a $1.5 million increase in rent expense as a result of adopting ASC 842 and the estimated negative impact of Hurricane Dorian of $0.6 million), or 13.9% of total revenues, in 2019 from $54.9 million, or 14.6% of total revenues, in 2018 due primarily to the impact of lower restaurant sales, including the impact of Hurricane Dorian, and higher rent expense, contracted cleaning
services, delivery fees and general and administrative expenses, partially offset by lower cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant sales. Adjusted EBITDA for our Taco Cabana restaurants decreased to $7.9 million (which includes the negative impact of a $1.9 million increase in rent expense as a result of adopting ASC 842), or 2.7% of total revenues, in 2019 from $13.1 million, or 4.2% of total revenues, in 2018 due primarily to the impact of lower restaurant sales and higher rent expense, cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant sales, delivery fees, and general and administrative expenses, partially offset by lower restaurant wages and related expenses as a percentage of restaurant sales.
Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA. We also use Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, as a supplemental measure to evaluate the performance and profitability of our restaurants in the aggregate, which is defined as Adjusted EBITDA excluding franchise royalty revenues and fees, pre-opening costs and general and administrative expenses (including corporate-level general and administrative expenses).
Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical was $61.3 million (19.5% of restaurant sales), $77.6 million (which includes the negative impact of a $1.5 million increase in rent expense as a result of adopting ASC 842 and the estimated negative impact of Hurricane Dorian of $0.6 million) (21.4% of restaurant sales), and $82.1 million (21.9% of restaurant sales) in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA for Taco Cabana was $29.7 million (12.4% of restaurant sales), $31.4 million (which includes the negative impact of a $1.9 million increase in rent expense as a result of adopting ASC 842) (10.6% of restaurant sales), and $36.3 million (11.7% of restaurant sales) in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The changes in Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA were primarily due to the foregoing. In addition, we estimate the additional week of sales in our fiscal 2020 had a $2.0 million and $1.4 million favorable impact on Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana, respectively, in 2020. For a reconciliation from Adjusted EBITDA to Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, see the heading entitled "Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $38.2 million in 2020 from $39.2 million in 2019 due primarily to decreased depreciation as a result of impairing closed restaurant assets, partially offset by an increase in depreciation related to new restaurant openings and ongoing reinvestment and enhancements to our restaurants. Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $39.2 million in 2019 from $37.6 million in 2018 primarily as a result of increased depreciation related to new restaurant openings and ongoing reinvestment and enhancements to our restaurants, partially offset by a decrease in depreciation as a result of impairing closed restaurant assets.
Impairment and Other Lease Charges. Impairment and other lease charges decreased to $9.1 million in 2020 from $13.1 million in 2019.
Impairment and other lease charges in 2020 for Pollo Tropical include impairment charges of $7.3 million related primarily to the impairment of assets from three underperforming Pollo Tropical restaurants, two of which we closed in the third quarter of 2020, the write-down of saucing islands and self-service soda machines that are being removed from dining rooms as a result of COVID-19, and the write-down of assets held for sale to their fair value less costs to sell, and lease termination charges of $0.9 million for restaurant locations we decided not to develop, net of a gain from lease terminations of $(0.2) million. Impairment and other lease charges in 2020 for Taco Cabana include impairment charges of $1.1 million related primarily to the write-down of assets held for sale to their fair value less costs to sell and the impairment of assets for two underperforming Taco Cabana restaurants that we continue to operate, and two offsetting lease terminations.
Impairment and other lease charges decreased to $13.1 million in 2019 from $21.1 million in 2018. Impairment and other lease charges in 2019 consisted of impairment charges for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants of $0.8 million and $13.2 million, respectively, and net lease charge recoveries for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants of $(0.8) million and $(0.1) million, respectively. Impairment charges in 2019 also included right-of-use assets and were related primarily to 19 Taco Cabana restaurants that were subsequently closed in January 2020, five of which were initially impaired in prior years, as well as previously closed Pollo Tropical restaurants and other underperforming Taco Cabana restaurants that we continued to operate, while the net lease charge recoveries were related primarily to lease terminations for previously closed restaurants.
Impairment and other lease charges in 2018 consisted of impairment charges for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants of $13.1 million and $6.0 million, respectively, and lease and other charges for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana restaurants (as well as a Taco Cabana office location) of $0.5 million and $1.6 million, respectively, net of recoveries. Impairment charges in 2018 were related primarily to 14 Pollo Tropical restaurants that were closed in 2018, two of which were initially impaired in 2017, nine Taco Cabana restaurants that were closed in 2018, one of which was initially impaired in 2017, two Taco Cabana restaurants that were closed in 2020, and one Pollo Tropical restaurant and four Taco Cabana restaurants that we continued to operate. Other lease charges, net of recoveries, in 2018 were related primarily to restaurants and an office location that were closed in 2018 as well as previously closed restaurants.
Each quarter we assess the potential impairment of any long-lived assets that have experienced a triggering event, including restaurants for which the related trailing twelve-month cash flows are below a certain threshold. We determine if there is
impairment at the restaurant level by comparing undiscounted future cash flows from the related long-lived assets, exclusive of operating lease payments, to their respective carrying values, excluding operating lease liabilities. In determining future cash flows, significant estimates are made by us with respect to future operating results of each restaurant over its remaining lease term, including sales trends, labor rates, commodity costs and other operating cost assumptions. If assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment charge is measured by calculating the amount by which the asset group's carrying amount exceeds its fair value. This process of assessing fair values requires the use of estimates and assumptions, including our ability to sell or reuse the related assets and market conditions, and for right-of-use lease assets, current market lease rent and discount rates, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets and these charges could be material. Due to the uncertainty associated with the unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact it will continue to have on restaurant operations and future cash flows, it is reasonably possible that the estimates of future cash flows used in impairment assessments will change in the near term and the effect of the change could be material. Our current estimates assume that operating restrictions, regulations and directives for restaurants and other changes related to COVID-19 will continue to have a significant impact through at least the first half of 2021 with the greatest impact in the near term.
For four Pollo Tropical restaurants and four Taco Cabana restaurants with combined carrying values (excluding right-of-use lease assets) of $2.8 million and $1.4 million, respectively, projected cash flows are not substantially in excess of their carrying values. In addition, one Pollo Tropical restaurant and one Taco Cabana restaurant with combined carrying values (excluding right-of-use lease assets) of $1.9 million and $0.9 million, respectively, have initial sales volumes lower than expected, but do not have significant operating history to form a good basis for future projections. If the performance of these restaurants does not improve as projected, an impairment charge could be recognized in future periods, and such charge could be material.
Goodwill Impairment. Goodwill impairment was $67.9 million in 2019 and consisted of non-cash impairment charges to write down the value of goodwill for the Taco Cabana reporting unit.
Closed Restaurant Rent Expense, Net of Sublease Income. Closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income was $6.5 million in 2020 and consisted of closed restaurant rent and ancillary lease costs of $6.9 million and $4.9 million net of sublease income of $(4.8) million and $(0.5) million for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana, respectively.
Closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income was $4.2 million in 2019 and consisted of closed restaurant rent and ancillary lease costs of $6.8 million and $1.4 million net of sublease income of $(3.4) million and $(0.5) million for Pollo Tropical and Taco Cabana, respectively.
Other Expense (Income), Net. Other expense (income), net was $(1.7) million in 2020 and primarily consisted of total gains of $(3.8) million on the sale-leaseback of seven restaurant properties and the sale of six restaurant properties, partially offset by $1.5 million in costs for the removal, transfer and storage of equipment from closed restaurants and other closed restaurant costs and $0.7 million for the write-off of site development costs. Other expense (income), net in 2019 primarily consisted of $0.8 million in costs for the removal, transfer and storage of equipment from closed restaurants and $0.1 million for the write-off of site development costs. Other expense (income), net in 2018 consisted primarily of $(3.5) million in insurance recoveries related to the Hurricanes and total gains of $(1.2) million on the sale of three restaurant properties, partially offset by the write-off of site development costs of $0.6 million and severance costs related to the closure of restaurants and costs for the removal, transfer and storage of equipment from closed restaurants of $1.1 million.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $0.9 million to $4.8 million in 2020 from 2019 due to a higher borrowing level under our former amended senior credit facility and higher interest rates in 2020 and to higher interest rates under the term loan in our new senior credit facility. Interest expense decreased $0.1 million to $3.9 million in 2019 from 2018 due primarily to lower interest rates and a lower borrowing level under our former senior credit facility in 2019.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $1.2 million in 2020 and consisted of charges to write-off unamortized deferred financing costs related to the capacity reduction and termination of our former senior credit facility.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes. The effective tax rate was 44.8% for the year ended January 3, 2021, and (12.5)% for the year ended December 29, 2019. The benefit from income taxes for 2020 includes a benefit related to the carryback of net operating losses and reclassifying certain assets as qualified improvement property as permitted by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") and other changes to depreciation methods for certain assets made in conjunction with a cost segregation study conducted prior to filing our 2019 federal income tax return, as well as a decrease to the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets related to changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities. The provision for income taxes for 2019 included the effect of impairing non-deductible goodwill and establishing a valuation allowance on our deferred income taxes.
The CARES Act, which was signed into law on March 27, 2020, includes provisions that allow net operating losses arising in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back for up to five years and includes technical amendments that are retroactive to 2018 which permit certain assets to be classified as qualified improvement property and expensed immediately.
The effective tax rate was (12.5)% for 2019 and (55.3)% for 2018. The change in the effective rate was primarily the result of impairing non-deductible goodwill and establishing a valuation allowance on our deferred income tax assets in 2019 and changing the depreciation method for certain assets for federal income tax purposes to accelerate tax deductions in 2018 as well as the impact of lower pre-tax earnings (excluding non-deductible goodwill) in 2019.
Net Income (Loss). As a result of the foregoing, we had a net loss of $10.2 million in 2020 compared to a net loss of $84.4 million in 2019, and net income of $7.8 million in 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We do not have significant receivables or inventory and receive trade credit based upon negotiated terms in purchasing food products and other supplies. Although, as a result of our substantial cash balance, we did not have a working capital deficit at January 3, 2021, we have the ability to operate with a substantial working capital deficit (and we have historically operated with a working capital deficit) because:
•restaurant operations are primarily conducted on a cash basis;
•rapid turnover results in a limited investment in inventories; and
•cash from sales is usually received before related liabilities for supplies and payroll become due.
Capital expenditures and payments related to our lease obligations represent significant liquidity requirements for us. We believe our cash reserves, cash generated from our operations, and availability of borrowings under our senior credit facility will provide sufficient cash availability to cover our anticipated working capital needs, capital expenditures and debt service requirements for the next twelve months.
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $40.3 million, $65.0 million and $53.8 million, respectively. The $24.8 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was driven primarily by a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA and the receipt of a tax refund in 2019, partially offset by the timing of payments. The impact of extended vendor payment terms in 2020 was partially offset by the payment of January 2021 rent in fiscal 2020 as a result of the 53rd week in fiscal 2020. The $11.2 million increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 compared to 2018 was driven primarily by the receipt of a tax refund, partially offset by a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA and the timing of payments.
Investing Activities. Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was $8.4 million. Net cash used in investing activities in 2019, and 2018 was $39.4 million and $52.1 million, respectively. Capital expenditures are typically the largest component of our investing activities and include: (1) new restaurant development, which may include the purchase of real estate; (2) restaurant remodeling/reimaging, which includes the renovation or rebuilding of the interior and exterior of our existing restaurants; (3) other restaurant capital expenditures, which include capital maintenance expenditures for the ongoing reinvestment and enhancement of our restaurants; and (4) corporate and restaurant information systems.
The following table sets forth our capital expenditures for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
(1)Excludes restaurant repair and maintenance expenses included in other restaurant operating expenses in our consolidated financial statements. For the years ended January 3, 2021; December 29, 2019; and December 30, 2018, total restaurant repair and maintenance expenses were approximately $17.4 million, $23.1 million, and $23.4 million, respectively.
Cash provided by investing activities in 2020 included net proceeds of $17.2 million from the sale-leaseback of seven restaurant properties and $9.6 million from the sale of an additional six restaurant properties.
In 2019, investing activities also included net proceeds of $1.8 million from the sale of one restaurant property.
In 2018, investing activities also included $4.7 million in additional proceeds received related to three restaurant properties and $1.0 million received related to a closed Taco Cabana restaurant that suffered flood damages due to Hurricane Harvey and a Taco Cabana restaurant that was temporarily closed due to a fire.
Total capital expenditures in 2021 are expected to be between $33.0 million and $38.0 million including $12.0 million to $15.0 million for digital platforms and technology enhancements.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 was $8.5 million and included net revolving credit borrowing repayments under our former amended senior credit facility of $75.0 million, $3.0 million in payment of debt issuance costs associated with our former amended senior credit facility and new senior credit facility combined with $3.7 million in payments to repurchase our common stock, partially offset by proceeds of $73.5 million under our new senior credit facility.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 included $14.3 million in payments to repurchase our common stock combined with net revolving credit borrowing repayments under our former senior credit facility of $3.0 million.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2018 included $2.8 million in payments to repurchase our common stock and $0.2 million in payment of debt issuance costs associated with our former senior credit facility, offset by net borrowings under our former senior credit facility of $3.0 million.
New Senior Credit Facility. On November 23, 2020, we terminated our former amended senior secured revolving credit facility, referred to as the "former senior credit facility," and entered into a new senior secured credit facility, which is referred to as the "new senior credit facility." The new senior credit facility is comprised of a term loan facility (the "term loan facility") of $75.0 million and a revolving credit facility (the "revolving credit facility") of up to $10.0 million and matures on November 23, 2025. The new senior credit facility also provides for potential incremental term loan borrowing increases of up to $37.5 million in the aggregate, subject to, among other items, compliance with a minimum Total Leverage Ratio and other terms specified in the new senior credit facility. On January 3, 2021, there were $75.0 million in outstanding borrowings, subject to an original issue discount, under the term loan facility and no borrowings under the revolving credit facility.
Under the new senior credit facility, we must repay the unpaid principal amount of the term loan facility quarterly which commences on March 31, 2021, in an amount equal to 0.25% of the aggregate principal amount of the term loan facility on the effective date of the new senior credit facility, resulting in annual mandatory repayments of $0.8 million.
The new senior credit facility provides that we must maintain minimum Liquidity (as defined in the new senior credit facility) of $20.0 million (the "Liquidity Threshold") until January 3, 2022. The new senior credit facility also provides that we are not required to be in compliance with the Total Leverage Ratio under the new senior credit facility until January 3, 2022, or the date in which Liquidity is less than the Liquidity Threshold. We will be permitted to exercise equity cure rights with respect to compliance with the Total Leverage Ratio subject to certain restrictions as set forth in the new senior credit facility.
Borrowings under the new senior credit facility bear interest at a rate per annum, at our option, equal to either (all terms as defined in the new senior credit facility):
1) the Base Rate plus the Applicable Margin of 6.75% with a minimum Base Rate of 2.00%, or
2) the LIBOR (or Benchmark Replacement) Rate plus the Applicable Margin of 7.75%, with a minimum LIBOR (or Benchmark Replacement) Rate of 1.00%.
In addition, the new senior credit facility requires us to pay a commitment fee of 0.50% per annum on the daily amount of the unused portion of the revolving credit facility.
The outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility are prepayable without penalty or premium (other than customary breakage costs). The outstanding borrowings under the term loan facility are voluntarily prepayable by us, and the term loan facility provides that each of the following shall require a mandatory prepayment of outstanding term loan borrowings by us as follows: (i) 100% of any cash Net Proceeds (as defined in the new senior credit facility) in excess of $2.0 million individually or in the aggregate over the term of the new senior credit facility in respect of any Casualty Event (as defined in the new senior credit facility) affecting collateral provided that we are permitted to reinvest such Net Proceeds in accordance with the new senior credit facility, (ii) 100% of any Net Proceeds of a Specified Equity Contribution (as defined in the new senior credit facility), (iii) 100% of any cash Net Proceeds from the issuance of debt issued by us or our subsidiaries other than Permitted Debt (as defined in the new senior credit facility), (iv) 100% of any Net Proceeds from the Disposition (as defined in the new senior credit facility) of certain assets individually, or in the aggregate, in excess of $2.0 million in any fiscal year provided that we are permitted to reinvest such Net Proceeds in accordance with the new senior credit facility and (v) beginning with the fiscal year ending January 2, 2022, an amount equal to the Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the new senior credit facility) in accordance with the new senior credit facility.
Our new senior credit facility contains customary default provisions, including without limitation, a cross default provision pursuant to which it is an event of default under this facility if there is a default under any of our indebtedness having an outstanding principal amount in excess of $5.0 million which results in the acceleration of such indebtedness prior to its stated maturity or is caused by a failure to pay principal when due.
The new senior credit facility contains certain covenants, including, without limitation, those limiting our ability to, among other things, incur indebtedness, incur liens, sell or acquire assets or businesses, change the character of our business in any material respects, engage in transactions with related parties, make certain investments, make certain restricted payments or pay dividends.
Our obligations under the new senior credit facility are secured by all of our and our subsidiaries' assets (including a pledge of all of the capital stock and equity interests of our subsidiaries).
Under the new senior credit facility, the lenders may terminate their obligation to advance and may declare the unpaid balance of borrowings, or any part thereof, immediately due and payable upon the occurrence and during the continuance of customary defaults which include, without limitation, payment default, covenant defaults, bankruptcy type defaults, defaults on other indebtedness, certain judgments or upon the occurrence of a change of control (as specified in the new senior credit facility).
As of January 3, 2021, we were in compliance with the financial covenants under our new senior credit facility. At January 3, 2021, $10.0 million was available for borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Former Senior Credit Facility. On July 10, 2020, we entered into the Second Amendment to Credit Agreement (as previously defined as the "former senior credit facility") among Fiesta and a syndicate of lenders that included adjustments to our covenants that were more reflective of current sales and profit trends. Pursuant to the former senior credit facility, the available revolving credit borrowings under the former senior credit facility were reduced from $150.0 million to $95.0 million in a phased reduction beginning with a $30.0 million permanent reduction that occurred on July 10, 2020. The former senior secured credit facility was terminated on November 23, 2020.
Initial Share Repurchase Plan
In 2018, our board of directors approved a share repurchase program for up to 1.5 million shares of our common stock. In 2019, our board of directors approved increases to the share repurchase program of an additional 1.5 million shares of our common stock. Under the share repurchase program, shares may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions at prevailing market prices, in privately negotiated transactions or by other means in accordance with federal securities laws, including Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The number of shares repurchased and the timing of repurchases will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, stock price, trading volume, general market and economic conditions, and other corporate considerations. The share repurchase program has no time limit and may be modified, suspended, superseded or terminated at any time by our board of directors. Our new senior credit facility prohibits share repurchases, and we currently do not intend to repurchase additional shares of our common stock for the foreseeable future.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of January 3, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Our credit facility debt obligations at January 3, 2021, totaled $75.0 million. Total interest payments on the obligations of $31.4 million for all years presented are included at the cash interest rate of 8.75%. Total credit facility fees of $0.2 million for all years presented are included based on January 3, 2021, rates and balances. Actual interest and fee payments will vary based on our outstanding credit facility balances and the rates in effect during those years. Refer to Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details of our debt.
(2)Includes total interest of $0.9 million for all years presented.
(3) Represents the aggregate minimum lease payments under operating leases. Many of our leases also require contingent rent based on a percentage of sales in addition to the minimum base rent and require expenses incidental to the use of the property, all of which have been excluded from this table.
(4) Represents contractual obligations under various agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and include $7.7 million related to the master subscription agreement for an ERP system through April 27, 2024.
We have not included in the contractual obligations table payments we may make for workers' compensation, general liability and employee health care claims for which we pay all claims, subject to some annual stop-loss limitations both for individual claims and claims in the aggregate. The majority of our recorded liabilities related to employee health and insurance plans represent estimated reserves for incurred claims that have yet to be filed or settled. We are also party to various service and supply contracts that generally extend approximately twelve months. These arrangements are primarily individual contracts for routine goods and services that are part of our normal operations and are reflected in historical operating cash flow trends. These contract obligations are generally short-term in nature and can be canceled within a reasonable time period, at our option. We do not believe such arrangements will adversely affect our liquidity position.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements. Prior to the adoption of ASC 842, off-balance sheet arrangements consisted of our operating leases, which are primarily for our restaurant properties and are now included in other current liabilities and operating lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet as of January 3, 2021.
Inflation
The inflationary factors that have historically affected our results of operations include increases in food and paper costs, labor and other operating expenses and energy costs. Labor costs in our restaurants are impacted by changes in the federal and state hourly minimum wage rates as well as changes in payroll related taxes, including federal and state unemployment taxes. We typically attempt to offset the effect of inflation, at least in part, through periodic menu price increases and various cost reduction programs. However, no assurance can be given that we will be able to fully offset such inflationary cost increases in the future.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in the "Basis of Presentation" note in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical accounting estimates are those that require application of management's most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods.
Sales recognition at our restaurants is straightforward as customers pay for products at the time of sale and inventory turns over very quickly. Payments to vendors for products sold in the restaurants are generally settled within 60 days. The earnings reporting process is covered by our system of internal controls and generally does not require significant management estimates and judgments. However, critical accounting estimates and judgments, as noted below, are inherent in the assessment and recording of insurance liabilities, the valuation of goodwill for impairment, assessing impairment of long-lived assets, lease accounting matters and the valuation of deferred income tax assets. While we apply our judgment based on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results could vary from these assumptions. It is possible that materially different amounts would be reported using different assumptions.
Insurance liabilities. We are insured for workers' compensation, general liability and medical insurance claims under policies where we pay all claims, subject to annual stop-loss limitations both for individual claims and for general liability, medical insurance and certain workers' compensation claims in the aggregate. At January 3, 2021, we had $10.4 million accrued for these insurance claims. We record insurance liabilities based on historical and industry trends, which are continually monitored, with the assistance of actuaries, and adjust accruals as warranted by changing circumstances. Since there are estimates and assumptions inherent in recording these insurance liabilities, including the ability to estimate the future development of incurred claims based on historical trends or the severity of the claims, differences between actual future events and prior estimates and assumptions could result in adjustments to these liabilities.
Evaluation of Goodwill. We must evaluate our recorded goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently when events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. We have elected to conduct our annual impairment review of goodwill assets as of the last day of our fiscal year. We may first qualitatively assess goodwill impairment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. This qualitative analysis is performed by examining key events and circumstances affecting fair value. If it is determined it is more likely than not that the reporting unit's fair value is not greater than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative assessment. We adopted ASU No. 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment ("ASU 2017-04") in the second quarter of 2019, which eliminates the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill if the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount of the reporting unit. Instead, if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss will be recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
In performing the quantitative assessment for impairment, we compare the net book values of our reporting units to their estimated fair values. In determining the estimated fair values of the reporting units, we employ a combination of a discounted cash flow analysis based on management's best estimates of future cash flows and one or two market-based approaches. The results of these analyses are corroborated with other value indicators where available, such as comparable company earnings multiples. This evaluation of goodwill requires us to make estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of our
reporting units including projections regarding future operating results, anticipated growth rates, the weighted average cost of capital used to discount projected cash flows, and market multiples.
We performed a qualitative assessment, which included examining key events and circumstances affecting fair value, for our annual impairment review as of January 3, 2021, and determined it was more likely than not that the Pollo Tropical reporting unit's fair value was greater than its carrying amount. As of January 3, 2021, our Pollo Tropical reporting unit goodwill has a carrying value of $56.3 million and our Taco Cabana reporting unit goodwill has no remaining carrying value as it was fully impaired in 2019. See Note 4 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
We estimate the fair value of the Pollo Tropical reporting unit significantly exceeds its carrying value as of January 3, 2021. The estimates and assumptions used to determine and assess fair value may differ from actual future events and if these estimates or related projections change significantly in the future, we may be required to record material impairment charges for goodwill assets.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We assess the potential impairment of long-lived assets, principally property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the restaurant asset group may not be recoverable. In addition to considering management's plans, known regulatory/governmental actions and damage due to acts of God (hurricanes, tornadoes, etc.), we consider an event indicating that the carrying value may not be recoverable to have occurred related to a specific restaurant if the restaurant's cash flows for the last twelve months are less than a minimum threshold or if consistent levels of cash flows for the remaining lease period are less than the carrying value of the restaurant's assets. We determine if there is impairment at the restaurant level by comparing undiscounted future cash flows from the related long-lived assets to their respective carrying values. We have elected to exclude operating lease payments and liabilities from future cash flows and carrying values, respectively, in the comparison. In determining future cash flows, significant estimates are made by us with respect to future operating results of each restaurant over its remaining lease term, including sales trends, labor rates, commodity costs and other operating cost assumptions. If assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment charge is measured by calculating the amount by which the asset carrying amount exceeds its fair value. This process of assessing fair values requires the use of estimates and assumptions, including our ability to sell or reuse the related assets and market conditions and, for right-of-use lease assets, current market lease rent and discount rates, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets and these charges could be material.
For four Pollo Tropical restaurants and four Taco Cabana restaurants with combined carrying values (excluding right-of-use lease assets) of $2.8 million and $1.4 million, respectively, projected cash flows are not substantially in excess of their carrying values. In addition, one Pollo Tropical restaurant and one Taco Cabana restaurant with combined carrying values (excluding right-of-use lease assets) of $1.9 million and $0.9 million, respectively, have initial sales volumes lower than expected, but do not have significant operating history to form a good basis for future projections. If the performance of these restaurants does not improve as projected, an impairment charge could be recognized in future periods, and such charge could be material.
Lease Accounting. We adopted Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-02, Leases (ASC 842), the new lease accounting standard, as of as of December 31, 2018, using the modified retrospective method, with certain optional practical expedients including the transition practical expedient package, which among other things does not require reassessment of lease classification. Judgments made by management for our lease obligations include the determination of our incremental borrowing rate, the determination of standalone selling prices used to allocate the consideration in the contract, and the length of the lease term, which includes the determination of renewal options that are reasonably assured. The lease term can affect the classification of a lease as finance or operating for accounting purposes, the amount of the lease liability and corresponding right-of-use lease asset recognized, the term over which related leasehold improvements for each restaurant are amortized and any rent holidays and/or changes in rental amounts for recognizing rent expense over the term of the lease. These judgments may produce materially different amounts of depreciation, amortization and rent expense than would be reported if different assumed lease terms were used.
We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease payments for purposes of determining lease classification and recording lease liabilities and lease assets on our consolidated balance sheet. Our incremental borrowing rate is determined based on a synthetic credit rating, determined using a valuation model, adjusted to reflect a secured credit rating and a developed spread curve applied to a risk-free rate yield curve. Changes in the determination of our incremental borrowing rate could also have an impact on the depreciation and interest expense recognized for finance leases.
Valuation of Deferred Income Tax Assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities, which represent temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to
the years in which those differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. A valuation allowance is established to reduce the carrying amount of deferred tax assets if we believe it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the tax benefit from these deferred tax assets will not be realized. The realization of a deferred tax asset is dependent on the generation of sufficient taxable income in future periods, and the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences in the applicable periods. In evaluating the realizability of our net deferred tax assets, we perform an assessment of positive and negative evidence. The weight given to negative and positive evidence is commensurate only to the extent that such evidence can be objectively verified. Objective historical evidence is given greater weight than subjective evidence such as forecasts of future taxable income. We considered three years of cumulative operating income (loss) in evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide. Objective negative evidence limits our ability to consider other subjective evidence, such as our future earnings projections. Based on our evaluation of all available positive and negative evidence, and placing greater weight on the objective evidence, we determined that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be fully realized in future periods. We recorded a $13.5 million valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter of 2019, which increased our tax expense. Based on changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities in 2020, adjustments to our valuation allowance totaling $0.8 million were recorded in 2020 resulting in a valuation allowance of $12.7 million as of January 3, 2021. If we generate sufficient taxable income in the future to fully utilize the tax benefits of the deferred tax assets on which a valuation allowance was recorded, a portion or all of the valuation allowance could be reversed, which would decrease our tax expense in the period or periods in which the valuation allowance is reversed. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the positive and negative evidence considered in arriving at the above conclusion in order to assess whether such conclusion remains appropriate in future periods.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued ASU No. 2018-15, Customer's Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That is a Service Contract, which aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software (and hosting arrangements that include an internal-use software license). We adopted this new accounting standard on December 30, 2019, and applied it prospectively to all implementation costs incurred after the date of adoption. The adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on our financial statements. We deferred and amortized application development stage costs for cloud-based computing arrangements over the life of the related service (subscription) agreement in the same line item that the fees associated with the subscription arrangement were presented prior to adoption of the new standard.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740) ("ASU No. 2019-12"), which is a part of the Simplification Initiative being undertaken by the FASB to reduce complexity of accounting standards. The amendments in this update simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions, the most notable for us being the exception to the general methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period when the year-to-date loss exceeds the anticipated loss for the full year. The guidance will be effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is permitted and any adjustments should be reflected as of the beginning of the annual period of adoption. Amendments relevant to us should be applied on a prospective basis. The impact of the standard is largely dependent on interim and anticipated profit or loss in a given period, however we do not expect ASU No. 2019-12 to have a significant impact on our financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848) ("ASU No. 2020-04"), which provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. The amendments in this update are effective as of March 12, 2020, through December 31, 2022. As of January 3, 2021, our only exposure to LIBOR rates was our new senior credit facility. Upon cessation of the LIBOR, the new senior credit facility will use a benchmark replacement rate. According to ASU No. 2020-04, modifications of contracts within the scope of Topic 470 Debt should be accounted for by prospectively adjusting the effective interest rate. We do not expect ASU No. 2020-04 to have a significant impact on our financial statements.
Management's Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. We use Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA in addition to net income and income from operations to assess our performance, and we believe it is important for investors to be able to evaluate us using the same measures used by management. We believe this measure is an important indicator of our operational strength and the performance of our business and it provides a view of operations absent non-cash activity and items that are not related to the ongoing operation of our restaurants or affect comparability period over period. Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as calculated by us is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies and should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss), earnings (loss) per share, cash flows from operating activities or other financial information determined under GAAP.
The primary measure of segment profit or loss used by the chief operating decision maker to assess performance and allocate resources is Adjusted EBITDA, which is defined as earnings attributable to the applicable operating segments before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairment and other lease charges, goodwill impairment, closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income, stock-based compensation expense, other expense (income), net, and certain significant items for each segment that management believes are related to strategic changes and/or are not related to the ongoing operation of our restaurants as set forth in the reconciliation table below. Adjusted EBITDA for each of our segments includes an allocation of general and administrative expenses associated with administrative support for executive management, information systems and certain finance, legal, supply chain, human resources, construction and other administrative functions. See Note 11 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
We also use Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure to evaluate the performance and profitability of our restaurants in the aggregate, which is defined as Adjusted EBITDA for the applicable segment excluding franchise royalty revenues and fees, pre-opening costs, and general and administrative expenses (including corporate-level general and administrative expenses). Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA margin is derived by dividing Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA by restaurant sales. Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA is also a non-GAAP financial measure.
Management believes that Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with our results of operations calculated in accordance with GAAP and our reconciliation of net income (loss) to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA (i) provide useful information about our operating performance and period-over-period changes, (ii) provide additional information that is useful for evaluating the operating performance of our business and (iii) permit investors to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our ongoing earnings, from which capital investments are made and debt is serviced. However, such measures are not measures of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and, accordingly, should not be considered as alternatives to net income or cash flow from operating activities as indicators of operating performance or liquidity. Also, these measures may not be comparable to similarly titled captions of other companies.
All such financial measures have important limitations as analytical tools. These limitations include the following:
•such financial information does not reflect our capital expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments to purchase capital equipment;
•such financial information does not reflect interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service payments on our debt;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets that we currently depreciate and amortize will likely have to be replaced in the future, and such financial information does not reflect the cash required to fund such replacements; and
•such financial information does not reflect the effect of earnings or charges resulting from matters that our management does not consider to be indicative of our ongoing operations. However, some of these charges and gains (such as impairment and other lease charges, closed restaurant rent expense, net of sublease income, other income and expense, and stock-based compensation expense) have recurred and may recur.
A reconciliation from consolidated net income (loss) to Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA follows (in thousands):
(1) Goodwill impairment for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019, consists of a non-cash impairment charge to write down the value of goodwill for the Taco Cabana reporting unit. The related benefit from income taxes is the benefit attributable to the portion of the goodwill that was tax deductible.
(2) Closed restaurant rent, net of sublease income for the twelve months ended January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019, primarily consists of closed restaurant lease costs of $11.8 million and $8.2 million, respectively, partially offset by sublease income of $(5.3) million and $(4.0) million, respectively. As a result of adopting ASC 842, lease costs related to closed restaurants are recorded as closed restaurant rent. Prior to December 31, 2018, these costs were recorded as lease charges within impairment and other lease charges when a restaurant closed.
(3) Board and shareholder matter costs for the twelve months ended December 30, 2018, include fee reductions and final insurance recoveries related to 2017 shareholder activism costs.
(4) Restructuring costs and retention bonuses for the twelve months ended January 3, 2021, include severance costs related to eliminated positions related to terminations in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Restructuring costs and retention bonuses for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019, include severance costs related to eliminated positions. Restructuring costs and retention bonuses for the twelve months ended December 30, 2018, include severance costs related to the Strategic Renewal Plan and reduction in force and bonuses paid to certain employees for retention purposes.
(5) Legal settlements and related costs for the twelve months ended December 30, 2018, include reductions to final settlement amounts and benefits related to litigation matters.
(6) Digital and brand repositioning costs for the twelve months ended January 3, 2021, and December 29, 2019, include consulting costs related to repositioning the digital experience for our customers.
A reconciliation from Adjusted EBITDA to Restaurant-level Adjusted EBITDA follows (in thousands):
(1) Excludes general and administrative adjustments included in Adjusted EBITDA.