ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Generally accepted accounting principles require management to apply significant judgment to certain accounting, reporting and disclosure matters. Management must use assumptions and estimates to apply those principles where actual measurement is not possible or practical. The judgments and assumptions made are based upon historical experience or other factors that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the nature of the judgments and assumptions, actual results could differ from estimates, which could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. For a complete discussion of the Corporation’s significant accounting policies, see NOTE 1. NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following policies materially affect our reported earnings and financial condition and require significant judgments and estimates.
Business Combinations
Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, assets and liabilities of the business acquired are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition with any excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired recorded as goodwill. Results of operations of the acquired business are included in the income statement from the date of acquisition.
Investment Securities
Held to maturity securities are carried at amortized cost when the Corporation has the positive intent and ability to hold them until maturity. Available for sale securities are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis with the unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable income taxes, recorded in other comprehensive income. Realized gains and losses are recorded in earnings and the prior fair value adjustments are reclassified within stockholders' equity. Gains and losses on sales of securities are determined on the specific-identification method. Amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts are amortized to their earliest call date and are recorded as interest income from securities.
Available for sale and held to maturity securities are evaluated for OTTI at least on a quarterly basis, and more frequently when economic or market conditions warrant such an evaluation. In determining OTTI, management considers many factors, including: (1) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, (2) the financial condition and near term prospects of the issuer, (3) whether the market decline was affected by macroeconomic conditions, and (4) whether the Corporation has the intent to sell the debt security or more likely than not, will be required to sell the debt security before its anticipated recovery. The assessment of whether an other-than-temporary decline exists involves a high degree of subjectivity and judgment and is based on the information available to management at a point in time.
When OTTI occurs, the amount of OTTI recognized in the income statement depends on whether the Corporation intends to sell the security or it is more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, less any recognized credit loss. If the intent is to sell, or it is more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, less any recognized credit loss, the OTTI shall be recognized in earnings equal to the entire difference between the investment’s amortized cost basis, less any recognized credit loss, and its fair value at the balance sheet date. If the intent is not to sell the security and it is not more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell the security before the recovery of its amortized cost basis less any recognized credit loss, the OTTI has been separated into the amount representing the credit loss and the amount related to all other factors. The amount of the total OTTI related to the credit loss is determined based on the present value of cash flows expected to be collected and is recognized in earnings. The amount of the total OTTI related to other factors is recognized in other comprehensive income, net of applicable income taxes. The previous amortized cost basis less the OTTI recognized in earnings becomes the new amortized cost basis of the investment.
For held to maturity debt securities, the amount of an OTTI recorded in other comprehensive income for the noncredit portion of a previous other-than-temporary impairment is amortized prospectively over the remaining life of the security on the basis of the timing of future estimated cash flows of the security.
Loans
The Corporation’s loan portfolio is carried at the principal amount outstanding, net of unearned income and principal charge-offs. Certain loan fees and direct costs are being deferred and amortized as an adjustment of yield on the loans. Interest income is accrued on the principal balances of loans. The accrual of interest is discontinued on a loan when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payments as they become due. When the interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed against earnings when considered uncollectible. Interest income accrued in the prior year, if any, is charged to the allowance for loan losses. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received and the loan is returned to accruing status.
Certain non-accrual, substantially delinquent and renegotiated loans classified as troubled debt restructures may be considered to be impaired in accordance with ASC 310, Receivables. Under ASC 310-10, a loan is impaired when, based on current information or events, it is probable all amounts due (principal and interest) according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement are uncollectible. Renegotiated consumer loans classified as troubled debt restructures are considered to be impaired. In applying the provisions of ASC 310-10, the Corporation considers all other investments in one-to-four family residential loans and consumer installment loans to be homogeneous and therefore excluded from separate identification for evaluation of impairment. Impaired loans are carried at the fair value of collateral if the loan is collateral dependent, or the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s existing rate. A portion of the allowance for loan losses is allocated to impaired loans if the value of such loans is deemed to be less than the unpaid balance. If these allocations cause the allowance for loan losses to increase, such increase is reported as a component of the provision for loan losses. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectability of the loan is confirmed. The valuation would be considered Level 3, consisting of appraisals of underlying collateral and discounted cash flow analysis.
PART II: ITEM 7. AND