Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
JFrog’s vision is to power a world of continuously updated, version-less software-we call this Liquid Software.
We provide an end-to-end, hybrid, universal DevOps Platform to achieve Continuous Software Release Management, or CSRM. Our leading CSRM platform enables organizations to continuously deliver software updates across any system. Our platform is the critical bridge between software development and deployment of that software, paving the way for the modern DevOps paradigm. We enable organizations to build and release software faster and more securely while empowering developers to be more efficient. As of December 31, 2020, we had a global customer base of approximately 6,050 organizations across all industries and sizes, including approximately 78% of Fortune 100 organizations, increasing from approximately 5,600 organizations as of December 31, 2019. All of the top 10 technology organizations, 8 of the top 10 financial services organizations, 9 of the top 10 retail organizations, all of the top 10 healthcare organizations, and 7 of the top 9 telecommunications organizations in the Fortune 500 have adopted JFrog, embarking on their journey towards Liquid Software. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our 10 largest customers represented approximately 8% of our total revenue and no single customer accounted for more than 2% of our total revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, 36% of our revenue was generated from customers outside of the United States.
We have designed our subscription structure and go-to-market strategy to align our growth with the success of our customers. Our business model benefits from our ability to serve the needs of all customers, from individual software developers and IT operators to the largest organizations, in a value-oriented manner.
We generate revenue from the sale of subscriptions to customers. All of our subscription tiers are available for self-managed deployments, where our customers deploy and manage our products across their public cloud, on-premise, private cloud, or hybrid environments, as well as JFrog-managed public cloud deployments, which we refer to as our SaaS subscriptions. Due to ease of use, none of our subscriptions require the use of professional services. For the year ended December 31, 2020, 22% of our revenue came from SaaS subscriptions, compared to 18% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our self-managed subscriptions are offered on an annual and multi-year basis, and our SaaS subscriptions are offered on an annual and on a monthly basis. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 87% of our revenue came from subscriptions that provide our customers with access to multiple products, compared to approximately 85% for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 20% of our revenue came from Enterprise Plus subscription, compared to approximately 10% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The growth in revenue from our Enterprise Plus subscription, which was first launched in 2018 for self-managed deployments and during 2020 for SaaS deployments, demonstrates the increased demand for our end-to-end solutions for customers’ entire CSRM workflows.
We have an unwavering commitment to the software developer and IT operator communities, and show this commitment by offering varying forms of free access to our products in addition to the paid subscriptions
described above. This free access takes the form of free trials, freemium offerings, and open source software, and helps generate demand for our paid offerings within the software developer and IT operator communities.
We had 598.1 million of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020. We generated revenue of $150.8 million, $104.7 million, and $63.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, representing period-over-period growth rate of 44% and 65% for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net loss was $9.4 million, $5.4 million, and $26.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We generated operating cash flow of $29.5 million, $10.0 million, and $8.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Recent Developments
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of certain businesses, and greater uncertainty in global financial markets. Such conditions are creating disruption in global supply chains, increasing rates of unemployment, and adversely impacting many industries. The outbreak could have a continued adverse impact on economic and market conditions and trigger a global economic slowdown.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition or results of operations remain uncertain. Furthermore, because of our subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial condition until future periods, if at all.
We have experienced slowed growth during the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to experience slowed growth and decline in new customer orders for our platform and lower demand from our existing customers for upgrades within our platform, primarily due to changes in customer spend patterns and IT budgets. We have experienced and expect to continue to experience an increase in the average length of sales cycles and delays in new projects, all of which have adversely affected and could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations, and overall financial condition in future periods. The extent and continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial condition will depend on certain developments, including: the duration and spread of the outbreak; government responses to the pandemic; its impact on the health and welfare of our employees and their families; its impact on our customers and our sales cycles; its impact on customer, industry, or technology-based community events; delays in onboarding new employees; and effects on our partners, some of which are uncertain, difficult to predict, and not within our control. General economic conditions and disruptions in global markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other global events may also affect our future performance.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in the first quarter of 2020, we temporarily closed all of our offices, enabled our entire work force to work remotely and implemented travel restrictions for non-essential business. Since the second quarter of 2020, we intermittently reopened our offices in Israel. In the second half of 2020, we reopened our offices in India, the U.S. and France to partial capacity, as permitted by local governmental restrictions. The impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement are uncertain. The changes we have implemented to date have not affected and are not expected to materially affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
See the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including the following:
Extending Our Technology Leadership
We intend to continue to enhance our platform by developing new products and expanding the functionality of existing products to maintain our technology leadership. Since our initial launch of JFrog Artifactory, we have released several additional products that together create a unified platform for CSRM.
We invest heavily in integrating our products with the major package technologies so that our products can be easily adopted in any development environment. We believe that these integrations increase the value of our platform to our customers, as they provide freedom of choice for software developers and IT operators and help avoid vendor lock-in. We intend to expend additional resources in the future to continue introducing new products, features, and functionality.
Expanding Usage by Existing Customers
We believe that there is a significant opportunity for growth with many of our existing customers. Many customers purchase our products through self-service channels and often materially expand their usage over time. Increased engagement with our products provides our support and customer success teams opportunities to work directly with customers and introduce them to additional products and features, as well as drive usage of our products across large teams and more broadly across organizations. In order for us to continue to expand usage within our existing customers we will need to maintain engineering-level customer support, and continue to introduce new products and features that are responsive to our customers’ needs.
We quantify our expansion across existing customers through our net dollar retention rate. Our net dollar retention rate compares our annual recurring revenue (“ARR”) from the same set of customers across comparable periods. We define ARR as the annualized revenue run-rate of subscription agreements from all customers as of the last month of the quarter. The ARR includes monthly subscription customers so long as we generate revenue from these customers. We annualize our monthly subscriptions by taking the revenue we would contractually expect to receive from such customers in a given month and multiplying it by 12. We calculate net dollar retention rate by first identifying customers (the “Base Customers”), which were customers in the last month of a particular quarter (the “Base Quarter”). We then calculate the contracted ARR from these Base Customers in the last month of the same quarter of the subsequent year (the “Comparison Quarter”). This calculation captures upsells, contraction, and attrition since the Base Quarter. We then divide total Comparison Quarter ARR by total Base Quarter ARR for Base Customers. Our net dollar retention rate in a particular quarter is obtained by averaging the result from that particular quarter with the corresponding results from each of the prior three quarters. Our net dollar retention rate may fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including the level of penetration within our customer base, expansion of products and features, and our ability to retain our customers. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net dollar retention rate was 133% and 142%, respectively.
We focus on growing the number of large customers as a measure of our ability to scale with our customers and attract larger organizations to adopt our products. As of December 31, 2019, 234 of our customers had ARR of $100,000 or more, increasing to 352 customers as of December 31, 2020. We had 7 customers with ARR of at least $1.0 million as of December 31, 2019, increasing to 10 customers with ARR of at least $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Acquiring New Customers
We believe there is a significant opportunity to grow the number of customers that use our platform. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 27% of the Forbes Global 2000 were JFrog customers. Our results of
operations and growth prospects will depend in part on our ability to attract new customers. To date, we have relied on our self-service and inbound sales model to attract new customers. Prospective customers can evaluate and adopt our products through our free trials, freemium offerings, and open source software options. The costs associated with providing these free trials, freemium offerings, and open source software options are included in sales and marketing. While we believe we have a significant market opportunity that our platform addresses, we will need to continue to invest in customer support, sales and marketing, and research and development in order to address this opportunity.
Additionally, we believe our products address the software release needs of customers worldwide, and we see international expansion as a major opportunity. We have been operating and selling our products in international markets since our inception. While we believe global demand for our products will continue to increase as international market awareness of our brand grows, our ability to conduct our operations internationally will require considerable management attention and resources and is subject to the particular challenges of supporting a rapidly growing business in an environment of multiple languages, cultures, customs, legal and regulatory systems, alternative dispute systems, and commercial markets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe that free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating the performance of our business.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of property and equipment. We believe this is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated from our core operations that, after the purchases of property and equipment, can be used for strategic initiatives, including investing in our business, making strategic acquisitions, and strengthening our balance sheet. Free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities. Some of the limitations of free cash flow are that this metric does not reflect our future contractual commitments and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. We expect our free cash flow to fluctuate in future periods as we invest in our business to support our plans for growth.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented and provides a reconciliation of net cash from operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented:
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenues are comprised of revenue from self-managed subscriptions and SaaS subscriptions. Subscriptions to our self-managed software include license, support, and upgrades and updates on a when-and-if-available basis. Our SaaS subscriptions provide access to our latest managed version of our product hosted in a public cloud.
Subscription-Self-Managed and SaaS
Subscription-self-managed and SaaS revenue is generated from the sale of subscriptions for our self-managed software products and revenue from our SaaS subscriptions. For subscriptions to our self-managed software products, revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription term. For our SaaS subscriptions, revenue is recognized based on usage as the usage occurs over the contract period.
License-Self-Managed
The license component of our self-managed subscriptions reflects the revenue recognized by providing customers with access to proprietary software features. License revenue is recognized upfront when the software license is made available to our customer.
Cost of Revenue
Subscription-Self-Managed and SaaS
Cost of subscription-self-managed and SaaS revenue primarily consists of expenses related to providing support to our customers and cloud-related costs, such as hosting and managing costs. These costs primarily consist of personnel-related expenses of our services and customer support personnel, share-based compensation expenses, public cloud infrastructure costs, depreciation of property and equipment, and allocated overhead. We expect our cost of subscription and SaaS revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our subscription and SaaS revenue increases.
License-Self-Managed
Cost of license self-managed revenue consists of amortization associated with acquired intangible assets.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development costs primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation expenses, associated with our engineering personnel responsible for the design, development, and testing of our products, cost of development environments and tools, and allocated overhead. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase as we increase our research and development headcount to further strengthen and enhance our products and invest in the development of our software.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation expenses, sales commissions directly associated with our sales and marketing organizations, public cloud infrastructure costs associated with our free trials, freemium offerings, and open source software options, and costs associated with marketing programs and user events. Marketing programs include advertising, promotional events, and brand-building activities. We plan to increase our investment in sales and marketing over the foreseeable future, as we continue to hire additional personnel and invest in sales and marketing programs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation expenses, associated primarily with our finance, legal, human resources and other operational and administrative functions, professional fees for external legal, accounting and other consulting services, directors and officer’s insurance expenses, and allocated overhead. We expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net primarily consists of income earned on our cash equivalents and short-term investments. Interest and other income, net also includes foreign exchange gains and losses.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists primarily of income taxes related to the U.S. and other foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets in Israel as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our effective tax rate is affected by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions, as well as non-deductible expenses, such as share-based compensation, and changes in our valuation allowance.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenue for each of the periods indicated:
(1) Includes share-based compensation expense as follows:
(2) Includes amortization expense of acquired intangible assets as follows:
(3) Includes acquisition-related costs as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total subscription revenue increased $46.1 million, or 44%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Approximately $39.6 million of the increase in revenue was attributable to the growth from existing customers, and the remaining increase in revenue was attributable to new customers.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Total cost of subscription revenue increased $8.4 million, or 42%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $2.9 million in cloud-related costs, such as hosting and managing costs, driven by increased revenue from SaaS subscriptions, an increase of $2.6 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $0.8 million related to costs of access to vulnerability databases, and an increase of $0.6 million in share-based compensation expense as discussed in the section titled “Share-based Compensation Expense” below.
Our gross margin for subscription revenue remained unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased $11.4 million, or 38%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase of $6.6 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of increased headcount and an increase of $2.5 million in cloud-related costs incurred in product development.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $16.8 million, or 38%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $9.1 million in personnel-related expenses primarily as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $3.9 million in hosting costs related to our freemium offerings, trials, and community centers, an increase of $1.8 million in share-based compensation expense, as discussed in the section titled “Share-based Compensation Expense” below, and an increase of $1.3 million in commissions expense related to the amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, driven by an increase in total sales. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $1.0 million in travel costs due to COVID-19 travel restrictions and a decrease of $0.9 million in marketing programs and user events.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $16.7 million, or 94%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $11.8 million in share-based compensation expense, as discussed in the section titled “Share-based Compensation Expense” below, an increase of $1.7 million in personnel-related expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $1.3 million in officer and director insurance premium, and an increase of $1.2 million in professional fees for recruiting, legal, accounting, and other consulting services.
Share-based Compensation Expense
Share-based compensation expenses increased $14.5 million, or 155%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to $11.4 million in share-based compensation expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, related to RSUs granted to our chief executive officer in August 2020. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding these RSUs. The increase was partially offset by compensation expense of $3.3 million incurred as a result of a secondary transaction during the year ended December 31, 2019.The remaining increase in share-based compensation expense was attributable to grants to new and existing employees.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net decreased by $1.1 million, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower interest income on deposit and investment balances as a result of lower interest rates during the period.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
We recorded an income tax benefit of $2.7 million and income tax expense of $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This change was primarily due to $3.4 million income tax benefit in the U.S. as a result of higher loss before income tax from our operations. Our effective tax rate was 23% and (43)% of our loss before income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective tax rate is affected primarily by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions, as well as non-deductible expenses, such as share-based compensation, and changes in our valuation allowance.
For discussion on comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see the section titled “Results of Operations” disclosed in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Prospectus, which was filed with the SEC on September 16, 2020 and hereby incorporated by reference herein and considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K only to the extent referenced.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the quarters indicated, as well as the percentage that each line item represents of our total revenue for each quarter presented. The information for each quarter has been prepared on a basis consistent with our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and reflect, in the opinion of management, all adjustments of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for a fair statement of the financial information contained in those financial statements. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future. The following quarterly financial data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1) Includes share-based compensation expense as follows:
(2) Includes amortization expense of acquired intangible assets as follows:
(3) Includes acquisition-related costs as follows:
Quarterly Revenue Trends
Our total subscription revenue increased sequentially in the periods presented due to the growth from our existing customers and an increase in the number of new customers. As we generally invoice in advance for subscription agreements of at least one year in duration but recognize a majority of the revenue ratably over the term of those agreements, a substantial portion of the revenue that we report in each period is attributable to the recognition of deferred revenue relating to sales we received during previous periods. Consequently, increases or decreases in renewals, customer expansion, or new sales in a period typically will not be fully reflected in our total subscription revenue for that period and will positively or negatively affect our revenue in future periods.
Quarterly Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin Trends
Our total cost of revenue increased sequentially in the periods presented, primarily due to expanded adoption of our SaaS subscriptions by existing and new customers, which resulted in increased hosting and managing costs, as well as growth in personnel costs as we continue to grow our support team. Our quarterly gross margins were relatively unchanged in the periods presented.
Quarterly Operating Expenses Trends
Operating expenses have generally increased in each sequential quarter presented above primarily due to the increased headcount and associated personnel-related costs, share-based compensation, infrastructure and related
costs to support our growth. We intend to continue to make significant investments in research and development as we add features and enhance our platform. We also intend to invest in our sales and marketing organization to drive future revenue growth.
Quarterly Interest and Other Income, Net Trends
Our quarterly interest and other income, net in general was lower in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower interest income received on existing cash and investment balances as a result of lower interest rates during the periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity securities and cash generated from operations. In September 2020, we completed our IPO of 9,735,232 ordinary shares at an offering price of $44.00 per share, including 1,735,232 shares pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, which resulted in net proceeds of $393.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs of $35.1 million. Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations, investing in capital expenditures, and various business and asset acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $598.1 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash in banks, bank deposits, money market funds, and other highly liquid investments. Short-term investments generally consist of bank deposits, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, corporate debt securities, municipal securities, and government and agency debt. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, together with cash provided by operations, will be sufficient to meet our needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing, and extent of spending to support further sales and marketing and research and development efforts, the continuing market acceptance of our products and services, as well as expenses associated with our international expansion, the timing, and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new office spaces. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be materially and adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to our net loss of $9.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $29.4 million and net cash inflows of $9.4 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of share-based compensation of $23.9 million and depreciation and amortization of $3.7 million. The main drivers of net cash inflows were derived from the changes in operating assets and liabilities and were
related to an increase in deferred revenue of $20.5 million due to increases in sales, and an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $10.4 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $12.3 million due to timing of collections, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $7.0 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to our net loss of $5.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $11.8 million and net cash inflows of $3.6 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of share-based compensation of $9.4 million and depreciation and amortization of $2.8 million. The main drivers of net cash inflows were derived from the changes in operating assets and liabilities and were related to an increase in deferred revenue of $12.1 million due to increases in sales, and an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $2.9 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $4.9 million due to timing of collections, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $4.1 million, and net additions to deferred contract acquisition costs of $2.4 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $311.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to net purchases of short-term investments of $308.3 million and capital expenditures of $3.5 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $149.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to net purchases of short-term investments of $126.9 million, net cash paid for business combination of $20.9 million, and capital expenditures of $1.8 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $406.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net proceeds from our IPO of $393.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs, and proceeds of $9.2 million from employee equity transactions to be remitted to tax authorities.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to proceeds from exercise of share options of $1.2 million, partially offset by payments related to a prior year asset acquisition of $0.3 million and payments of deferred offering costs of $0.2 million.
For discussion on operating, investing, and financing activities of the year ended December 31, 2018, see the section titled “Liquidity and Capital Resources” disclosed in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Prospectus, which was filed with the SEC on September 16, 2020 and hereby incorporated by reference herein and considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K only to the extent referenced.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our non-cancellable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, as well as related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has created, and may continue to create, significant uncertainty in macroeconomic conditions, and the extent of its impact on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and the impact on our customers and sales cycles. We considered the impact of COVID-19 on our estimates and assumptions and determined that there were no material adverse impacts on the consolidated financial statements for the period ended December 31, 2020. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates and assumptions may change materially in future periods. The critical accounting policies and estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are comprised of revenue from self-managed subscriptions and SaaS subscriptions. Our self-managed subscriptions are offered on an annual and multi-year basis, and SaaS subscriptions are offered on an annual basis, with the exception of certain SaaS subscriptions, which are also offered on a monthly basis. Our annual and multi-year subscriptions are typically invoiced and collected at the time of entering into the contract for the full contract amount. Our monthly SaaS subscriptions are typically billed in arrears. For SaaS subscriptions with a minimum usage commitment, we typically invoice and collect the commitment amount at the time of entering into the contract, with any usage in excess of the committed contracted amount billed monthly in arrears.
Subscriptions to our self-managed software include license, support, and upgrades and updates, on a when-and-if-available basis. Our SaaS subscriptions provide access to our latest managed version of our product, which is hosted in a public cloud.
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services are delivered. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for these goods or services. To achieve the core principle of this standard, we applied the following five steps:
1. Identification of the contract, or contracts, with the customer
We determine that we have a contract with a customer when each party’s rights regarding the products or services to be transferred can be identified, the payment terms for the services can be identified, we have determined the customer has the ability and intent to pay, and the contract has commercial substance. At contract inception, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation.
2. Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the products and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the products or services either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the products and services is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
For self-managed subscriptions, our performance obligations include license for proprietary features of software, support, and upgrades and updates to the software on a when-and-if-available basis. The license provides standalone functionality to the customer and is therefore deemed a distinct performance obligation. Performance obligations related to support as well as upgrades and updates to the software on a when-and-if-available basis generally have a consistent continuous pattern of transfer to a customer during the contract period.
For SaaS subscriptions, we provide access to our cloud-hosted software, without providing the customer with the right to take possession of our software, which we consider to be a single performance obligation.
3. Determination of the transaction price
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring products or delivery of services to the customer. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although terms generally include a requirement to pay within 30 days. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we have determined our contracts generally do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, not to receive financing from our customers or to provide customers with financing. We have applied the practical expedient in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) and did not evaluate payment terms of one year or less for the existence of a significant financing component. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers which are subsequently remitted to governmental entities (for example, sales tax and other indirect taxes). We do not offer right of refund in our contracts.
4. Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price for each contract to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each performance obligation. We use judgment in determining the SSP for our products and services. We typically assess the SSP for our products and services on a periodic basis or when facts and circumstances change. To determine SSP, we maximize the use of observable standalone sales and observable data, where available. In instances where performance obligations do not have observable standalone sales, we utilize available information that may include market conditions, pricing strategies, the economic life of the software, and other observable inputs or uses the expected cost-plus margin approach to estimate the price we would charge if the products and services were sold separately.
5. Recognition of the revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied
Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring the promised product or delivery of service to the customer. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. For self-managed subscriptions, the revenue related to the license for proprietary features is recognized upfront, when the license is delivered. This revenue is presented in our consolidated statements of operations as license-self-managed. The
revenue related to support, and upgrades and updates, are recognized ratably over the contract period and is included in our consolidated statements of operations as subscription-self-managed and SaaS. For SaaS subscriptions, revenue is recognized based on usage as the usage occurs over the contract period and is included in our consolidated statements of operations as subscription-self-managed and SaaS.
Contract Balances
Contract assets consist of unbilled accounts receivable, which occur when a right to consideration for our performance under the customer contract occurs before invoicing to the customer. The amount of unbilled accounts receivable included within accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheets was immaterial for the periods presented. Contract liabilities consist of deferred revenue. Revenue is deferred when we invoice in advance of performance under a contract. The current portion of the deferred revenue balance is recognized as revenue during the 12-month period after the balance sheet date. The noncurrent portion of the deferred revenue balance is recognized as revenue following the 12-month period after the balance sheet date.
Cost to Obtain a Contract
We capitalize sales commissions and associated payroll taxes paid to sales personnel that are incremental to the acquisition of customer contracts. These costs are recorded as deferred contract acquisition costs on the consolidated balance sheets. We determine whether costs should be deferred based on our sales compensation plans and if the commissions are incremental and would not have occurred absent the customer contract.
Sales commissions for the renewal of a contract are not considered commensurate with the sales commissions paid for the acquisition of the initial contract given a substantive difference in commission rates in proportion to their respective contract values. Sales commissions paid for the renewal of a contract to sales personnel are amortized over the contractual term of the renewals. Sales commissions paid upon the initial acquisition of a customer contract for sales personnel are amortized over an estimated period of benefit of four years. We determine the period of benefit for sales commissions paid for the acquisition of the initial customer contract by taking into consideration the estimated customer life and the technological life of our software and other factors.
Amortization of sales commissions are consistent with the pattern of revenue recognition of each performance obligation and are included in sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations. We have applied the practical expedient in ASC 606 to expense costs as incurred for costs to obtain a contract with a customer when the amortization period would have been one year or less. We periodically review these deferred contract acquisition costs to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that could impact the period of benefit.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation expense related to share-based awards is recognized based on the fair value of the awards granted and recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for share options, RSUs and performance-based RSUs. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of each RSU award is based on the fair value of the underlying ordinary shares on the grant date. The assumptions used to determine the fair value of the share awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. The compensation expense associated with performance-based RSUs is adjusted based on the probability in achieving performance targets. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur instead of estimating the number of awards expected to be forfeited.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our share-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions and estimates were determined as follows:
•
Fair Value of Ordinary Shares. Prior to the IPO, the fair value was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and valuation reports prepared by third-party valuation specialists. After the IPO, the fair value of each ordinary share was based on the closing price of our publicly traded ordinary shares as reported on the date of the grant.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free rate for the expected term of the options is based on the Black-Scholes option-pricing model on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities appropriate for the expected term of employee share option awards.
•
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that options are expected to be outstanding. For option grants that are considered to be “plain vanilla,” we determine the expected term using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
•
Expected Volatility. As we have a short trading history for our ordinary shares, the expected volatility is derived from the average historical share volatilities of several unrelated public companies within our industry that we consider to be comparable to our own business over a period equivalent to the option’s expected term.
•
Expected Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and does not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, an expected dividend yield of zero percent was used.
The Black-Scholes assumptions used in evaluating our awards are as follows:
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our share-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our ordinary shares, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future share-based compensation expense.
Ordinary Shares Valuations
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of the ordinary shares underlying our equity awards was determined by our board of directors, after considering contemporaneous third-party valuations and input from management. The valuations of our ordinary shares were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. In the absence of a public trading market, our board of directors, with input from management, exercised significant judgment and considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our ordinary shares as of the date of each option grant, including the following factors:
•
the nature and history of our business;
•
the general economic conditions and our industry outlook;
•
our book value and overall financial condition;
•
our earning capacity;
•
our dividend history;
•
the existence of goodwill or other intangible value within our business;
•
prior interest sales and the size of the interests being valued; and
•
the market price of companies engaged in the same or a similar line of our business having their equity securities actively traded in a free and open market, either on an exchange or over-the-counter.
In valuing our ordinary shares, absent an arm’s-length current/recent round of financing, the fair value of our business, or equity value, was determined using both the income approach and market approach. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that the company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate based on the capital rates of return for comparable publicly traded companies and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in the company’s cash flows relative to those inherent in the companies utilized in the discount rate calculation. The market approach estimates value based on a comparison of the company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined and then applied to the company’s financial results to estimate the value of the subject company.
The resulting equity value was then allocated to each share class using an Option Pricing Model (“OPM”). The OPM allocates the overall company value to the various share classes based on differences in liquidation preferences, participation rights, dividend policy, and conversion rights, using a series of call options. The OPM is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is difficult to predict. Beginning in September 2019, we utilized a probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”) to allocate value among the various share classes. The PWERM involves the estimation of the value of our company under multiple future potential outcomes and estimates the probability of each potential outcome. The per-share value of our ordinary shares as determined through the PWERM was ultimately based upon probability-weighted per share values resulting from the various future scenarios, which include an initial public offering or continued operation as a private company. After the ordinary share value was determined, a discount for lack of marketability (“DLOM”) was applied to arrive at the fair value of the ordinary shares on a non-marketable basis. A DLOM is applied in order to reflect the lack of a recognized market for a closely held interest and the fact that a non-controlling equity interest may not be readily transferable. A market participant purchasing this share would recognize this illiquidity associated with the shares, which would reduce the overall fair market value.
In addition, we also considered any secondary transactions involving our capital shares. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange. Factors considered include transaction volume, proximity to other transactions as well as the valuation date, frequency of similar transactions, whether the transactions occurred between willing and unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved parties with sufficient access to our financial information from which to make an informed decision on price.
In some cases, we considered the amount of time between the valuation date and the grant date to determine whether to use the latest ordinary share valuation determined pursuant to the method described above or a straight-line calculation between two valuation dates. This determination included an evaluation of whether the subsequent valuation indicated that any significant change in valuation had occurred between the previous valuation and the grant date.
Subsequent to the closing of our IPO, the fair value of our ordinary shares is based on the closing price of our ordinary shares as reported on the date of the respective grant.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act, and, for so long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements
that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. In addition, pursuant to Section 107 of the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. If we cease to be an emerging growth company, we will no longer be able to take advantage of these exemptions or the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the section titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.