ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a clinical-stage pharmaceutical company focused on the development of innovative and differentiated prescription therapeutics for debilitating skin diseases with a focus on our lead asset for the treatment of hyperhidrosis. Our executive management team and board of directors bring extensive experience in product development and global commercialization, having served in leadership roles at large global pharmaceutical companies and biotechs that have developed and/or launched successful products, including several that were first-in-class and/or achieved iconic status, such as Cialis®, Taltz®, Gemzar®, Prozac®, Cymbalta®, and Juvederm®.
Our pivotal Phase 3 clinical-stage investigational product candidate, sofpironium bromide, is a new chemical entity that belongs to a class of medications called anticholinergics. Anticholinergics block the action of acetylcholine, a chemical that transmits signals within the nervous system that are responsible for a range of bodily functions, including activation of the sweat glands. Sofpironium bromide was retrometabolically designed. Retrometabolic drugs are designed to exert their action locally and are potentially rapidly metabolized to a less active form once absorbed into the blood. This proposed mechanism of action may allow for potentially highly effective doses to be used while limiting systemic side effects. We intend to develop sofpironium bromide as a potential best-in-class, self-administered, once daily, topical therapy for the treatment of primary axillary (underarm) hyperhidrosis.
Hyperhidrosis is a life-altering condition of sweating beyond what is physiologically required for thermoregulation of the body. It is believed to be caused by an overactive cholinergic response of the sweat glands and affects an estimated 15.3 million, or 4.8%, of the U.S. population. According to a 2016 update on the prevalence and severity of hyperhidrosis in the U.S. by Doolittle et al., axillary hyperhidrosis, which is the targeted first potential indication for sofpironium bromide, is the most common occurrence of hyperhidrosis, affecting approximately 65% of patients, or an estimated 10 million individuals, in the U.S.
Collaboration with Kaken in Asia
We and our development partner in Asia, Kaken, have conducted multiple clinical trials of sofpironium bromide gel that encompass over 1,300 subjects in the U.S. and Japan. These trials evaluated the potential safety, tolerability, PK, and efficacy of sofpironium bromide gel in adult and pediatric patients with primary axillary hyperhidrosis and healthy adult subjects.
In September 2020, Kaken received regulatory approval in Japan to manufacture and market sofpironium bromide gel, 5% under the brand name ECCLOCK® for the once-daily treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis. Japan is the first country to approve sofpironium bromide, which also marks the first approval of a topical presentation product for the treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis in Japan. This approval was based on the results of Kaken’s Japanese pivotal Phase 3 registration study of sofpironium bromide gel, 5% in 281 patients with primary axillary hyperhidrosis, in which all primary and secondary efficacy endpoints demonstrated statistically significant differences between sofpironium bromide gel and vehicle. In addition, sofpironium bromide gel, 5% was observed to be safe and generally well tolerated in this study, as well as in the accompanying 52-week long-term safety extension study with 185 patients in Japan.
In November 2020, Kaken launched commercial sales of ECCLOCK® in Japan. This marked the first commercialization of sofpironium bromide worldwide. Under the Kaken Agreement, we are entitled to receive commercial milestone payments, as well as tiered royalties based on a percentage of net sales of sofpironium bromide gel in Japan. Furthermore, Kaken has rights to develop and commercialize sofpironium bromide in South Korea, China, and certain other Asian countries, and we are entitled to receive royalties based on a percentage of Kaken’s net sales in these countries.
In March 2019, Kaken completed a Phase 3 trial in patients with primary axillary hyperhidrosis in Japan, achieving statistical significance (p<0.05) on all primary and secondary endpoints, upon which Kaken filed for, and in September 2020 received, regulatory approval to manufacture and market in Japan sofpironium bromide gel, 5% under the brand name ECCLOCK® for the treatment of primary axillary (underarm) hyperhidrosis.
Together with Kaken, we were granted by the Japanese Patent Office a composition of matter patent with claims directed to the novel polymorphic, or crystalline, forms of sofpironium bromide that are being commercialized by Kaken in Japan and would be by us in the U.S. subject to our own ongoing development efforts, and this patent is expected to provide additional protection for these newly developed and distinct forms in certain countries, including Japan, potentially through 2040.
Our Clinical Programs
U.S. Phase 3 Clinical Studies
Based on the positive results in the clinical trials for sofpironium bromide conducted globally to date by us and Kaken, we initiated during the fourth quarter of 2020 two U.S. pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials (also referred to as our Phase 3 Program or Cardigan Studies), which are both currently enrolling patients.
In October 2020, we initiated our first of two pivotal U.S. Phase 3 clinical studies evaluating sofpironium bromide gel, 15% for the treatment for primary axillary (underarm) hyperhidrosis, the Cardigan I Study. The Cardigan I Study is expected to
enroll up to 350 subjects aged nine years and older with primary axillary hyperhidrosis and is a multicenter, randomized, double-blinded, vehicle (placebo)-controlled Phase 3 study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of topically applied sofpironium bromide gel, 15%. Subjects will apply sofpironium bromide or vehicle once daily at bedtime to their underarms for six consecutive weeks, with a two-week post-treatment follow-up. The co-primary efficacy endpoints of the Cardigan I Study include the proportion of subjects achieving at least a 2-point improvement on the HDSM-Ax scale, a proprietary and validated PRO measure, and change in GSP, each from baseline to EOT. In addition, safety and tolerability assessments will be performed throughout the study. As of the date of filing of this Annual Report, we have exceeded 50% enrollment in the Cardigan I study.
In December 2020, we initiated the second of the two pivotal U.S. Phase 3 clinical trials for sofpironium bromide gel, 15% for the primary axillary (underarm) hyperhidrosis, the Cardigan II Study. The Cardigan II Study will evaluate the safety and efficacy of sofpironium bromide gel, 15% versus vehicle in approximately 350 subjects aged nine years and older with primary axillary hyperhidrosis. As of the date of filing of this Annual Report, all investigational sites are activated, and enrollment of subjects has begun.
We expect to complete enrollment of the Cardigan Studies in the third quarter of 2021 and anticipate announcing topline results from the Cardigan Studies in the fourth quarter of 2021. If successful, the results from the Cardigan Studies are expected to form the basis of a prospective NDA in the U.S. for sofpironium bromide gel, 15% for the treatment of primary axillary hyperhidrosis.
Phase 3 Open-Label Long-Term Safety Study
In July 2020, we completed our 12-month Phase 3 open-label long-term safety study evaluating sofpironium gel 5% and 15% in 300 subjects aged nine years and older with primary axillary hyperhidrosis. The study results confirmed to us that sofpironium bromide gel, at both concentrations, was safe and generally well tolerated, which was consistent with the earlier Phase 2 clinical trial results. No treatment-related SAEs were observed.
AnGes Collaboration Agreement
In September 2020, we entered into a collaboration agreement with AnGes relating to the development and potential commercialization of AnGes’ proprietary investigational adjuvanted plasmid DNA vaccine intended to prevent COVID-19. Under the terms of the collaboration agreement, AnGes will continue to lead the development of its vaccine candidate in Japan, and we will provide information and know-how that could be relevant to such development efforts. If AnGes obtains positive results from its clinical studies in Japan and we are able to satisfy certain conditions, including raising the required development funding, we would have the right to lead the development efforts in the U.S. and certain emerging markets. If ultimately approved for sale in the applicable jurisdictions, AnGes would have commercial rights to the vaccine in Japan and we would have commercial rights in the U.S. and certain emerging markets on terms and conditions to be agreed with AnGes prior to any launch of a vaccine product. AnGes completed a Phase 1/2 study and is currently conducting a Phase 2/3 clinical study with its vaccine candidate in Japan. If the development process continues based on this effort, a larger Phase 3 registration study will be required for any regulatory approval.
Significant Financing and Licensing Arrangements
Public Offerings of Common Stock and Warrants
In October 2020, we completed the sale of 19,003,510 shares of our common stock, and, to certain investors, pre-funded warrants to purchase 1,829,812 shares of our common stock, and accompanying common stock warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 20,833,322 shares of our common stock (the “October 2020 Offering”). Each share of common stock and pre-funded warrant to purchase one share of common stock was sold together with a common warrant to purchase one share of our common stock. The public offering price of each share of common stock and accompanying common warrant was $0.72 and $0.719 for each pre-funded warrant and accompanying common warrant, respectively. The shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants, and the accompanying common warrants, were issued separately and were immediately separable upon issuance. The common warrants are exercisable at a price of $0.72 per share of our common stock and will expire five years from the date of issuance. The pre-funded warrants were exercised in October 2020 at an exercise price of $0.001 per share of our common stock. The October 2020 Offering resulted in net proceeds of approximately $13.7 million to us after deducting underwriting commissions and discounts and other offering expenses of $1.3 million and excluding the proceeds from the exercise of the warrants.
In June 2020, we completed the sale of 14,790,133 shares of our common stock, and, to certain investors, pre-funded warrants to purchase 2,709,867 shares of our common stock, and accompanying common warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 17,500,000 shares of our common stock (the “June 2020 Offering”) (and together with the October 2020 Offering, the “2020 Offerings”). Each share of common stock and pre-funded warrant to purchase one share of our common stock was sold together with a common warrant to purchase one share of our common stock. The public offering price of each share of common stock and accompanying common warrant was $1.15 and $1.149 for each pre-funded warrant and accompanying common warrant, respectively. The shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants, and the accompanying common warrants, were issued separately and were immediately separable upon issuance. The pre-funded warrants were exercised in the third quarter of 2020 at an exercise price of $0.001 per share of our common stock. The common warrants were immediately exercisable at a price of $1.25 per share of our common stock and will expire five years from the date of issuance. The June 2020 Offering resulted in approximately $18.7 million of net proceeds after deducting underwriting commissions and discounts and other offering expenses of $1.4 million and excluding the proceeds from the exercise of the warrants.
We are using the proceeds from the 2020 Offerings for research and development, including clinical trials, working capital, and general corporate purposes.
At Market Issuance Sales Agreement
In April 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. (“Oppenheimer”) as our sales agent (the “Agent”). Pursuant to the terms of the ATM Agreement, we may sell from time to time through the Agent shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $8.0 million (the “Shares”). The Shares are issued pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-236353). Sales of the Shares are made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions on The Nasdaq Capital Market at market prices or as otherwise agreed by us and the Agent. Under the terms of the ATM Agreement, we may also sell the Shares from time to time to the Agent as principal for its own account at a price to be agreed upon at the time of sale. Any sale of the Shares to the Agent as principal would be pursuant to the terms of a separate placement notice between us and the Agent. We will be significantly limited in our ability to sell shares of our common stock under the ATM Agreement unless and until the number of authorized shares of our common stock is increased, which would require stockholder approval. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 4,360,167 Shares under the ATM Agreement at a weighted-average price of $0.85 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of $3.4 million, after giving effect to a 3% commission to Oppenheimer as Agent plus initial expenses for executing the ATM Agreement. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, and through March 9, 2021, we sold 1,083,548 shares of common stock under the ATM Agreement at a weighted-average price of $1.55 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of $1.6 million.
Private Placement Offerings
In February 2020, we and Lincoln Park entered into (i) a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”); (ii) a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”); and (iii) a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”). Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park purchased, and we sold, (i) an aggregate of 950,000 shares of common stock (the “Common Shares”), (ii) a warrant to initially purchase an aggregate of up to 606,420 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share (the “Series A Warrant”), and (iii) a warrant to initially purchase an aggregate of up to 1,556,420 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.16 per share (the “Series B Warrant”, and together with the Series A Warrant, the “Warrants”). The aggregate gross purchase price for the Common Shares and the Warrants was $2.0 million.
Under the terms and subject to the conditions of the Purchase Agreement, we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase, up to $28.0 million in the aggregate of shares of our common stock. Sales of common stock by us, if any, will be subject to certain limitations, and may occur from time to time, at our sole discretion, over the 36-month period commencing on August 14, 2020 (the “Commencement Date”). Further, we will be significantly limited in our ability to sell shares of our common stock under the Purchase Agreement unless and until the number of authorized shares of our common stock is increased, which would require stockholder approval.
Following the Commencement Date, under the Purchase Agreement, on any business day selected by us, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to 100,000 shares of our common stock on such business day (each, a “Regular Purchase”), provided, however, that (i) the Regular Purchase may be increased to up to 125,000 shares, provided that the closing sale price of the common stock is not below $3.00 on the purchase date; and (ii) the Regular Purchase may be increased to up to
150,000 shares, provided that the closing sale price of the common stock is not below $5.00 on the purchase date. In each case, Lincoln Park’s maximum commitment in any single Regular Purchase may not exceed $1,000,000. The purchase price per share for each such Regular Purchase will be based on prevailing market prices of common stock immediately preceding the time of sale. In addition to Regular Purchases, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase other amounts as accelerated purchases or as additional accelerated purchases if the closing sale price of the common stock exceeds certain threshold prices as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. In all instances, we may not sell shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement if it would result in Lincoln Park beneficially owning more than 9.99% of the outstanding shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we have not made any sales of our common stock under the Purchase Agreement.
We agreed with Lincoln Park that we will not enter into any “variable rate” transactions with any third party, subject to certain exceptions, for a period defined in the Purchase Agreement. We have the right to terminate the Purchase Agreement at any time, at no cost or penalty.
Amended and Restated License Agreement with Bodor
In February 2020, we, together with Brickell Subsidiary and Bodor entered into the Amended and Restated License Agreement, which supersedes the License Agreement, dated December 15, 2012, entered into between Brickell Subsidiary and Bodor, as amended by Amendment No. 1 to License Agreement, effective as of October 21, 2013, and Amendment No. 2 to License Agreement, effective as of March 31, 2015.
The Amended and Restated License Agreement retains with us a worldwide, exclusive license to develop, manufacture, market, sell and sublicense products containing the proprietary compound sofpironium bromide based upon the patents referenced in the Amended and Restated License Agreement for a defined field of use. In exchange for entering into the Amended and Restated License Agreement, settling the previously disclosed dispute, and resolving the associated litigation between us and Bodor, we made an upfront payment of $1.0 million in cash to Bodor following the execution of the Amended and Restated License Agreement and the settlement agreement by and among the Company, Brickell Subsidiary, and Bodor, dated February 17, 2020. Additionally, under the original License Agreement and the Amended and Restated License Agreement, we are required to pay Bodor (i) a royalty on sales of product outside Kaken’s territory, including a low single-digit royalty on sales of certain product not covered by the patent estate licensed from Bodor; (ii) a specified percentage of all royalties we receive from Kaken for sales of product within its territory; (iii) a percentage of non-royalty sublicensing income we receive from Kaken or other sublicensees; and (iv) up to an aggregate of $1.8 million (plus an additional $0.1 million for approvals of additional products) in cash payments and $1.5 million of shares of our common stock upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and other milestones, including the enrollment of the first patient in the U.S. Phase 3 trials. Based on the foregoing, we made a $0.5 million milestone payment to Bodor in June 2020 following the closing of the June 2020 Offering. Additionally, in October 2020, in association with the enrollment of the first patient in our U.S. Phase 3 pivotal program, we made a cash payment of $0.5 million and issued $0.5 million, or 480,769 shares, of our common stock to Bodor. As a result, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an aggregate of $1.5 million as research and development expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Further, following December 31, 2020, we have begun to pay Bodor the required royalties based on the royalty revenue we have recognized from Kaken’s net sales of sofpironium bromide in Japan.
Financial Overview
Our operations to date have been limited to business planning, raising capital, developing our pipeline assets (in particular sofpironium bromide), identifying product candidates, conducting clinical trials, and other research and development. To date, we have financed operations primarily through funds received from the sale of common stock and warrants, convertible preferred stock, debt, and convertible notes, funds received from license and collaboration agreements, and cash and investments acquired in connection with the Merger. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any product sales. Since inception, we have incurred operating losses. We recorded a net loss of $20.9 million and $23.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $105.9 million. We expect to continue incurring significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next several years as we:
• execute our two pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials for sofpironium bromide in the U.S.;
• contract to manufacture product candidates;
• advance research and development-related activities to develop and expand our product pipeline;
• maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
• hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, and management personnel; and
• add operational and finance personnel to support product development efforts and to support operating as a public company.
We do not expect to generate significant revenue unless and until we successfully complete development of, obtain marketing approval for, and commercialize product candidates, either alone or in collaboration with third parties. We expect these activities may take several years and our success in these efforts is subject to significant uncertainty. We expect we will need to raise substantial additional capital prior to the regulatory approval and commercialization of any of our product candidates. Until such time, if ever, that we generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our operations through public or private equity or debt financings, collaborations or licenses, or other available financing transactions. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds through these or other means when needed.
Key Components of Operations
Revenue
Revenue generally consists of revenue recognized under our strategic collaboration agreements for the development and commercialization of our product candidates. Our strategic collaboration agreements generally outline overall development plans and include payments we receive at signing, payments for the achievement of certain milestones, and royalties. For these activities and payments, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the performance obligations to determine whether the performance obligations are satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. Prior to 2020, we had not recognized any royalty revenue from any collaboration arrangement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the Kaken Agreement, we began recognizing royalty revenue earned on a percentage of sales of sofpironium bromide in Japan, and we expect to continue to recognize such royalties going forward. Other than the revenue we may generate in connection with this agreement, we do not expect to generate any revenue from any product candidates that we develop unless and until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize our products or enter into other collaboration agreements with third parties.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses principally consist of payments to third parties known as CROs. These CROs help plan, organize, and conduct clinical and nonclinical studies under our direction. Personnel costs, including wages, benefits, and share-based compensation, related to our research and development staff in support of product development activities are also included, as well as costs incurred for supplies, preclinical studies and toxicology tests, consultants, and facility and related overhead costs.
Below is a summary of our research and development expenses related to sofpironium bromide by categories of costs for the periods presented. The other expenses category includes travel, lab and office supplies, clinical trial management software, license fees, and other miscellaneous expenses. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in future periods during the execution of our Phase 3 program for sofpironium bromide.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including wages, benefits, and share-based compensation, related to our executive, sales, marketing, finance, and human resources personnel, as well as professional fees, including legal, accounting, and sublicensing fees.
We expect our overall general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in the near term as we incur expenses associated with operating as a public company compared to prior periods, which may include increased insurance premiums, investor relations expenses, legal and accounting fees associated with the expansion of our business and corporate governance, financial reporting expenses, and expenses related to Sarbanes-Oxley and other regulatory compliance obligations.
Total Other Income, Net
Investment and Other Income, Net
Investment and other income, net consists primarily of realized gains and losses associated with marketable securities and interest earned on cash and cash equivalent and marketable securities balances. Our interest income varies each reporting period depending on our average cash balances during the period and market interest rates. We expect interest income to fluctuate in the future with changes in average cash balances and market interest rates.
Gain on Extinguishment
Gain on extinguishment consists of the gain realized on the conversion of convertible promissory notes to common stock in August 2019, as described further immediately below.
Interest Expense
Interest expense historically consisted primarily of interest and amortization related to the issuance of $7.4 million of convertible promissory note principal during the year ended December 31, 2019, and principal borrowings of $7.5 million provided by the loan and security agreement entered into with Hercules Capital, Inc. on February 18, 2016 (the “Loan Agreement”). In August 2019, the convertible promissory notes were converted and the Loan Agreement was repaid, and therefore, there was no interest expense thereafter related to these agreements.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant and Derivative Liability
In connection with the Loan Agreement, we issued warrants to Hercules Capital, Inc., which are exercisable for 9,005 shares of common stock at a per share exercise price of $33.31. In connection with the convertible promissory notes, we issued warrants which are exercisable for 490,683 shares of common stock at a per share exercise price of $10.36.
We accounted for the warrants as liabilities at their estimated fair value. The warrants were subject to remeasurement to fair value at each balance sheet date, and any fair value adjustments were recognized in the consolidated statements of operations within the “Change in fair value of warrant and derivative liability” line item. The liability was adjusted for changes in fair value through August 2019, and at that time the final warrant liability fair value was reclassified to equity in the consolidated balance sheets and no longer remeasured to fair value each period.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have prepared the consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses, and related disclosures at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its critical estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, accrued research and development expenses, convertible promissory notes, redeemable convertible preferred stock, warrants, and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on assumptions that we believe are reasonable; however, actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
For information on our significant accounting policies, please refer to Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
We currently recognize revenue generated primarily from licensing and royalty fees received under the Kaken Agreement. The terms of the agreement include non-refundable upfront fees, funding of research and development activities, payments based upon achievement of milestones, and royalties on net product sales.
We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the promised goods or services in the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied. We utilize judgment to assess the nature of the performance obligation to determine whether the performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Licenses of Intellectual Property
If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer, and the customer can use and benefit from the license.
Milestone payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the value of the associated milestone (such as a regulatory submission) is included in the transaction price, which is then allocated to each performance obligation. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the control of our partner, such as approvals from regulators, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license, collaboration, and other revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment and future periods through the end of the performance obligation period.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and where the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occur, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). Prior to 2020, we had not recognized any royalty revenue from any collaboration arrangement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the Kaken Agreement, we recognized revenue related to tiered royalties earned on a percentage of net sales of sofpironium bromide in Japan of approximately $27 thousand.
For a complete discussion of accounting for collaboration licensing agreements, see Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our revenue to date has been generated primarily from licensing and development fees received under the Kaken Agreement.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are charged to expense when incurred and consist of costs incurred for independent and collaboration research and development activities. The major components of research and development costs include formulation development, clinical studies, clinical manufacturing costs, salaries and employee benefits, toxicology studies, allocations of various overhead, and occupancy costs. Research costs typically consist of applied research, preclinical, and toxicology work. Pharmaceutical manufacturing development costs consist of product formulation, chemical analysis, and the transfer and scale-up of manufacturing at contract manufacturers.
As part of the process of recording research and development costs, we are required to estimate and accrue expenses. This process involves the following:
•communicating with appropriate internal personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost;
• estimating and accruing expenses in our financial statements as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time; and
• periodically confirming the accuracy of our estimates with service providers and making adjustments, if necessary.
Examples of estimated research and development expenses that we accrue include:
•payments to CROs in connection with preclinical and toxicology studies and clinical trials;
• payments to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials;
• payments to CMOs in connection with the production of clinical trial materials; and
• professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expense accruals related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing costs, we estimate the period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from estimates.
To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of accrued research and development expenses after a reporting period. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials and other research activities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Unless otherwise discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the impact of recently issued guidance to be adopted in the future is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue decreased by $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue in both periods was driven primarily by collaboration revenue recognized for research and development activities related to the Kaken Agreement for which Kaken provided research and development funding. The decrease in revenue recognized was attributable to our Phase 3 open-label long-term safety study of sofpironium bromide gel and other ancillary clinical studies that were ongoing in 2019 but were concluded or winding down by the end of the first quarter of 2020. Conducting these studies was the basis for revenue recognition over time, through the third quarter of 2020, of a $15.6 million research and development payment received from Kaken in the second quarter of 2018. During the fourth quarter of 2020, pursuant to the Kaken Agreement, we began recognizing royalty revenue earned on a percentage of net sales of sofpironium bromide in Japan, which amounted to approximately $27 thousand in that quarter, however we did not receive any cash related to such royalties because Kaken instead offset amounts we owed it under the Clinical Supply Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to a decrease in clinical and other related regulatory and compliance costs related to sofpironium bromide. Our Phase 3, open-label, long-term safety study of sofpironium bromide gel and other ancillary clinical studies were ongoing in 2019, but were concluded or winding down by the end of the first quarter of 2020. We began incurring greater research and development costs upon the initiation of our Phase 3 Cardigan Studies in the fourth quarter of 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased by $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to reduced professional fees of $1.8 million resulting from legal and other fees incurred in 2019 related to the Merger that did not recur in 2020, as well as reduced impairment expense of $0.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019. These reduced expenses were partially offset by higher costs in 2020 of $2.0 million for compensation-related expense and $0.8 million for directors’ and officers’ liability insurance due to becoming a public company.
Total Other Income, Net
Total other income, net decreased by $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily due to a gain of $2.3 million related to the conversion of the convertible promissory notes in August 2019 and a gain of $0.2 million resulting from fair value adjustments to warrant liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2019, both of which did not recur in 2020. These gains were partially offset by a decrease of $2.1 million in interest expense related to the issuance of convertible promissory notes in 2019 and principal borrowings provided by the Loan Agreement with a former lender.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred significant operating losses and have an accumulated deficit as a result of ongoing efforts to develop our product candidates, including conducting preclinical and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a net loss of $20.9 million and $23.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $105.9 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities of $30.1 million compared to $11.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we received aggregate proceeds of $10.5 million from warrant exercises and sales of shares of our common stock under the ATM Agreement. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through funds received from the sale of common stock and warrants, convertible preferred stock, debt, and convertible notes, payments received under strategic license and collaboration agreements, and cash and investments acquired in the Merger.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, along with aggregate cash proceeds received subsequent to December 31, 2020 of $10.5 million from warrant exercises and sales of shares of our common stock under the ATM Agreement, are sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of this Annual Report. We expect to continue to incur additional substantial losses in the foreseeable future as a result of our research and development activities. Additional funding will be required in the future to continue with our planned development and commercial related activities.
Cash Flows
Since inception, we have primarily used our available cash to fund expenditures related to product discovery and development activities. The following table sets forth a summary of cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $20.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to $36.0 million during the prior year primarily due to the combined effect of a change in working capital of $12.0 million, which included $6.1 million due to changes in deferred revenue and $7.4 million due to changes in prepaid expenses related to clinical trials, a decrease in net loss of $3.0 million, a reduction associated with the 2019 gain on extinguishment of debt of $2.3 million, and an increase associated with the 2019 amortization of a convertible promissory notes discount of $1.4 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities of $4.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to $32.5 million during the prior year. The $28.0 million decrease was primarily the result of a reduction in 2020 in maturities of marketable securities by $15.0 million and cash received from Vical in the Merger of $13.0 million in 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $38.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased compared to $2.6 million during the prior year. The increase was primarily related to higher net proceeds received in the 2020 period from the issuance of common stock and warrants of $38.0 million and proceeds from the issuance of a note payable of $0.4 million, compared to net proceeds received in 2019 from the issuance of convertible promissory notes of $7.4 million, partially offset by the repayment of principal associated with the Loan Agreement in the 2019 period of $4.8 million.