Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis reviews our consolidated financial statements and other relevant statistical data and is intended to enhance your understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. The information in this section has been derived from the Consolidated Financial Statements and footnotes thereto that appear in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The information contained in this section should be read in conjunction with these Consolidated Financial Statements and footnotes and the business and financial information provided in this Form 10-K.
Overview
FS Bancorp, Inc. and its subsidiary bank, 1st Security Bank of Washington have been serving the Puget Sound area since 1936. Originally chartered as a credit union, known as Washington’s Credit Union, the credit union served various select employment groups. On April 1, 2004, the credit union converted to a Washington state-chartered mutual savings bank. On July 9, 2012, the Bank converted from mutual to stock ownership and became the wholly owned subsidiary of FS Bancorp, Inc.
The Company is relationship-driven, delivering banking and financial services to local families, local and regional businesses and industry niches within distinct Western Washington communities, predominately, the Puget Sound area, and one loan production office located in the Tri-Cities, Washington.
The Company also maintains its long-standing indirect consumer lending platform which operates throughout the West Coast. The Company emphasizes long-term relationships with families and businesses within the communities served, working with them to meet their financial needs. The Company is also actively involved in community activities and events within these market areas, which further strengthens our relationships within those markets.
The Company focuses on diversifying revenues, expanding lending channels, and growing the banking franchise. Management remains focused on building diversified revenue streams based upon credit, interest rate, and concentration risks. Our business plan remains as follows:
● Growing and diversifying our loan portfolio;
● Maintaining strong asset quality;
● Emphasizing lower cost core deposits to reduce the costs of funding our loan growth;
● Capturing our customers’ full relationship by offering a wide range of products and services by leveraging our well-established involvement in our communities and by selectively emphasizing products and services designed to meet our customers’ banking needs; and
● Expanding the Company’s markets.
The Company is a diversified lender with a focus on the origination of one-to-four-family loans, commercial real estate mortgage loans, second mortgage or home equity loan products, consumer loans, including indirect home improvement (“fixture secured”) loans which also include solar-related home improvement loans, marine lending, and commercial business loans. As part of our expanding lending products, the Company experienced growth in residential mortgage and commercial construction warehouse lending consistent with our business plan to further diversify revenues. Historically, consumer loans, in particular, fixture secured loans had represented the largest portion of the Company’s loan portfolio and had traditionally been the mainstay of the Company’s lending strategy. At December 31, 2020, consumer loans represented 23.8% of the Company’s total gross loan portfolio, down slightly from 24.1% at December 31, 2019, due in part to growth in real estate and commercial business loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. In recent years, the Company has placed more of an emphasis on real estate lending products, such as one-to-four-family loans, commercial real estate loans, construction and development loans, including speculative residential construction loans, as well as commercial business loans, while growing the current size of the consumer loan portfolio. At December 31, 2020, real estate loans represented 58.8% of the Company’s total gross loan portfolio.
Fixture secured loans to finance window, gutter, siding replacement, solar panels, pools, and other improvement renovations are a large and regionally expanding segment of the consumer loan portfolio. These fixture secured consumer loans are dependent on the Bank’s contractor/dealer network of 143 active dealers located throughout Washington, Oregon, California, Idaho, Colorado, Arizona, Nevada, and Minnesota with four contractor/dealers responsible for 39.2% of the funded loans dollar volume for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company funded $185.7 million, or approximately 8,000 loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table details fixture secured loan originations by state for the periods indicated:
The Company originates one-to-four-family residential mortgage loans through referrals from real estate agents, financial planners, builders, and from existing customers. Retail banking customers are also an important source of the Company’s loan originations. The Company originated $1.87 billion of one-to-four-family loans which includes loans held for sale, loans held for investment, and fixed seconds in addition to loans brokered to other institutions of $10.1 million through the home lending segment during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $1.64 billion were sold to investors. Of the loans sold to investors, $1.48 billion were sold to the FNMA, FHLMC, FHLB, and/or GNMA with servicing rights retained for the purpose of further developing these customer relationships. At December 31, 2020, one-to-four-family residential mortgage loans held for investment, which excludes loans held for sale of $166.4 million, totaled $311.1 million, or 19.8%, of the total gross loan portfolio.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were higher volumes of refinances and sales of one-to-four-family homes, compared to the prior years’ surge in construction loans due to lower housing inventories. Residential construction and development lending, while not as common as other options like one-to-four-family loans, will continue to be an important element in our total loan portfolio, and we will continue to take a disciplined approach by concentrating our efforts on loans to builders and developers in our market areas known to us. These short-term loans typically mature in six to twelve months. In addition, the funding is usually not fully disbursed at origination, thereby reducing our net loans receivable in the short-term.
The Company is significantly affected by prevailing economic conditions, as well as government policies and regulations concerning, among other things, monetary and fiscal affairs. Deposit flows are influenced by a number of factors, including interest rates paid on time deposits, other investments, account maturities, and the overall level of personal income and savings. Lending activities are influenced by the demand for funds, the number and quality of lenders, and regional economic cycles. Sources of funds for lending activities include primarily deposits, including brokered deposits, borrowings, payments on loans, and income provided from operations.
The Company’s earnings are primarily dependent upon net interest income, the difference between interest income and interest expense. Interest income is a function of the balances of loans and investments outstanding during a given period and the yield earned on these loans and investments. Interest expense is a function of the amount of deposits and borrowings outstanding during the same period and interest rates paid on these deposits and borrowings. The significant 150 basis point reduction in the targeted federal funds rate during the quarter ended March 31, 2020, resulted in a larger impact to our interest-earning assets than to our interest-bearing liabilities, thereby decreasing our net interest margin to 4.02% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 4.53% for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, our net interest margin was adversely impacted by the low loan yields from the PPP loan portfolio. The continuing low
interest rate environment is expected to continue to put downward pressure on loan yields and the yields on other floating rate interest earning assets as well. Further because the length of the COVID-19 pandemic and the efficacy of the extraordinary measures being put in place to address its economic consequences are unknown, including the 150 basis point reductions in the targeted federal funds rate in March 2020, until the pandemic subsides the Company expects its net interest income and net interest margin will be adversely affected in 2021 and possibly longer.
Another significant influence on the Company’s earnings is fee income from mortgage banking activities. The Company’s earnings are also affected by the provision for loan losses, service charges and fees, gains from sales of assets, operating expenses and income taxes. The Company recorded a provision of $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.9 million for the same period one year ago, due primarily to the incurred but not yet experienced probable loan losses reflecting credit deterioration due to the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the increase in the loan portfolio due to organic growth, and net loan charge-offs.
Highlights in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
Due to the current global situation surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company is offering a variety of relief options designed to support our customers and the communities we serve.
Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") Participation. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank is committed to providing assistance to its customers. Under the CARES Act, as a qualified SBA lender, the Company was automatically authorized to originate PPP loans upon commencement of the program in April 2020. The PPP program initially concluded on August 8, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the Company had 423 PPP loans totaling $62.1 million for customers who are small- to mid-size businesses as well as independent contractors, sole proprietors and partnerships as allowed under the PPP guidance issued in April 2020. The CAA 2021 renewed and extended the PPP until March 31, 2021 by authorizing an additional $284.5 billion for the program. As a result, in January 2021, the Bank began accepting and processing loan applications under this second PPP program. The SBA has recently released a simplified forgiveness process for PPP loans of $150,000 or less. At December 31, 2020, the Bank held 352 of PPP loans of $150,000 or less with a combined balance of $16.6 million. We will also continue working with our customers to assist them with accessing other borrowing options, including SBA and other government sponsored lending programs, as appropriate.
We have utilized the Federal Reserve’s PPPLF, pursuant to which the Company has pledged its PPP loans as collateral at face value to obtain Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (“FRB”) non-recourse loans. For additional information regarding the PPPLF, see the discussion included in “Note 9 - Debt” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this report.
Allowance for Loan Losses and Loan Modifications
The Company recorded a provision of $1.6 million and $13.0 million for the quarter and year ended December 31, 2020, respectively, compared to $647,000 and $2.9 million for the quarter and year ended December 31, 2019, respectively, due primarily to probable loan losses reflecting the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy. According to the CARES Act and related banking agency guidance, banks are not required to designate as TDRs the modification of loans as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, made on a good faith basis to borrowers who were current, as defined under the CARES Act prior to any relief. This includes short-term (e.g. less than six months) modifications such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms, or other delays in payment that are insignificant. Borrowers are considered current under the CARES Act and related banking agency guidance if they are not more than 30 days past due on their contractual payments as of December 31, 2019, or prior to any relief, respectively, and have experienced financial difficulty as a result of COVID-19. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of portfolio loans remaining under payment/relief agreements includes commercial real estate loans of $31.2 million, commercial business loans of $12.8 million, a portfolio one-to-four-family loan of $308,000, and consumer loans of $392,000. The primary method of relief is to allow the borrower up to 90-days of interest only payments and/or loan payment deferments, and, on a more limited basis, waived interest, late fees, or interest only loan payments and suspended foreclosure proceedings. These modifications were not classified as TDRs at December 31, 2020 in accordance with the guidance of the CARES Act and related banking agency guidance. All loans modified due to COVID-19 are separately monitored and any request for continuation of relief beyond the initial modification will be reassessed at that time to determine if a further modification
should be granted and if a downgrade in risk rating is appropriate. Loan modifications in accordance with the CARES Act and related banking agency guidance are still subject to an evaluation in regard to determining whether or not a loan is deemed to be impaired.
Branch Operations and Additional Client Support
We have taken various steps to ensure the safety of our customers and our personnel. The majority of our employees are working remotely or have flexible work schedules, and we have established protective measures within our offices to help ensure the safety of those employees who must work on-site. The Families First Coronavirus Response Act also provides additional flexibility to our employees to help navigate their individual challenges with paid sick leave or expanded family and medical leave for specified reasons related to COVID-19. All of our branches are currently open.
Overdraft and fee reversals are waived on a case-by-case basis. We are cautious when paying overdrafts beyond the client's total deposit relationship, overdraft protection options or their overdraft coverage limits.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain of the Company’s accounting policies are important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and result of operations, since they require management to make difficult, complex or subjective judgments, some of which may relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. Estimates associated with these policies are susceptible to material changes as a result of changes in facts and circumstances. Facts and circumstances which could affect these judgments include, but are not limited to, changes in interest rates, changes in the performance of the economy, and changes in the financial condition of borrowers. Management believes that its critical accounting policies and estimates include the following:
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses (“ALLL”). The ALLL is the amount estimated by management as necessary to cover probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The ALLL is established through the provision for loan losses, which is charged to income. A high degree of judgment is necessary when determining the amount of the ALLL. Among the material estimates required to establish the ALLL are: loss exposure at default; the amount and timing of future cash flows on impacted loans; value of collateral; and determination of loss factors to be applied to the various elements of the portfolio. All of these estimates are susceptible to significant change. Management reviews the level of the ALLL at least quarterly and establishes the provision for loan losses based upon an evaluation of the portfolio, past loss experience, current economic conditions, and other factors related to the collectability of the loan portfolio. Although the Company believes that the best information available currently is used to establish the ALLL, future adjustments to the ALLL may be necessary if economic or other conditions change. As the Company adds new products to the loan portfolio and expands the Company’s market area, management intends to enhance and adapt the methodology to keep pace with the size and complexity of the loan portfolio. Changes in any of the above factors could have a significant effect on the calculation of the ALLL in any given period. Management believes that its systematic methodology continues to be appropriate.
Servicing Rights. Servicing assets are recognized as separate assets when rights are acquired through the purchase or through the sale of financial assets. Generally, purchased servicing rights are capitalized at the cost to acquire the rights. For sales of mortgage loans, the value of servicing is capitalized during the month of sale. Fair value is based on market prices for comparable mortgage contracts, when available, or alternatively, is based on a valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing income. The valuation model incorporates assumptions that market participants would use in estimating future net servicing income, such as the cost to service, the discount rate, the custodial earnings rate, an inflation rate, ancillary income, prepayment speeds, and default rates and losses.
Servicing assets are evaluated quarterly for impairment based upon the fair value of the rights as compared to amortized cost. Impairment is determined by stratifying rights into tranches based on predominant characteristics, such as interest rate, loan type, and investor type. Impairment is recognized through a valuation allowance for an individual tranche, to the extent that fair value is less than the capitalized amount for the tranches. If the Company later determines that all or a portion of the impairment no longer exists for a particular tranche, a reduction of the allowance may be recorded as a recovery and an increase to income. Capitalized servicing rights are stated separately on the Consolidated Balance Sheets
and are amortized into noninterest income in proportion to, and over the period of, the estimated future net servicing income of the underlying financial assets.
Derivative and Hedging Activity. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” requires that derivatives of the Company be recorded in the consolidated financial statements at fair value. Management considers its accounting policy for derivatives to be a critical accounting policy because these instruments have certain interest rate risk characteristics that change in value based upon changes in the capital markets. Fair values for derivative assets and liabilities are measured on a recurring basis. The Company’s primary use of derivative instruments are related to the mortgage banking activities in the form of commitments to extend credit, commitments to sell loans, To-Be-Announced (“TBA”) mortgage-backed securities trades and option contracts to mitigate the risk of the commitments to extend credit. Estimates of the percentage of commitments to extend credit on loans to be held for sale that may not fund are based upon historical data and current market trends. The fair value adjustments of the derivatives are recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Income with offsets to other assets or other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Derivative instruments not related to mortgage banking activities primarily relate to interest rate swap agreements accounted for as cash flow hedges. To qualify for hedge accounting, derivatives must be highly effective at reducing the risk associated with the exposure being hedged and must be designated as a hedge at the inception of the derivative contract. If derivative instruments are designated as cash flow hedges, fair value adjustments related to the effective portion are recorded in other comprehensive income and are reclassified to earnings when the hedged transaction is reflected in earnings. Ineffective portions of cash flow hedges are reflected in earnings as they occur. Actual cash receipts and/or payments and related accruals on derivatives related to hedges are recorded as adjustments to the interest income or interest expense associated with the hedged item. During the life of the hedge, the Company formally assesses whether derivatives designated as hedging instruments continue to be highly effective in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flows of hedged items. If it is determined that a hedge has ceased to be highly effective, the Company will discontinue hedge accounting prospectively. At such time, previous adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item are reversed into current earnings and the derivative instrument is reclassified to a trading position recorded at fair value. For derivatives not designated as hedges, changes in fair value are recognized in earnings, in noninterest income.
Fair Value. ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” establishes a hierarchical disclosure framework associated with the level of pricing observability utilized in measuring financial instruments at fair value. The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally correlates to the level of pricing observability. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted prices generally will have a higher degree of pricing observability and a lesser degree of judgment utilized in measuring fair value. Conversely, financial instruments rarely traded or not quoted will generally have little or no pricing observability and a higher degree of judgment utilized in measuring fair value. Pricing observability is impacted by a number of factors, including the type of financial instrument, whether the financial instrument is new to the market and not yet established and the characteristics specific to the transaction. The objective of a fair value measurement is to estimate the price at which an orderly transaction to sell the asset or to transfer the liability would take place between market participants at the measurement date under current market conditions (that is, an exit price at the measurement date from the perspective of a market participant that holds the asset or owes the liability). For additional details, see “Note 15 - Fair Value Measurement” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for additional information about the level of pricing transparency associated with financial instruments carried at fair value.
Income Taxes. Income taxes are reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements to show the tax effects of the operations and transactions reported in the consolidated financial statements and consist of taxes currently payable plus deferred taxes. ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes,” requires the asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities result from temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. They are reflected at currently enacted income tax rates applicable to the period in which the deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be realized or settled and are determined using the assets and liability method of accounting. The deferred income provision represents the difference between net deferred tax asset/liability at the beginning and end of the reported period. In formulating the deferred tax asset, the Company is required to estimate income and taxes in the jurisdiction in which the Company operates. This process involves estimating the actual current tax exposure for the reported period together with assessing temporary
differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as depreciation and the provision for loan losses, for tax and financial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities occur when taxable income is larger or smaller than reported income on the income statements due to accounting valuation methods that differ from tax, as well as tax rate estimates and payments made quarterly and adjusted to actual at the end of the year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are temporary differences deductible or payable in future periods. The Company had net deferred tax liabilities of $58,000 and $2.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company’s accounting policies are discussed in detail in “Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Summary” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Our Business and Operating Strategy and Goals
The Company’s primary objective is to operate 1st Security Bank of Washington as a well capitalized, profitable, independent, community-oriented financial institution, serving customers in its primary market area defined generally as the greater Puget Sound market area. The Company’s strategy is to provide innovative products and superior customer service to small businesses, industry and geographic niches, and individuals located in its primary market area. Services are currently provided to communities through the main office and 21 full-service bank branches and are supported with 24/7 access to on-line banking and participation in a worldwide ATM network.
The Company focuses on diversifying revenues, expanding lending channels, and growing the banking franchise. Management remains focused on building diversified revenue streams based upon credit, interest rate, and concentration risks. The Board of Directors seeks to accomplish the Company’s objectives through the adoption of a strategy designed to improve profitability and maintain a strong capital position and high asset quality. This strategy primarily involves:
Growing and diversifying the loan portfolio and revenue streams. The Company is transitioning lending activities from a predominantly consumer-driven model to a more diversified consumer and business model by emphasizing three key lending initiatives: expansion of commercial business lending programs, increasing in-house originations of residential mortgage loans primarily for sale into the secondary market through the mortgage banking program; and commercial real estate lending. Additionally, the Company seeks to diversify the loan portfolio by increasing lending to small businesses in the market area, as well as residential construction lending.
Maintaining strong asset quality. The Company believes that strong asset quality is a key to long-term financial success. The percentage of nonperforming loans to total gross loans were 0.49% and 0.22% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The percentage of nonperforming assets to total assets were 0.37% and 0.19% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company has actively managed the delinquent loans and nonperforming assets by aggressively pursuing the collection of consumer debts and marketing saleable properties upon which were foreclosed or repossessed, work-outs of classified assets and loan charge-offs. In the past several years, the Company also began emphasizing consumer loan originations to borrowers with higher credit scores, generally credit scores over 720 (although the policy allows us to go lower). Although the Company plans to place more emphasis on certain lending products, such as commercial and multi-family real estate loans, construction and development loans, including speculative residential construction loans, and commercial business loans, while growing the current size of the one-to-four-family residential mortgage loans and the consumer loan portfolios, the Company continues to manage its credit exposures through the use of experienced bankers and an overall conservative approach to lending.
Emphasizing lower cost core deposits to reduce the costs of funding loan growth. The Company offers personal and business checking accounts, NOW accounts and savings and money market accounts, which generally are lower-cost sources of funds than certificates of deposit, and are less sensitive to withdrawal when interest rates fluctuate. In order to build a core deposit base, the Company is pursuing a number of strategies. First, a diligent attempt to recruit all commercial loan customers to maintain a deposit relationship with the Company, generally a business checking account relationship to the extent practicable, for the term of their loan. Second, interest rate
promotions are provided on savings and checking accounts from time to time to encourage the growth of these types of deposits. Third, by hiring experienced personnel with relationships in the communities we serve.
Capturing customers’ full relationship. The Company offers a wide range of products and services that provide diversification of revenue sources and solidify the relationship with the Bank’s customers. The Company focuses on core retail and business deposits, including savings and checking accounts, that lead to long-term customer retention. As part of the commercial lending process, cross-selling the entire business banking relationship, including deposit relationships and business banking products, such as online cash management, treasury management, wires, direct deposit, payment processing and remote deposit capture. The Company’s mortgage banking program also provides opportunities to cross-sell products to new customers.
Expanding the Company’s markets. In addition to deepening relationships with existing customers, the Company intends to expand business to new customers by leveraging the Company’s well-established involvement in the community and by selectively emphasizing products and services designed to meet their banking needs. The Company also intends to pursue expansion in other market areas through selective growth of the home lending network.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Assets. Total assets increased $400.2 million, to $2.11 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.71 billion at December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in loans receivable, net of $208.6 million, loans held for sale of $96.7 million, securities available-for-sale of $52.0 million, total cash and cash equivalents of $45.8 million, securities held-to-maturity of $7.5 million, accrued interest receivable of $1.1 million, and servicing rights of $1.0 million, partially offset by decreases in certificates of deposit at other financial institutions of $8.6 million, other assets of $2.0 million and premises and equipment of $1.4 million. The increase in total assets were primarily funded by deposit growth, the use of PPPLF, and FHLB borrowings.
Loans receivable, net, increased $208.6 million, to $1.54 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.34 billion at December 31, 2019. Total real estate loans increased $101.4 million, including increases in one-to-four-family portfolio loans of $49.6 million, which includes adjustable rate mortgage loans purchased in the first quarter of 2020 with a balance of $17.2 million at December 31, 2020, commercial real estate loans of $12.0 million, construction and development loans of $37.3 million, and home equity loans of $4.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in multi-family loans of $2.3 million. Undisbursed construction and development loan commitments increased $48.6 million, or 51.2%, to $143.7 at December 31, 2020, as compared to $95.0 million at December 31, 2019. Commercial business loans increased $71.9 million, due to increases in commercial and industrial loans of $83.9 million, reflecting primarily PPP loans of $62.1 million originated in the second and third quarters of 2020 and the purchase of a U.S. Department of Agriculture guaranteed loan in the first quarter of 2020 with a balance of $3.6 million at December 31, 2020, partially offset by the decrease in warehouse lending of $12.0 million. Consumer loans increased $49.0 million, primarily due to increases of $31.3 million in indirect home improvement loans and $18.6 million in marine loans.
Loans held for sale, consisting of one-to-four-family loans, increased by $96.7 million, or 138.8%, to $166.4 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $69.7 million for the prior year primarily due to increased loan production. The Company continues to expand its home lending operations by hiring additional lending staff and will continue selling one-to-four-family mortgage loans into the secondary market for asset/liability management purposes.
One-to-four-family loan originations included $1.73 billion of loans originated for sale, $132.3 million of portfolio loans including first and second liens, and $10.1 million of loans brokered to other institutions. Refinance activity increased significantly over the last year in response to decreases in market interest rates.
Originations of one-to-four-family loans to purchase and to refinance a home for the periods indicated were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company sold $1.64 billion of one-to-four-family loans, compared to sales of $785.4 million for the same period one year ago. In addition, the cash margin on loans sold, net of deferred fees and capitalized expenses, increased to 2.48% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.74% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Margin reported is based on actual loans sold into the secondary market and the related value of capitalized servicing, partially offset by recognized deferred loans fees and capitalized expenses. The gross cash margins on loans sold, were 4.25% and 3.34% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross cash margins on loans sold is defined as the margin on loans sold without the impact of deferred loan fees and costs.
The ALLL was $26.2 million, or 1.66% of gross loans receivable, excluding loans held for sale at December 31, 2020, compared to $13.2 million, or 0.98% of gross loans receivable, excluding loans held for sale, at December 31, 2019. Substandard loans increased to $17.6 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $6.7 million at December 31, 2019. This increase in substandard loans was primarily due to one relationship with mortgage loans totaling $4.5 million, one relationship with mortgage, commercial real estate, and commercial business loans totaling $3.3 million, and two commercial business loans totaling $4.4 million. Nonperforming loans, consisting solely of nonaccruing loans 90-days or more past due, increased to $7.8 million at December 31, 2020, from $3.0 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, nonperforming loans consisted of $5.6 million in commercial business loans, $826,000 of indirect home improvement loans, $644,000 in one-to-four-family loans, and $636,000 of home equity loans. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total gross loans was 0.49% at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.22% at December 31, 2019. There was one OREO property in the amount of $90,000 at December 31, 2020, and two OREO properties totaling $168,000 at December 31, 2019. See “Item 1. Business - Lending Activities - Asset Quality” of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the Company’s nonperforming loans.
In accordance with acquisition accounting, the ALLL does not include the recorded discount on loans acquired in the Anchor Acquisition of $1.5 million and $2.7 million on $132.6 million and $198.5 million of gross loans at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Loans in their respective industries that were downgraded as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and remain downgraded at the dates indicated are as follows:
Additionally, management increased the economic qualitative factors of the ALLL associated with the loan portfolio based on current economic conditions and the potential effects from higher forecasted unemployment rates and lower gross
domestic product, as well as the impact on other economic conditions on the U.S. and global economies from COVID-19. Management recognizes the potential impact on all of our customers and will continue to assess and evaluate our level of reserves against our homogenous residential and consumer portfolios during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liabilities. Total liabilities increased $370.4 million to $1.88 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.51 billion at December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases of $281.7 million in deposits and $80.9 million in borrowings.
Total deposits increased $281.7 million to $1.67 billion at December 31, 2020, from $1.39 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in deposits was primarily driven by organic growth in customer relationships, proceeds from PPP loans and government stimulus checks deposited directly into customer accounts, and reduced withdrawals from deposit accounts due to a change in spending habits as a result of COVID-19. Relationship-based transactional accounts (noninterest-bearing checking, interest-bearing checking, and escrow accounts) increased $137.6 million to $589.1 million at December 31, 2020, from $451.6 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $88.3 million increase in noninterest-bearing checking, and a $48.3 million increase in interest-bearing checking. Money market and savings accounts increased $193.1 million, or 49.6%, to $582.4 million at December 31, 2020, from $389.3 million at December 31, 2019. Time deposits decreased $49.0 million to $502.5 million at December 31, 2020, from $551.5 million at December 31, 2019, due to factors related to COVID-19 and a managed run-off of higher costing certificates of deposit (“CDs”). Nonretail CDs which includes brokered CDs, online CDs, and public funds increased $50.4 million to $196.6 million, at December 31, 2020, compared to $146.2 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $45.0 million increase in brokered CDs. Management remains focused on increasing its lower cost relationship-based deposits to fund long-term asset growth.
Deposits are summarized as follows at the years indicated:
_______________________________
(1) Includes $129.5 million of deposits at December 31, 2020 from the Branch Purchase and $117.1 million at December 31, 2019.
(2) Includes $286.5 million and $299.0 million of deposits at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, from the Anchor Acquisition.
(3) Includes $15.0 million and $6.2 million of brokered deposits at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
(4) Includes $186.4 million and $141.4 million of brokered deposits at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
(5) Time deposits that meet or exceed the FDIC insurance limit.
As a result primarily of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting availability of PPP loan funds and stimulus funds made available during 2020, the tables above reflect year over year increases as well as changes in deposits, partially impacted by customers transferring funds from CDs to more liquid interest-bearing accounts, such as money market and interest-bearing checking.
Borrowings increased $80.9 million to $165.8 million at December 31, 2020, from $84.9 million at December 31, 2019, primarily related to $63.3 million of advances from the PPPLF and FHLB borrowings.
Management entered into three liability interest rate swap arrangements designated as cash flow hedges in 2020 to lock the expense costs associated with $90.0 million in brokered deposits and borrowings. The average cost of these $90 million in notional pay fixed interest rate swap agreements was 73 basis points as the Bank pays a fixed rate of 73 basis
points to the interest rate swap counterparty quarterly instead of the variable amount tied to three month LIBOR. Management will continue to implement processes to match balance sheet funding duration and minimize interest rate risk and costs.
Stockholders’ Equity. Total stockholders’ equity increased $29.8 million, to $230.0 million at December 31, 2020, from $200.2 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in stockholders’ equity during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to net income of $39.3 million, partially offset by common stock repurchases of $9.8 million under our 2020 stock repurchase plans. The Company repurchased 260,363 shares of its common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020, at an average price of $39.33 per share. Book value per common share was $55.33 at December 31, 2020, compared to $45.85 at December 31, 2019.
We calculated book value based on common shares outstanding of 4,237,956 at December 31, 2020, less 55,092 unvested restricted stock shares, and 25,921 of unallocated ESOP shares for the reported common shares outstanding of 4,156,943. Common shares outstanding was calculated using 4,459,041 shares at December 31, 2019, less 40,215 unvested restricted stock shares, and 51,842 of unallocated ESOP shares for the reported common shares outstanding of 4,366,984.
Average Balances, Interest and Average Yields/Cost
The following table sets forth for the periods indicated, information regarding average balances of assets and liabilities, as well as the total dollar amounts of interest income from average interest-earning assets and interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, resultant yields, interest rate spread, net interest margin (otherwise known as net yield on interest-earning assets), and the ratio of average interest-earning assets to average interest-bearing liabilities. Also presented is the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets, rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant spread at December 31, 2020. Income and all average balances are monthly average balances. Nonaccruing loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield.
____________________________
(1) The average loans receivable, net balances include nonaccruing loans.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. It distinguishes between the changes related to outstanding balances and that due to the changes in interest rates. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to (i) changes in volume (i.e., changes in volume multiplied by old rate) and (ii) changes in rate (i.e., changes in rate multiplied by old volume). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
__________________________
(1) The average loans receivable, net balances include nonaccruing loans.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $16.5 million, or 72.8%, to $39.3 million, from $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net income was primarily a result of a $32.3 million, or 140.3% increase in noninterest income and a $3.8 million increase in net interest income, partially offset by a $10.2 million increase in provision for loan losses, a $5.2 million increase in provision for income tax expense, and a $4.3 million increase in noninterest expense.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $3.8 million, to $74.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $70.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to decreases in interest expense of $4.6 million and interest income of $788,000.
The net interest margin (“NIM”) decreased 51 basis points to 4.02% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 4.53% for the same period last year. The decrease in NIM was primarily impacted by lower interest rates on recent fixed-rate real
estate loan originations and adjustable-rate commercial loans, as well as the PPP loans and repricing loans since the 150 basis point reduction in the targeted federal funds rate in March 2020 due to COVID-19. The average cost of funds for total interest-bearing liabilities decreased 57 basis points to 1.07% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 1.64% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was predominantly due to the lowering of our deposit rates commensurate with the low rate environment during the year. Management remains focused on matching deposit and liability duration with the duration of loans and assets where appropriate.
Interest Income. Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $788,000, to $88.8 million, from $89.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease during the year was primarily attributable to a 95 basis point decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets to 4.82% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 5.77% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in average yield on interest-earning assets compared to the same period a year earlier primarily reflects the reduction of higher interest rate and fee income loans, particularly construction and development loans, the impact of refinances of one-to-four-family loans and the origination of low yielding PPP loans. The impact of PPP loans on loan yields will change during any period based on the volume of prepayments or amounts forgiven by the SBA as certain criteria are met but is expected to cease completely after the maturity of the loans. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $646,000 in net deferred fees on PPP loans in interest income.
The following table compares average earning asset balances, associated yields, and resulting changes in interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
___________________________
(1) The average loans receivable, net balances include nonaccruing loans.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $4.6 million, to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $19.3 million for the prior year, primarily due to decreased interest expense on deposits of $4.2 million, and interest expense on borrowings of $515,000. The average cost of funds for total interest-bearing liabilities decreased 57 basis points to 1.07% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.64% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was predominantly due to lowered borrowing interest expense, primarily due to the reduction of interest rates for the use of FHLB borrowings and the repricing of CD deposits. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 53 basis points to 0.98% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.51% for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting lower market interest rates, primarily in interest-bearing checking deposits, as well as brokered and retail CDs.
The following table details average balances for cost of funds on interest-bearing liabilities and the change in interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Provision for Loan Losses. For the year ended December 30, 2020, the provision for loan losses was $13.0 million, compared to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the incurred but not yet reported probable loan losses reflecting credit deterioration due to the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the increase in the loan portfolio due to organic growth. The $62.1 million balance of PPP loans was omitted from the calculation for the ALLL at December 31, 2020 as these loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA and management expects that the great majority of PPP borrowers will seek full or partial forgiveness of their loan obligations from the SBA within a short time frame, which in turn will reduce the Bank’s loan balance for the amount forgiven. In addition, the provision for credit losses also reflects risk rating downgrades on loans that are considered at risk due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net charge-offs totaled $93,000 compared to $2.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. A further decline in national and local economic conditions, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors, could result in a material increase in the ALLL and may adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
The following table details activity and information related to the allowance for loan losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Management considers the ALLL at December 31, 2020, to be adequate to cover estimated losses inherent in the loan portfolio based on the assessment of the above-mentioned factors affecting the loan portfolio. While management believes the estimates and assumptions used in its determination of the adequacy of the allowance are reasonable, there can be no assurance that such estimates and assumptions will not be proven incorrect in the future, or that the actual amount of future provisions will not exceed the amount of past provisions or that any increased provisions that may be required will not adversely impact the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. In addition, the determination of the amount of allowance for loan losses is subject to review by bank regulators, as part of the routine examination process, which may
result in the establishment of additional reserves based upon their judgment of information available to them at the time of their examination.
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income increased $32.3 million, to $55.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table provides a detailed analysis of the changes in the components of noninterest income:
The year over year increases included a $34.6 million, or 242.8% increase in gain on sale of loans, primarily due to higher sales volume, and an increase in other noninterest income mostly due to the net gain from a one-time sale of Class B Visa stock shares of $1.5 million, partially offset by a $4.2 million, or 63.8% decrease in net service charges and fee income, primarily due to an increase in mortgage servicing rights amortization of $4.0 million, reflecting higher volumes of loan payoffs in the underlying servicing portfolio from declining interest rates and increased refinancing activity. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company originated $1.87 billion of one-to-four-family mortgages during 2020 and sold $1.64 billion to secondary mortgage market investors, compared to sales of $785.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increased refinance activity compared to the prior year in response to decreases in market interest rates, and increased purchase activity as a result of the Company’s focus on purchase originations and a favorable interest rate environment for home purchases.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense increased $4.3 million, to $66.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $62.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table provides an analysis of the changes in the components of noninterest expense:
The increase in noninterest expense was primarily due a $4.3 million increase in salaries and benefits, primarily attributable to increases in incentives and commissions of $16.0 million, driven by increased production of HFS loans, and compensation of $2.9 million, partially offset by an increase in recognized deferred costs on direct loan origination activities of $16.1 million, as well as no acquisition costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other increases between the periods included $1.9 million in the impairment of
servicing rights, and $749,000 in operations expense, partially offset by decreases of $1.2 million in loan costs and $584,000 in data processing.
The efficiency ratio, which is noninterest expense as a percentage of net interest income and noninterest income, improved to, 51.43% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 66.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Provision for Income Tax. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a provision for income tax expense of $10.6 million on pre-tax income of $49.9 million, as compared to a provision of income tax expense of $5.4 million on pre-tax income of $28.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. There was a net deferred tax liability of $58,000 and $2.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective corporate income tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 21.2% and 19.2%, respectively. For additional information regarding income taxes, see “Note 11 - Income Taxes” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Asset and Liability Management and Market Risk
Risk When Interest Rates Change. The rates of interest the Company earns on assets and pays on liabilities generally is established contractually for a period of time. Market rates change over time. Like other financial institutions, the Company’s results of operations are impacted by changes in interest rates and the interest rate sensitivity of the Company’s assets and liabilities. The risk associated with changes in interest rates and the Company’s ability to adapt to these changes is known as interest rate risk and is the most significant market risk.
The Company assumes interest rate risk (the risk that general interest rate levels will change) as a result of its normal operations. Consequently, the fair value of the Company’s consolidated financial instruments will change when interest rate levels change, and that change may either be favorable or unfavorable to the Company. Management attempts to match maturities of assets and liabilities to the extent believed necessary to minimize interest rate risk. However, borrowers with fixed interest rate obligations are less likely to prepay in a rising interest rate environment and more likely to prepay in a falling interest rate environment. Conversely, depositors who are receiving fixed interest rates are more likely to withdraw funds before maturity in a rising interest rate environment and less likely to do so in a falling interest rate environment. Management monitors interest rates and maturities of assets and liabilities, and attempts to minimize interest rate risk by adjusting terms of new loans, and deposits, and by investing in securities with terms that mitigate the Company’s overall interest rate risk.
How The Company Measures Risk of Interest Rate Changes. As part of an attempt to manage exposure to changes in interest rates and comply with applicable regulations, the Company monitors interest rate risk. In doing so, the Company analyzes and manages assets and liabilities based on their interest rates and payment streams, timing of maturities, repricing opportunities, and sensitivity to actual or potential changes in market interest rates.
The Company is subject to interest rate risk to the extent that its interest-bearing liabilities, primarily deposits and FHLB advances, reprice more rapidly or at different rates than the interest-earning assets. In order to minimize the potential for adverse effects of material prolonged increases or decreases in interest rates on the Company’s results of operations, the Company has adopted an Asset and Liability Management Policy. The Board of Directors sets the Asset and Liability Management Policy for the Bank, which is implemented by the Asset/Liability Committee (“ALCO”), an internal management committee. The board-level oversight for ALCO is performed by the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
The purpose of the ALCO is to communicate, coordinate, and control asset/liability management consistent with the business plan and board-approved policies. The committee establishes and monitors the volume and mix of assets and funding sources, taking into account relative costs and spreads, interest rate sensitivity and liquidity needs. The objectives are to manage assets and funding sources to produce results that are consistent with liquidity, capital adequacy, growth, risk, and profitability goals.
The committee generally meets monthly to, among other things, protect capital through earnings stability over the interest rate cycle; maintain the Bank’s well capitalized status; and provide a reasonable return on investment. The committee recommends appropriate strategy changes based on this review. The committee is responsible for reviewing and reporting
the effects of the policy implementations and strategies to the Board of Directors at least quarterly. The Chief Financial Officer oversees the process on a daily basis.
A key element of the Bank’s asset/liability management plan is to protect net earnings by managing the maturity or repricing mismatch between interest-earning assets and rate-sensitive liabilities. The Company seeks to accomplish this by extending funding maturities through wholesale funding sources, including the use of FHLB advances and brokered certificates of deposit, and through asset management, including the use of adjustable-rate loans and selling certain fixed-rate loans in the secondary market. Management is also focused on matching deposit duration with the duration of earning assets as appropriate.
As part of the efforts to monitor and manage interest rate risk, a number of indicators are used to monitor overall risk. Among the measurements are:
Market Risk. Market risk is the potential change in the value of investment securities if interest rates change. This change in value impacts the value of the Company and the liquidity of the securities. Market risk is controlled by setting a maximum average maturity/average life of the securities portfolio to 10 years.
Economic Risk. Economic risk is the risk that the underlying value of a bank will change when rates change. This can be caused by a change in value of the existing assets and liabilities (this is called Economic Value of Equity or EVE), or a change in the earnings stream (this is caused by interest rate risk). The Company takes economic risk primarily when fixed rate loans are made, or purchase fixed-rate investments, or issue long term certificates of deposit or take fixed-rate FHLB advances. It is the risk that interest rates will change and these fixed-rate assets and liabilities will change in value. This change in value usually is not recognized in the earnings, or equity (other than marking to market securities available-for-sale or fair value adjustments on loans held for sale). The change is recognized only when the assets and liabilities are liquidated. Although the change in market value is usually not recognized in earnings or in capital, the impact is real to the long-term value of 1st Security Bank of Washington. Therefore, the Company will control the level of economic risk by limiting the amount of long-term, fixed-rate assets the Company will have and by setting a limit on concentrations and maturities of securities.
Interest Rate Risk. If the Federal Reserve Board changes the Fed Funds rate 100, 200 or 300 basis points, the Bank policy dictates that a change in net interest income should not change more that 7.5%, 15% and 30%, respectively.
The table presented below, as of December 31, 2020, is an analysis prepared for 1st Security Bank of Washington by a third-party consultant utilizing various market and actual experience-based assumptions. The table represents a static shock to the net interest income using instantaneous and sustained shifts in the yield curve, in 100 basis point increments, up and down 100 basis points. No rates in the model are allowed to go below zero. Given that the current targeted Fed Funds rate is a range of 1.00% to 1.25%, a 200 or 300 basis point reduction in rates is not reported. The results reflect a projected income statement with minimal exposure to instantaneous changes in interest rates. These results are primarily based upon historical prepayment speeds within the consumer lending portfolio in combination with the above average yields associated with the consumer portfolio if those prepayments do not occur. The table illustrates the estimated change in our net interest income over the next 12 months from December 31, 2020.
In managing the assets/liability mix the Company typically places an equal emphasis on maximizing net interest margin and matching the interest rate sensitivity of the assets and liabilities. From time to time, however, depending on the relationship between long- and short-term interest rates, market conditions and consumer preference, the Company may place somewhat greater emphasis on maximizing net interest margin than on strict dollar for dollar categories matching
the interest rate sensitivity of the assets and liabilities. Management also believes that the increased net income which may result from a prepayment assumption mismatch in the actual maturity or repricing of the asset and liability portfolios can, during periods of changing interest rates, provide sufficient returns to justify the increased exposure to sudden and unexpected increases in interest rates which may result from such a mismatch. Management believes that 1st Security Bank of Washington’s level of interest rate risk is acceptable under this approach.
In evaluating 1st Security Bank of Washington’s exposure to interest rate movements, certain shortcomings inherent in the method of analysis presented in the foregoing table must be considered. For example, although certain assets and liabilities may have similar maturities or repricing periods, they may react in different degrees to changes in market interest rates. Also, the interest rates on certain types of assets and liabilities may fluctuate in advance of changes in market interest rates, while interest rates on other types may lag behind changes in interest rates. Additionally, certain assets, such as adjustable rate mortgages, have features which restrict changes in interest rates on a short-term basis and over the life of the asset. Further, in the event of a significant change in interest rates, prepayment and early withdrawal levels would likely deviate significantly from those assumed above. Finally, the ability of many borrowers to service their debt may decrease in the event of an interest rate increase. 1st Security Bank of Washington considers all of these factors in monitoring its exposure to interest rate risk.
Liquidity
Management maintains a liquidity position that it believes will adequately provide funding for loan demand and deposit runoff that may occur in the normal course of business. The Company relies on a number of different sources in order to meet potential liquidity demands. The primary sources are increases in deposit accounts, FHLB advances, purchases of federal funds, sale of securities available-for-sale, cash flows from loan payments, sales of one-to-four-family loans held for sale, and maturing securities.
At December 31, 2020, the Bank’s total borrowing capacity was $568.2 million with the FHLB of Des Moines, with unused borrowing capacity of $459.9 million. The FHLB borrowing limit is based on certain categories of loans, primarily real estate loans that qualify as collateral for FHLB advances. At December 31, 2020, the Bank held approximately $774.8 million in loans that qualify as collateral for FHLB advances.
In addition to the availability of liquidity from the FHLB of Des Moines, the Bank maintained a short-term borrowing line of credit with the FRB, with a current limit of $179.6 million, and a combined credit limit of $101.0 million in written federal funds lines of credit through correspondent banking relationships as of December 31, 2020. The FRB borrowing limit is based on certain categories of loans, primarily consumer loans that qualify as collateral for the FRB’s line of credit. At December 31, 2020, the Bank held approximately $369.2 million in loans that qualify as collateral for the FRB line of credit. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had pledged $62.1 million in PPP loans as collateral under the PPPLF, with no additional borrowing capacity under the PPPLF. The Bank may obtain additional available liquidity from the PPPLF as additional PPP loans are originated in 2021.
At December 31, 2020, the outstanding balances of FHLB advances and PPPLF borrowings were $102.5 million and $63.3 million, respectively. The Bank’s Asset and Liability Management Policy permits management to utilize brokered deposits up to 20% of deposits or $337.7 million at December 31, 2020. Total brokered deposits at December 31, 2020 were $201.4 million. Management utilizes brokered deposits to mitigate interest rate risk and liquidity risk exposure when appropriate.
Liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of the Company’s management. Excess liquidity is generally invested in short-term investments, such as overnight deposits and federal funds. On a longer-term basis, a strategy is maintained of investing in various lending products and investment securities, including U.S. Government obligations and U.S. agency securities. The Company uses sources of funds primarily to meet ongoing commitments, pay maturing deposits and fund withdrawals, and to fund loan commitments. At December 31, 2020, the approved outstanding loan commitments, including unused lines of credit, amounted to $528.2 million. Certificates of deposit scheduled to mature in one year or less at December 31, 2020, totaled $340.9 million. It is management’s policy to offer deposit rates that are competitive with other local financial institutions. Based on this management strategy, the Company believes that a majority of maturing relationship deposits will remain with the Bank.
As a separate legal entity from the Bank, FS Bancorp, Inc. must provide for its own liquidity. Sources of capital and liquidity for FS Bancorp, Inc. include distributions from the Bank and the issuance of debt or equity securities. Dividends and other capital distributions from the Bank are subject to regulatory notice. At December 31, 2020, FS Bancorp, Inc. had $14.5 million in unrestricted cash to meet liquidity needs. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, on February 10, 2021, FS Bancorp, Inc. completed the private placement of $50.0 million of its 3.75% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2031 (the “Notes”) at an offering price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes, resulting in net proceeds, after placement agent fees and offering expenses, of approximately 49.3 million. For regulatory capital purposes, the subordinated notes have been structured to qualify initially as Tier 2 capital for the Company.
Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business in order to meet the financing needs of its customers. For information regarding our commitments and off-balance sheet arrangements, see “Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
A summary of off-balance sheet commitments to extend credit at December 31, 2020 was as follows:
__________________________
(1) Includes held for sale interest rate lock commitments.
Capital Resources
The Bank is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by the FDIC. Based on its capital levels at December 31, 2020, the Bank exceeded these requirements as of that date. Consistent with our goals to operate a sound and profitable organization, our policy is for the Bank to maintain a well capitalized status under the capital categories of the FDIC. Based on capital levels at December 31, 2020, the Bank was considered to be well capitalized. Effective January 1, 2020, a bank that elects to use the Community Bank Leverage Ratio (“CBLR”) will generally be considered well capitalized and to have met the risk-based and leverage capital requirements of the capital regulations if it has a leverage ratio greater than 9.0%. At December 31, 2020, the Bank qualified and elected to use the CBLR to measure capital adequacy. The Tier 1 leverage-based capital ratio calculated for the Bank at December 31, 2020 was 10.9%, compared to 11.6% at December 31, 2019. As required by the CARES Act, the FDIC has temporarily lowered the CBLR to 8% beginning in the second quarter of 2020 through the end of the year. Beginning in 2021, the CBLR increased to 8.5% for that calendar year. The CBLR will return to 9% on January 1, 2022.
As a bank holding company registered with the Federal Reserve, the Company is subject to the capital adequacy requirements of the Federal Reserve. Bank holding companies with less than $3.0 billion in assets are generally not subject to compliance with the Federal Reserve’s capital regulations, which are generally the same as the capital regulations applicable to the Bank. The Federal Reserve has a policy that a bank holding company is required to serve as a source of financial and managerial strength to the holding company’s subsidiary bank and the Federal Reserve expects the holding company’s subsidiary bank to be well capitalized under the prompt corrective action regulations. If FS Bancorp, Inc. were subject to regulatory capital guidelines for bank holding companies with $3.0 billion or more in assets at December 31, 2020, FS Bancorp would have exceeded all regulatory capital requirements. The Tier 1 leverage-based capital ratio calculated for FS Bancorp, Inc. at December 31, 2020 was 11.1%. For additional information regarding the Bank’s regulatory capital compliance, see the discussion included in “Note 14 - Regulatory Capital” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting standards, please see “Note 1- Basis of Presentation and Summary” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.