ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Dollars in thousands, except share data unless otherwise noted)
Executive Level Overview
2020 Developments and 2021 Outlook
During 2020, the Company:
•Produced net sales of $497,411, a decrease of $119,017, or 19.3% from 2019;
•Increased backlog(a) by 8.4% over the prior year end to $248,232, despite new orders(a) decreasing by 16.3%;
•Generated net income from continuing operations of $25,823, or $2.42 per diluted share;
•Divested the IOS Test and Inspection Services business from the Infrastructure Solutions segment, resulting in the recognition of an income tax benefit of $15,840 in continuing operations;
•Reported adjusted EBITDA(b) (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, and certain expenses) of $31,993;
•Effectively managed working capital levels, resulting in $20,549 of net cash provided by operating activities;
•Reduced borrowings by $13,114, or 22.6%, to $45,024, resulting in net debt(b) of $37,460;
•Successfully implemented cost containment programs, including in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in $8,880 decline year over year in selling and administrative expense;
•Amended the Company’s credit agreement, resulting in the termination of its term loan outstanding of $22,500 and a decrease in the maximum capacity of its revolver from $140,000 to $115,000 as of December 31, 2020;
•Continued operations during the COVID-19 pandemic while minimizing any business interruptions and addressing safety concerns of our employees and customers through implementation of our Pandemic Action Plan which includes measures such as enhanced disinfecting, temperature screenings, social distancing, telework, wearing masks, limiting access to facilities to only essential third parties, and adhering to travel and quarantine recommendations issued by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and various national, state, provincial, and local departments of health where our facilities are located.
•Completed the relocation of the CXT Concrete Buildings facility from Spokane, WA to Boise, ID; and
•Realigned the Company’s operating segments under two senior business leaders to provide clear line of sight around the opportunities for growth and asset leverage in each of the two segments.
(a) The Company defines new orders as a contractual agreement between the Company and a third-party in which the Company will, or has the ability to, satisfy the performance obligations of the promised products or services under the terms of the agreement. The Company defines backlog as contractual commitments to customers for which the Company’s performance obligations have not been met, including with respect to new orders and contracts for which the Company has not begun any performance. Management utilizes new orders and backlog to evaluate the health of the industries in which the Company operates, the Company’s current and future results of operations and financial prospects, and strategies for business development. The Company believes that new orders and backlog are useful to investors as supplemental metrics by which to measure the Company’s current performance and prospective results of operations and financial performance. The Company defines its book-to-bill ratio as new orders divided by revenue. Management uses the book-to-bill key performance indicator as a monitoring metric for the levels of backlog a business unit is building (greater than 1.0) or consuming (less than 1.0), which may provide management and investors an indication of current market activity.
(b) The following tables display reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. EBITDA is a financial metric utilized by management to evaluate the Company’s performance on a comparable basis. The Company believes that EBITDA is useful to investors as a supplemental way to evaluate the ongoing operations of the Company’s business as EBITDA enhances investors’ ability to compare historical periods as it adjusts for the impact of financing methods, tax law and strategy changes, and depreciation and amortization. In addition, EBITDA is a financial measurement that management and the Company’s Board of Directors use in their financial and operational decision-making and in the determination of certain compensation programs. Adjusted EBITDA includes certain adjustments to EBITDA. In 2020, the Company made adjustments to exclude the impact of relocation and restructuring costs and the proceeds from an unconsolidated partnership. In 2019, the Company made adjustments to exclude the U.S. defined benefit plan settlements, costs associated with relocation and closure activities, including nonoperational start-up costs related to the Boise, ID facility. The Company views net debt, which is total debt less cash and cash equivalents, as an important metric of the operational and financial health of the organization and useful to investors as an indicator of our ability to incur additional debt and to service our existing debt. Non-GAAP financial measures are not a substitute for GAAP financial results and should only be considered in conjunction with the Company’s financial information that is presented in accordance with GAAP. Quantitative reconciliations of EBITDA and debt to the non-GAAP financial measures are presented below.
As a result of the ongoing pandemic, the Company has continued to experience disruptions in supply chains, delays in deliveries to customers, and customer unwillingness to have the Company’s employees work on site where safe distance measures are difficult to follow, as well as general weakness in demand as certain travel and work restrictions continued to be in place in most areas. Most notably, the collapse in oil demand associated with reduced travel resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to a significant drop in demand for certain products and services offered by our Infrastructure Solutions segment, has persisted. In the rail, transit, friction management, steel construction, and fabricated bridge businesses governmental stay-at-home and work-from-home orders both in the U.S. and globally, particularly in the U.K., have resulted in reduced traffic and demand for our products and services, and many public works projects have been deferred or delayed as a result of pandemic mitigation efforts, adversely impacting our business. The Company anticipates continued disruption at least through the first half of 2021 as various restrictive measures have remained in effect in the major markets we serve. The Company has experienced minimal disruption with its on-premise workforce up to this point, and the Company expects to continue to operate under its pandemic protocols with minimal changes.
The Company’s strong balance sheet should continue to allow the Company to effectively manage operations through the current environment and remain a leading provider of products and services to the global infrastructure markets. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company reduced its net debt to $37,460 as of December 31, 2020 from $39,793 as of September 30, 2020, a reduction of $2,333. The Company’s total available funding capacity was $76,838 as of December 31, 2020.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company realigned its operating segments under two senior business leaders to provide clear line of sight around the opportunities for growth and asset leverage in each of the two segments. The Rail Technologies and Services, consisting of businesses previously reported in the former Rail Products and Services segment, reflects the Company’s current focus on serving transit and freight railway operators and related infrastructure. The Company has been evolving from a track components supplier to one that has been introducing solutions that deliver greater benefits to operating efficiency, reducing disruption and improving safety through the deployment of more advanced technology in its solutions. Services have become a greater part of the Company’s offerings as end users look to the Company for expertise in managing more sophisticated systems often coupled with these new technologies. The former Construction Products segment and former Tubular and Energy segment were realigned into the Infrastructure Solutions operating segment, as these businesses collectively provide a variety of products and services for infrastructure markets to support the efficient transportation of people, goods, commodities, and for general civil works, primarily in the United States. Engineering and construction firms and general contractors seek assistance from the Company for design and application engineering help when addressing needs across highway, bridge, ports, railways, heavy civil, marine, water and storm water, agricultural, commercial, and residential projects. The Company’s expertise in fabricated steel, precast concrete, measurement systems and corrosion protection coupled with competencies around managing large complex projects results in custom solutions for each project. Within the product offerings, there is a significant overlap of infrastructure markets, including water, transportation, energy, chemical and fabrication infrastructure markets.
The fourth quarter has historically seen a decline in activity for the Company, but the current year was more severe as sales for the fourth quarter of 2020 declined by 18.2% when compared to the prior year quarter. This contributed to a year-over-year sales decline of 19.3%. Along with the sales decline in the current year, both the Rail Technologies and Services and Infrastructure Solutions segments reported reduced order activity during 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, new order activity did outpace revenue volume for the year, which we consider a favorable indicator for the Company. The book-to-bill ratio for the Rail segment was 1.08 for 2020, which drove the year-over-year increase in backlog of $17,537, or 16.9%. This increase highlights the ongoing spending in the infrastructure markets served by the Rail segment despite pockets of weakness associated with rail and transit traffic volume and transportation related projects and services due to the pandemic. Infrastructure Solutions backlog increased by $1,663 or 1.3% from the prior year despite a $27,643 decline in the Coatings and Measurement business unit, which principally serves the midstream energy markets. The energy market continues to have an unfavorable outlook and the industry expects significant difficulties in funding ongoing development activity that requires the Company’s services. As such, the Company has experienced continued weakness in new order activity in the businesses serving the energy market and is forecasting sales to decline significantly year-over-year for its Coatings and Measurement business unit in 2021.
Despite the significant decrease in revenue year-over-year, and the significant challenges experienced by the midstream energy market focused businesses in 2020, the Company was able to generate a gross margin of 19.1%, a 50 basis point decline from 2019, with the Rail segment reflecting a 20 basis point increase year-over-year to 20.0%. In addition, the Company decreased its selling, general and administrative costs to $73,644, a 10.8% decline from 2019, partially due to cost reduction actions taken during the year. As a result, the Company was able to generate income before taxes from continuing operations of $13,982 in 2020, and after the impact of the tax benefits generated in the IOS Test and Inspection Services divestiture, the Company produced net income from continuing operations of $25,823, or $2.42 per diluted share.
The Rail segment is anticipating further recovery in Rail Technologies, although continued pandemic-related lockdowns in the U.K. may hamper such recovery in the near term. Rail Products bookings were strong in the fourth quarter of 2020, reflecting a $15,064 increase over the third quarter of 2020. As the Company monitors the budget shortfalls incurred by transit operators, projects associated with long-term planning have been moving forward. However, the Company is not expecting a notable improvement in the sales of consumable products until passenger and freight volumes improve.
The 1.3% increase in the Infrastructure Solutions segment backlog as compared to December 31, 2019 resulted from increases in the Fabricated Steel Products and Precast Concrete Products business units. The Fabricated Steel Products division experienced substantial year-over-year increases in backlog of $22,276 as a result of securing several key projects during the year. In particular, the backlog for bridge decking is expected to continue to result in production rates at near capacity levels in 2021. The Precast Concrete Products division continues to benefit from new infrastructure projects in the regions it serves, which is reflected in a year-over-year backlog increase of $7,030. While this business often depends on municipal, state, and federal spending that may experience budget pressures, these programs could benefit from continued government spending on infrastructure and economic stimulus efforts related to civil construction projects. Offsetting these increases in the Infrastructure Solutions segment was the reduction in the Coatings and Measurement division’s backlog, which fell by $27,643 from December 31, 2019. This decline is primarily due to Coatings and Measurement’s exposure to the midstream energy market, and the associated weakness in demand for oil in 2020. New orders for Coatings and Measurement reached its lowest point in the fourth quarter of 2020 at $6,057. Current project inquiries lead the Company to believe that the first half of 2021 will improve modestly from this level.
Since the middle of 2019, the upstream energy markets that the Company served have deteriorated as prices of oil and natural gas declined due to weakening demand. This deterioration accelerated as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic and the associated reduction in demand due to reduced travel and movement of goods throughout the world. As U.S. exploration and production companies have reduced production and implemented spending cuts, demand for much of what the Company did in its upstream oil and gas test and inspection business (“Test and Inspection Services”) had sharply declined. Consequently, the Company did not see a path to earning acceptable returns for the Test and Inspections Services business. As a result, on September 4, 2020, the Company completed the sale of the issued and outstanding membership interests of its Test and Inspection Services business. Proceeds from the sale were $4,000 and resulted in a loss of $10,034, net of tax. As a result of the sale of this business, the Company recognized an aggregate of $18,978 in tax benefits, including tax benefits recognized in discontinued operations, for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company anticipates receiving approximately $9,008 in tax refunds within the next year due to extended carryback provisions in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020, as amended (“CARES Act”), and the acceleration of existing deferred tax assets related to the sale. The sale represents a strategic shift away from providing services to the upstream oil and gas market. The Company believes that this divestiture also changes the risk profile of the Company by: (a) eliminating dependence on the upstream energy market and the liability associated with serving upstream applications; (b) reducing exposure to a volatile industry that can turn off demand quickly under poor conditions; and (c) avoiding the price and production cyclicality of the global oil market. On a prospective basis, the Company’s Coatings and Measurement business will continue to be focused on core competencies around corrosion protection and measurement systems in midstream pipeline applications, where the market has been much less volatile and tends to have longer term investments and associated backlog compared to upstream activities. The Company has reflected the results of operations of the Test and Inspection Services business as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Financial Statements and recast the Infrastructure Solutions segment results for all periods presented.
In October 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company was the subject of a cyber-attack (the “Cybersecurity Event”). Upon becoming aware of the Cybersecurity Event, the Company immediately notified federal law enforcement, acted quickly to take its systems offline, and began assessing the nature of the attack, all as part of its comprehensive response. The Company was able to act quickly to restore normal operations with no material operational, financial, or other impact to the Company. The Company maintains a cyber insurance policy that assisted with risk mitigation of the Cybersecurity Event and any potential future events. As part of the Company’s response, it has implemented enhanced cybersecurity measures across its network. The investigation of the Cybersecurity Event is ongoing with assistance from external cybersecurity, forensics, and legal experts and advisors, and the Company will make any and all appropriate regulatory filings and disclosures once the investigation is complete. While the investigation is ongoing, the Company does not expect any adverse impact on its operations, financial results or performance, or reputation.
Year-to-date Results Comparison
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019 - Company Analysis
Net sales of $497,411 for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $119,017, or 19.3%, compared to the prior year. Both of the reporting segments contributed to the decrease, with Infrastructure Solutions decreasing by 25.0% and Rail Technologies and Services decreasing by 14.1% from the prior year. The sales decline was primarily attributable to the circumstances around the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in reduced demand in each of the business units within the segments and most severely impacting the Coatings and Measurement business unit, which principally serves the midstream energy market, within the Infrastructure Solutions segment.
Gross profit decreased by $25,932 from the prior year to $95,006 for 2020. This decrease was attributable to both of the segments, with Infrastructure Solutions decreasing by $17,528 and Rail Technologies and Services decreasing by $8,404. Along with the decrease in gross profit, gross profit margin for 2020 was 19.1%, or 50 basis points (“bps”) lower than the prior year. The decrease in the current year margin was due to the Infrastructure Solutions segment, which was impacted by decreased sales volume, primarily
within the Coatings and Measurement business unit, that outpaced decreases in expense. The 2020 gross profit margin decline was partially offset by a 20 bps increase in the Rail Technologies and Services segment.
Selling and administrative expenses decreased by $8,880, or 10.8%, from the prior year. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreases in personnel related expenses of $7,149 from the prior year, including a $2,019 decrease in stock-based compensation expense, and a reduction in third-party services of $2,116 compared to the prior year. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense of $441 when compared to the prior year. As a result of the suppressed sales levels in 2020, selling and administrative expenses increased by 140 bps as a percentage of net sales as compared to the prior year.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded expense of $673 related to relocation and closure activities and income of $1,874 from an unconsolidated partnership distribution recorded in “Other (income) expense - net.” Interest expense, net of interest income, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was reduced by $1,150 as a result of the $13,114 reduction in outstanding debt.
The Company’s effective income tax rate for 2020 was (84.7)%, compared to (98.7)% in the prior year period. The Company’s income tax benefit from continuing operations for 2020 included a discrete income tax benefit of $15,840, net of valuation allowance, related to the disposition of the Test and Inspection Services business. During 2019, the Company reversed $29,648 of its valuation allowance previously recorded against U.S. deferred tax assets. The positive evidence considered in evaluating U.S. deferred tax assets included cumulative financial income over the three-year period ended December 31, 2020, as well as the composition and reversal patterns of existing taxable and deductible temporary differences between financial reporting and tax. Based on our evaluation, the Company believed it was appropriate to rely on forecasted future taxable income to support its U.S. deferred tax assets. The amount of deferred tax assets considered to be realizable, however, could be adjusted if negative evidence outweighs additional subjective evidence such as our projections for growth.
Net income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $25,823, or $2.42 per diluted share, compared to net income from continuing operations for the 2019 period of $47,974, or $4.51 per diluted share.
Results of Operations - Segment Analysis
Rail Technologies and Services
Rail Technologies and Services segment sales decreased by $45,361, or 14.1%, compared to the prior year. The sales decline was driven almost equally by our Rail Products and Rail Technologies business units, which experienced year-over-year declines of $21,882, or 10.5%, and $23,479, or 20.7%, respectively. The decreases were due primarily to impacts experienced as a result of the pandemic, including: reductions in demand for North American transit projects and friction management consumable products and services as freight and transit rail customer traffic declined, as well as reduced activity levels on the London Crossrail project in the U.K., as the project nears its completion and continues to experience temporary work stoppages due to stay-at-home orders implemented.
Segment gross profit decreased by $8,404, or 13.2%, which was driven by decreases in sales volumes across the segment. The Rail segment gross profit margin increased by 20 bps over the prior year, which is attributable to management’s cost control measures as well as a more favorable product mix of higher margin offerings, especially within the Rail Products business unit. The Rail segment profit for 2020 was $16,321, a segment profit margin of 5.9%, compared to $19,641, and a margin of 6.1% for 2019.
During 2020, the new orders within the Rail Technologies and Services segment decreased by 10.7% when compared to the prior year. Each of the business units within the segment had decreases in new orders compared to 2019, which were primarily related to declines in order activity for global transit projects, friction management consumables, and on-track services. Despite the decline in new orders, backlog increased by 16.9% compared to the prior year, ending 2020 at $121,231, which illustrates expected future spending in markets served despite challenges faced in the current year.
Infrastructure Solutions
On September 4, 2020, we sold our Test and Inspection Service business to an unrelated third party buyer. Proceeds from the sale were $4,000 and resulted in a loss of $10,034 net of tax. The sale represents a strategic shift away from providing services to the upstream oil and gas market. We believe that this divestiture also changes the risk profile of our Company by (a) eliminating dependence on the upstream energy market and the liability associated with serving upstream applications; (b) reducing exposure to a volatile industry that can turn off demand quickly under poor conditions; and (c) avoiding the price and production cyclicality of the global oil market. On a prospective basis, our Coatings and Measurement businesses will continue to be focused on core competencies
around corrosion protection and measurement systems in midstream pipeline applications, where the market has been much less volatile and tends to have longer term investments and associated backlog compared to upstream activities. We have reflected the results of operations of the Test and Inspection Services business as discontinued operations in our Consolidated Financial Statements and recast the segment results for all periods presented.
The Infrastructure Solutions segment sales decreased by $73,656, or 25.0%, compared to the prior year, which was attributable to each of the business units within the segment. Coatings and Measurement experienced a sales decrease of 35.6%, primarily due to the pandemic-related deteriorated oil and gas market conditions in addition to already weakened demand for crude oil. The Fabricated Steel Products sales decrease of 25.1% was primarily driven by the completion of the Port Everglades project in 2019 without a comparably sized project in 2020. The Precast Concrete Products sales decline of 7.5% was primarily attributable to down time as a result of the move to the new precast concrete facility in Boise, ID.
The Infrastructure Solutions segment gross profit decreased by $17,528, or 30.6%, compared to the prior year. The gross profit decrease was primarily due to depressed sales volume within the segment and plant inefficiencies during the production ramp-up of the new precast concrete facility in Boise, ID. The aforementioned items also contributed to a 150 bps reduction in gross profit margin for the segment. The segment profit of $8,250 decreased by $15,365 compared to the prior year to 3.7% of net sales. Included within segment profit for 2020 and 2019 are relocation and closure costs of $673 and $1,768, respectively, related to our closure of the Spokane, WA concrete building facility and subsequent relocation of operations to Boise, ID, which was completed during the first quarter of 2020. This relocation is part of an initiative to focus on regional growth opportunities and logistical savings associated with a more centralized location closer to the Company’s existing and prospective customer base.
For 2020, the Infrastructure Solutions segment had a 22.5% decrease in new orders compared to the prior year period. This decrease was primarily attributable to the Coatings and Measurement business unit. The segment’s backlog as of December 31, 2020 was $127,001, a 1.3% increase compared to the prior year end.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated by operations, and the available capacity under our revolving credit facility, which provides for a total commitment of up to $115,000, of which $69,274 was available for borrowing as of December 31, 2020. Our primary needs for liquidity relate to working capital requirements for operations, capital expenditures, debt service obligations, payments related to the Union Pacific Railroad Settlement, tax obligations, and outstanding purchase obligations. Our total debt was $45,024 and $58,152 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, and was primarily comprised of borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
The following table reflects our available funding capacity as of December 31, 2020:
Our cash flows are impacted from period to period by fluctuations in working capital. While we place an emphasis on working capital management in our operations, factors such as our contract mix, commercial terms, days sales outstanding (“DSO”), and market conditions as well as seasonality may impact our working capital. We regularly assess our receivables for collectability, and provide allowances for doubtful accounts where appropriate. We believe that our reserves for doubtful accounts are appropriate as of December 31, 2020, but adverse changes in the economic environment, including further deterioration of demand for crude oil and natural gas in the energy markets, and adverse financial conditions of our customers resulting from, among other things, the COVID-19 pandemic, may impact certain of our customers’ ability to access capital and compensate us for our products and services, as well as impact demand for our products and services.
The change in cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 were as follows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $20,549, compared to $26,242 during the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, income and adjustments to income from continuing operating activities provided $36,521, compared to $37,216 in 2019. Working capital and other assets and liabilities, used $15,972 in the current period compared to $10,974 during 2019, including payments of $8,000 and $10,000, in 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the Union Pacific Railroad Concrete Tie Settlement.
The Company’s calculation of days sales outstanding was 51 days as of December 31, 2020 compared to 49 days as of December 31, 2019. We believe our receivables portfolio is strong.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had capital expenditures of $9,179, a $3,153 increase from 2019. The current year expenditures were primarily related to plant expansions and a plant relocation within our Infrastructure Solutions segment, the purchase of a continuous welded rail car and unloader within our Rail Technologies and Services segment, and general plant and operational improvements throughout the Company. The capital expenditures during 2019 related to a plant expansion within our Infrastructure Solutions segment, progress payments towards the purchase of a continuous welded rail car and unloader within our Rail Technologies and Services segment, and general plant and operational improvements. The Company received proceeds of $16 from the sale of assets during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $930 in 2019. The prior year proceeds were primarily attributable to the sale of land and improvements in Castle Rock, CO. Cash used in investing activities for 2020 also includes cash paid of $1,156 for the asset acquisition of LarKen Precast, LLC in Boise, Idaho to expand our precast concrete offerings in that region.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The Company reduced its outstanding debt by $13,114 during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from operational cash flows, net proceeds from the sale of the Test and Inspection Services business, and excess international cash repatriation. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company reduced outstanding debt by $2,584, primarily utilizing proceeds from operational cash flows and the sale of non-core assets. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company paid financing fees of $498 and $836, respectively, related to its amended credit facility agreements. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased 95,285 and 34,198 shares of its stock, respectively, for $1,665 and $621, respectively. These shares were withheld from employees to pay their withholding taxes in connection with the vesting of stock awards.
Financial Condition
The Company generated $20,549 from cash flows from operations during 2020, which was primarily utilized to make payments against our outstanding debt and to fund capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2020, we had $7,564 in cash and cash equivalents and $69,274 of availability under our revolving credit facility.
Our principal uses of cash in recent years have been to fund our operations, including capital expenditures, and to service our indebtedness. We view our short and long-term liquidity as being dependent on our results of operations, changes in working capital and our borrowing capacity. As of December 31, 2020, our current ratio, which we define as current assets divided by current liabilities, was 2.05.
Non-domestic cash balances of $6,995 are held in various locations throughout the world. Management determined that should the cash balances of our Canadian and U.K. subsidiaries exceed our projected working capital needs, excess funds will be repatriated. The Company repatriated $5,387 of excess cash during 2020.
On June 26, 2020, we entered into an amendment to our credit agreement (as amended, “First Amendment”) that reduced the total commitments under the revolving credit facility to $120,000 from $140,000. The First Amendment requires additional $5,000 annual reductions to the revolving credit facility capacity beginning on December 31, 2020 through the maturity of the facility on April 30, 2024. As a result, the revolving credit facility has $115,000 of total capacity as of December 31, 2020. In addition, the First Amendment terminated the existing term loan by drawing on the revolving credit facility. Borrowings under the First Amendment continue to bear interest rates based upon either the base rate or Euro-rate plus applicable margins. However, the First Amendment increased the applicable margins on the interest rates, and implemented an interest rate floor of 100 basis points. The First Amendment
also modified the covenants associated with the credit agreement. For a discussion of the terms and availability of the Company’s credit facilities, please see Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with the covenants in the Amended Credit Agreement.
To reduce the impact of interest rate changes on outstanding variable-rate debt, the Company entered into forward starting LIBOR-based interest rate swaps with notional values totaling $50,000. The swaps became effective on February 28, 2017 at which point they effectively converted a portion of the debt from variable to fixed-rate borrowings during the term of the swap contract. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the swap liability was $1,097 and $480, respectively. The Company continues to monitor the impact of the dissolution of LIBOR and its effect on our LIBOR-based interest rate swaps.
On September 4, 2020, the Company sold its Test and Inspection Services business for gross proceeds of $4,000. As a result of this divestiture, the Company has reclassified the results of this business into discontinued operations. Due to the sale of this business, the Company recognized approximately $18,978 in tax benefits, including tax benefits recognized in discontinued operations, for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company anticipates receiving approximately $9,008 in tax refunds within the next year due to extended carryback provisions in the CARES Act and the acceleration of existing deferred tax assets related to the sale. For additional information regarding the Test and Inspection Services sale, please refer to Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We believe that the combination of our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations and the capacity under our revolving credit facility will provide us with sufficient liquidity to provide the flexibility to operate the business in a prudent manner, enable us to continue to service our outstanding debt and to selectively pursue accretive bolt-on acquisitions to augment our core service offerings.
Backlog
Although backlog is not necessarily indicative of future operating results, the following table provides the backlog by business segment:
While a considerable portion of our business is backlog driven, certain businesses, including the Rail Technologies business unit, are not driven by backlog and therefore have insignificant levels of backlog throughout the year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The following critical accounting policies, which are reviewed by the Company’s Audit Committee of the Board of Directors, relate to the Company’s more significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
For a summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies, see Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
Income Taxes - The recognition of deferred tax assets requires management to make judgments regarding the future realization of these assets. As prescribed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740, “Income Taxes,” valuation allowances must be provided for those deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not (a likelihood of more than 50%) that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This guidance requires management to evaluate positive and negative evidence regarding the recoverability of deferred tax assets. The determination of whether the positive evidence outweighs the negative evidence and quantification of the valuation allowance requires management to make estimates and judgments of future financial results.
The Company evaluates all tax positions taken on its federal, state, and foreign tax filings to determine if the position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination. For positions that meet the more likely than not to be sustained criteria, the largest amount of benefit to be realized upon ultimate settlement is determined on a cumulative probability basis. A previously recognized tax position is derecognized when it is subsequently determined that a tax position no longer meets the more likely than not threshold to be sustained. The evaluation of the sustainability of a tax position and the expected tax benefit is based on judgment, historical experience, and other assumptions. Actual results could differ from those estimates upon subsequent resolution of identified matters.
The Company’s income tax rate is significantly affected by the tax rate on global operations. In addition to local country tax laws and regulations, this rate depends on the extent earnings are indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States. Indefinite
reinvestment is determined by management’s judgment about and intentions concerning the future operations of the Company. There has been no material changes in the underlying assumptions and estimates used in these calculations in the relevant period.
Refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 14 which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7, for additional information regarding the Company’s deferred tax assets. The Company’s ability to realize these tax benefits may affect the Company’s reported income tax expense and net income.
Revenue Recognition - We account for revenue in accordance with the ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” whereby the unit of account is a performance obligation. The majority of the Company’s revenue is from products transferred and services rendered to customers at a point in time. The Company recognizes revenue at the point in time at which the customer obtains control of the product or service, which is generally when product title passes to the customer upon shipment or the service has been rendered to the customer. In limited cases, title does not transfer, and revenue is not recognized until the customer has received the products at its physical location.
The Company also derives revenue from products and services provided under long-term agreements with its customers. The transaction price of a long-term agreement is allocated to each distinct performance obligation. The majority of the Company’s long-term contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer products or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contract and, therefore, not distinct. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products or providing services.
The Company’s performance obligations under long-term agreements with its customers are generally satisfied as over time. Revenue under these long-term agreements is generally recognized over time either using an input measure based upon the proportion of actual costs incurred to estimated total project costs or an input measure based upon actual labor costs as a percentage of estimated total labor costs, depending upon which measure the Company believes best depicts the Company’s performance to date under the terms of the contract. A certain portion of the Company’s revenue recognized over time under these long-term agreements is recognized using an output method, specifically units delivered, based upon certain customer acceptance and delivery requirements. Contract assets from over time contracts are recorded in “Inventories - net” within the Consolidated Balance Sheets and contract liabilities from over time contracts are recorded in “Deferred revenue” within the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Accounting for these long-term agreements involves the use of various techniques to estimate total revenues and costs. The Company estimates profit on these long-term agreements as the difference between total estimated revenues and expected costs to complete a contract and recognizes that profit over the life of the contract. Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events that may span several years. These assumptions include, among other things, labor productivity, cost and availability of materials, and timing of funding by customers. The nature of these long-term agreements may give rise to several types of variable considerations, such as claims, awards, and incentive fees. Historically, these amounts of variable consideration have not been considered significant. Contract estimates may include additional revenue for submitted contract modifications if there exists an enforceable right to the modification, the amount can be reasonably estimated, and its realization is probable. These estimates are based on historical collection experience, anticipated performance, and the Company’s best judgment at that time. These amounts are generally included in the contract’s transaction price and are allocated over the remaining performance obligations. As significant changes in the above estimates could impact the timing and amount of revenue and profitability of our long-term contracts, we review and update contract-related estimates regularly. In the event a contract loss becomes known, the entire amount of the estimated loss is recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. There has been no material changes in the underlying assumptions and estimates used in these calculations in the relevant period.
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
Goodwill - Goodwill is the cost of an acquisition less the fair value of the identifiable net assets of the acquired business. Goodwill is required to be tested for impairment at least annually. The Company performs its annual impairment test in the fourth quarter, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount.
The Company may first consider qualitative factors to assess whether there are indicators that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit may not exceed its carrying amount. The quantitative goodwill impairment analysis involves comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss equal to the excess amount up to the goodwill balance is recorded as an impairment to goodwill of the reporting unit. The Company uses a combination of a discounted cash flow method and a market approach to determine the fair values of the reporting units.
A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the estimation of the fair value of reporting units, including the identification of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, and overall financial performance. The estimated fair value of a reporting unit is sensitive to changes in assumptions, including forecasted future operating cash flows, weighted-average cost of capital, terminal growth rates, and industry multiples.
The Company considers historical experience and available information at the time the fair values of its reporting units are estimated. The Company believes the estimates and assumptions used in estimating the fair value of its reporting units are reasonable and appropriate; however, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact the estimated fair value of its reporting units
and the resulting determinations about goodwill impairment. This could materially impact the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Consolidated Balance Sheets. There has been no material changes in the underlying assumptions and estimates used in these calculations in the relevant period. Future estimates may differ materially from current estimates and assumptions.
Additional information concerning the impairments is set forth in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets - The Company tests intangible assets and long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is determined by comparing the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group to their carrying amount. If the carrying value of the assets exceeds their estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment loss would be determined as the difference between the fair value of the assets and its carrying value. Typically, the fair value of the assets would be determined using a discounted cash flow model which would be sensitive to judgments of what constitutes an asset group and certain assumptions such as estimated future financial performance, discount rates, and other assumptions that marketplace participants would use in their estimates of fair value. There has been no material changes in the underlying assumptions and estimates used in these calculations in the relevant period. The accounting estimate related to asset impairments is highly susceptible to change from period to period because it requires management to make assumptions about the existence of impairment indicators and cash flows over future years. These assumptions impact the amount of an impairment, which would have an impact on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Additional information concerning the impairments is set forth in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included herein, which is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.