ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following information should be read in conjunction with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and the audited consolidated and combined financial statements and related notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. The cautionary statements discussed in “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as applying to all forward-looking statements wherever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those factors discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020, which specific discussion is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
Frontdoor is the leading provider of home service plans in the United States, as measured by revenue, and operates under the American Home Shield, HSA, OneGuard and Landmark brands. Our customizable home service plans help customers protect and maintain their homes, typically their most valuable asset, from costly and unplanned breakdowns of essential home systems and appliances. Our home service plan customers subscribe to an annual service plan agreement that covers the repair or replacement of major components of more than 20 home systems and appliances, including electrical, plumbing, central HVAC systems, water heaters, refrigerators, dishwashers and ranges/ovens/cooktops, as well as optional coverages for electronics, pools, spas and pumps. In 2019, we launched our ProConnect on-demand home services business, and we acquired Streem, a technology platform that uses augmented reality, computer vision and machine learning to, among other things, help home service professionals more quickly and accurately diagnose breakdowns and complete repairs. At December 31, 2020, we had over two million active home service plans across all 50 states and the District of Columbia.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated revenue, net income and Adjusted EBITDA of $1,474 million, $112 million and $270 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated revenue, net income and Adjusted EBITDA of $1,365 million, $153 million and $303 million, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our total operating revenue included 69 percent of revenue derived from existing customer renewals, while 18 percent and 12 percent were derived from new home service plan sales made in conjunction with existing home resale transactions and direct-to-consumer sales, respectively, and one percent was derived from other revenue streams. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our total operating revenue included 68 percent of revenue derived from existing customer renewals, while 19 percent and 12 percent were derived from new home service plan sales made in conjunction with existing home resale transactions and direct-to-consumer sales, respectively, and one percent was derived from other revenue streams.
The Spin-off
On October 1, 2018, Terminix completed the Spin-off. The audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for periods prior to the Spin-off represent, on a historical cost basis, the combined assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses related to the Separated Business. Frontdoor was formed as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Terminix on January 2, 2018 for the purpose of holding the Separated Business in connection with the Spin-off. During 2018, Terminix contributed the Separated Business to Frontdoor. The Spin-off was completed by a pro rata distribution to Terminix’s stockholders of approximately 80.2 percent of our common stock. Each holder of Terminix common stock received one share of our common stock for every two shares of Terminix common stock held at the close of business on September 14, 2018, the record date of the distribution. The Spin-off was completed pursuant to a separation and distribution agreement and other agreements with Terminix related to the Spin-off, including a transition services agreement, a tax matters agreement, an employee matters agreement and a stockholder and registration rights agreement. See Note 11 to the audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to these agreements to the extent they are still in effect.
On March 20, 2019, Terminix agreed to transfer its remaining 16,734,092 shares of Frontdoor stock to a financial institution pursuant to an exchange agreement. Subsequent to that date, the financial institution conducted a secondary offering of those shares. The transfer was completed on March 27, 2019, resulting in the full separation of Frontdoor from Terminix and the disposal of Terminix's entire ownership and voting interest in Frontdoor.
Our historical financial position, results of operations and cash flows may not be indicative of our condition had we been a separate stand-alone entity during the periods presented, nor are the results stated herein necessarily indicative of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows had we operated as a separate, independent company during the periods presented. The audited consolidated and combined financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for periods prior to the Spin-off do not reflect any changes that occurred in our financing and operations as a result of the Spin-off.
The audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for periods prior to the Spin-off include all revenues, costs, assets and liabilities directly attributable to us. Terminix’s debt and corresponding interest expense were not allocated to us for periods prior to the Spin-off since we were not the obligor of the debt. The audited consolidated and combined financial statements of operations and comprehensive income include allocations of certain costs from Terminix incurred on our behalf. Such corporate-level costs were allocated to us using methods based on proportionate formulas such as revenue, headcount, and others. Such corporate costs include costs pertaining to: accounting and finance, legal, human resources, technology, insurance, marketing, tax services, procurement services and other costs. We consider the expense allocation methodology and results to be reasonable for all periods presented. However, these allocations may not be indicative of the actual level of expense that we would have incurred if we had operated as a separate stand-alone, publicly traded company during the periods presented nor are these costs necessarily indicative of costs we may incur in the future.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting Our Results of Operations
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the WHO characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency concerning the outbreak. The broader implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken a number of steps to protect the well-being of our employees, customers and contractors, and we continue to respond to the real-time needs of our business. Specifically, we have:
Established a Cross-Functional Business Continuity Team. This core team actively monitors national and local developments and emerging issues, deploys coordinated and strategic real-time responses to address the needs of employees, customers and contractors, and ensures ongoing operational efficiency during this time.
Changed How Employees Work. We have fully transitioned all of our customer care center agents to work remotely from their homes, ensuring uninterrupted customer service. All other employees, including those at our Memphis corporate headquarters, Denver and India engineering and technology campuses, and our offices in Seattle and Portland, are also working remotely.
Increased Customer Communications. Our contractor network has been designated by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security as “Essential Critical Infrastructure Workers” during the COVID-19 response and has consistently been deemed “essential” by state and local governments. As of today, we do not foresee significant disruption to our ability to provide services to our customers. Nevertheless, we are managing customer responses on a case-by-case basis, and actions may vary by location. To address virus-related concerns and ensure that we are handling the most critical service requests first, we established a special COVID-19 response team, increased customer communication and implemented safety screening protocols during the service initiation and delivery process.
Accelerated the Deployment of Streem’s Augmented Reality Technology. In order to protect the health and safety of the public, including our customers, contractors and real estate partners, we have accelerated the deployment of Streem’s augmented reality remote video technology. Using this innovative solution, we are enabling contractors to engage remotely with customers to reduce the number of required in-person visits and speed the repair process. For real estate professionals, an agent can connect remotely with a home seller, lead a virtual tour and guide the owner to areas that need closer inspection, all while allowing the creation of high-definition digital assets that future buyers can view remotely without ever entering the home.
Increased Contractor Education and Communication. Because our contractor network provides essential services, it is generally operating normally despite varying state and local conditions. We are leveraging the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) recommendations to increase customer and technician screening for COVID-19 and remain in ongoing communication with contractors to enable them to operate within CDC guidelines and help ensure the health and safety of their technicians, as well as our customers. To further these efforts, we introduced our Streem technology platform to our contractors at no cost during this time, enabling social distancing for customers and contractors through remote diagnostics and reduced in-person interactions to resolve customers’ issues.
Managing Supply Chain. In 2020, we experienced an elevated level of appliance service requests as customers spent more time at home in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has led to industry-wide availability challenges for appliances and appliance parts as demand has outpaced production. As a result, we have deepened and expanded our supplier relationships, improved access to the fastest moving appliances, increased speed of parts acquisition and expanded our service provider network. We are closely
monitoring the distribution of parts and replacement units and working with our suppliers to increase availability to us. We believe our multi-vendor strategy will help mitigate the impact on our business.
Financial Impact to our Business. While we did not experience a material impact on our results of operations and overall financial performance during the first quarter of 2020, during the remainder of 2020, our financial condition and results of operations were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as follows:
We experienced a decline in first-year real estate sales attributable, in part, to the adverse impact COVID-19 had on U.S. existing home sales in the second quarter of 2020. Due to the annual nature of our home service plan agreements, the impact of this decline carries forward into future periods.
We experienced an increase in appliance and plumbing claims primarily due to the increased usage of home systems and appliances driven by state and local shelter at home orders and recommendations. In addition, industry-wide availability challenges in the appliance trade have caused increased cost pressure, and, more specifically, appliance parts availability challenges drove additional replacements, contributing to the increased costs.
We increased our marketing spend in the first-year direct-to-consumer channel to help mitigate the decline in first-year real estate sales.
We incurred incremental wages at our customer care centers due to increased demand driven by temporary closures at our offshore business process outsourcers and a higher number of service requests in the appliance and plumbing trades, which is primarily a result of customers sheltering at home in response to COVID-19.
We incurred incremental direct costs in response to COVID-19, which were temporary in nature and primarily related to incremental health and childcare benefits for our employees and hoteling costs related to our offshore business process outsourcers.
Although there are effective vaccines for COVID-19 that have been approved for use, distribution of the vaccines did not begin until late 2020, and a majority of the public will likely not have access to a vaccination until sometime in 2021. In addition, new strains of the virus appear to have increased transmissibility, which could complicate treatment and vaccination programs. Accordingly, the COVID-19 situation remains very fluid, and we continue to adjust our response in real time. It remains difficult to predict the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business. We anticipate a continued increase in claims and incremental wages at our customer care centers due to the factors noted above.
Macroeconomic Conditions
Macroeconomic conditions that may affect customer spending patterns, and thereby our results of operations, include home sales, consumer confidence and employment rates. The COVID-19 pandemic has increased economic uncertainty in these areas. We believe our ability to acquire customers through the direct-to-consumer channel helps to mitigate the effects of downturns in the real estate market, while our nationwide presence limits the risk of poor economic conditions in any particular geography.
Seasonality
Our business is subject to seasonal fluctuations, which drives variations in our revenue, net income and Adjusted EBITDA for interim periods. Seasonal fluctuations are primarily driven by a higher number of central HVAC service requests in the summer months. In 2020, approximately 20 percent, 28 percent, 30 percent and 22 percent of our revenue, approximately 12 percent, 43 percent, 43 percent and 2 percent of our net income, and approximately 17 percent, 37 percent, 34 percent and 12 percent of our Adjusted EBITDA was recognized in the first, second, third and fourth quarters, respectively.
Effect of Weather Conditions
The demand for our services, and our results of operations, are affected by weather conditions. Extreme temperatures can lead to an increase in service requests related to home systems, particularly central HVAC systems, resulting in higher claim frequency and costs and lower profitability. Weather conditions that have a potentially favorable impact to our business include mild winters or summers, which can lead to lower home systems claim frequency. For example, seasonally mild temperatures were a factor throughout 2019, leading to a decrease in contract claims costs. In addition, favorable weather trends positively impacted contract claims costs in 2020.
While weather variations as described above may affect our business, major weather events and other similar Acts of God, such as hurricanes, flooding and tornadoes, typically do not increase our obligations to provide service. As a rule, repairs associated with such isolated events are addressed by homeowners’ and other forms of insurance as opposed to home service plans that we offer, and such insurance coverage in fact reduces our obligations to provide service to home systems and appliances damaged by insured, catastrophic events.
Tariff and Import/Export Regulations
Changes in U.S. tariff and import/export regulations may impact the costs of parts, appliances and home systems. Import duties or restrictions on components and raw materials that are imposed, or the perception that they could occur, may materially and adversely affect our business by increasing our costs. For example, rising costs due to blanket tariffs on imported steel and aluminum could increase the costs of our parts, appliances and home systems.
Competition
We compete in the U.S. home service plan category and the broader U.S. home services industry. The home service plan category is highly competitive. The principal methods of competition, and by which we differentiate ourselves from our competitors, are quality and speed of service, contract offerings, brand awareness and reputation, customer satisfaction, pricing and promotions, contractor network and referrals.
Acquisition Activity
We anticipate that the highly fragmented nature of the home service plan category will continue to create strategic opportunities for acquisitions. In particular, we intend to focus strategically on underserved regions where we can enhance and expand service capabilities. Historically, we have used acquisitions to cost-effectively grow our customer base in high-growth geographies, and we intend to continue to do so. We may also explore opportunities to make strategic acquisitions that will expand our service offering in the broader home services industry. We have also used acquisitions to enhance our technological capabilities. In 2019, we acquired Streem to support the service experience for our customers, reduce costs and create potential new revenue opportunities across a variety of channels. We expect to use Streem’s services in our core home service plan business and in ProConnect’s on-demand business to deliver a superior service experience and reduce our costs. In 2020, we acquired a business to expand our ProConnect on-demand offering via their intellectual capital and know-how, technology platform capabilities and geographic presence.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our results presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we have disclosed non-GAAP financial measures that exclude or adjust certain items. We present within this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section the non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA. See “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” for a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA, as well as “Key Business Metrics - Adjusted EBITDA” for further discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA to facilitate operating performance comparisons from period to period. We believe this non-GAAP financial measure provides investors, analysts and other interested parties useful information to evaluate our business performance as it facilitates company-to-company operating performance comparisons. While we believe these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our business, they should be considered as supplemental in nature and are not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be the same as similarly entitled measures reported by other companies, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Key Business Metrics
We focus on a variety of indicators and key operating and financial metrics to monitor the financial condition and performance of the continuing operations of our business. These metrics include:
revenue,
operating expenses,
net income,
earnings per share,
Adjusted EBITDA,
Adjusted EBITDA margin,
net cash provided from operating activities,
Free Cash Flow,
growth in number of home service plans, and
customer retention rate.
Revenue. Home service plan contracts are typically one year in duration. We recognize revenue at the agreed upon contractual amount over time using the input method in proportion to the costs expected to be incurred in performing services under the contracts. Our revenue is primarily a function of the volume and pricing of the services provided to our customers, as well as the mix of services provided. Our revenue volume is impacted by new home service plan sales, customer retention and acquisitions. We derive substantially all of our revenue from customers in the United States.
Operating Expenses. In addition to changes in our revenue, our operating results are affected by, among other things, the level of our operating expenses. Our operating expenses primarily include contract claims costs and expenses associated with sales and marketing, customer service and general corporate overhead. A number of our operating expenses are subject to inflationary pressures, such as: salaries and wages, employee benefits and health care; contractor costs; home systems, appliances and repair costs; tariffs; insurance premiums; and various regulatory compliance costs.
Net Income and Earnings Per Share. The presentation of net income and basic and diluted earnings per share provides measures of performance which are useful for investors, analysts and other interested parties in company-to-company operating performance comparisons. Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, increased to include the number of shares of common stock that would have been outstanding had potentially dilutive shares of common stock been issued. The dilutive effect of stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance shares (which are contractual rights to receive a share of our common stock (or the cash equivalent thereof) upon the achievement, in whole or in part, of the applicable performance goals, pursuant to the terms of the Omnibus Plan and the award agreement) and restricted stock awards (“RSAs”) are reflected in diluted net income per share by applying the treasury stock method.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin. We evaluate performance and allocate resources based primarily on Adjusted EBITDA, which is a financial measure not calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before: provision for income taxes; interest expense; interest income from affiliate; depreciation and amortization expense; non-cash stock-based compensation expense; restructuring charges; Spin-off charges; secondary offering costs; affiliate royalty expense; (gain) loss on insured home service plan claims; and other non-operating expenses. We define “Adjusted EBITDA margin” as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are useful for investors, analysts and other interested parties as they facilitate company-to-company operating performance comparisons by excluding potential differences caused by variations in capital structures, taxation, the age and book depreciation of facilities and equipment, restructuring initiatives, Spin-off charges, arrangements with affiliates and equity-based, long-term incentive plans.
Net Cash Provided from Operating Activities and Free Cash Flow. We focus on measures designed to monitor cash flow, including net cash provided from operating activities and Free Cash Flow, which is a financial measure not calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP and represents net cash provided from operating activities less property additions.
Growth in Number of Home Service Plans and Customer Retention Rate. We report our growth in number of home service plans and customer retention rate in order to track the performance of our business. Home service plans represent our recurring customer base, which includes customers with active contracts for recurring services. Our customer retention rate is calculated as the ratio of ending home service plans to the sum of beginning home service plans, new home service plan sales and acquired accounts for the applicable period. These measures are presented on a rolling, 12-month basis in order to avoid seasonal anomalies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” is based upon our audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, home service plan claims accruals, the impairment analysis for goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, stock-based compensation, income taxes, tax contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following accounting policies are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Home service plan contracts are typically one year in duration. We recognize revenue at the agreed upon contractual amount over time using the input method in proportion to the costs expected to be incurred in performing services under the contracts. Those costs bear a direct relationship to the fulfillment of our obligations under the contracts and are representative of the relative value provided to the customer.
At contract inception, we assess the goods and services promised in our contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a good or service (or a bundle of goods and services) that is distinct. To identify the performance obligation, we consider all of the goods and services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices.
Home Service Plan Claims Accruals
Home service plan claims costs are expensed as incurred. Accruals for home service plan claims are made using internal actuarial projections, which are based on current claims and historical claims experience. Accruals are established based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims. Home service plan claims take approximately three months to settle, on average, and substantially all claims are settled within six months of incurrence. The amount of time required to settle a claim can vary based on a number of factors, including whether a replacement is ultimately required. In addition to our estimates, we engage a third-party actuary to perform an accrual analysis utilizing generally accepted actuarial methods that incorporate cumulative historical claims experience and information provided by us. We regularly review our estimates of claims costs along with the third-party analysis and adjust our estimates when appropriate. We believe the use of actuarial methods to account for these liabilities provides a consistent and effective way to measure these judgmental accruals. However, the use of any estimation technique in this area is inherently sensitive given the magnitude of claims involved. We believe our recorded obligations for these expenses are consistently measured. Nevertheless, changes in claims costs can materially affect the estimates for these liabilities.
Income Taxes
For purposes of our audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for periods prior to the Spin-off, our taxes are provided for on a “separate return” basis, although our operations for the period prior to the completion of the Spin-off have historically been included in the tax returns filed by Terminix. Income taxes as presented therein allocate current and deferred income taxes of the business to us in a manner that is systematic, rational and consistent with the asset and liability method prescribed by ASC 740. Accordingly, as stated in paragraph 30 of ASC 740, the sum of the amounts allocated to the carve-out tax provisions may not equal the historical consolidated provision for us. Under the separate return method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established when management determines that it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The financial effect of changes in tax laws or rates is accounted for in the period of enactment. The settlement of tax obligations is assumed in the period incurred and included in net parent investment for periods prior to the completion of the Spin-off.
On October 1, 2018, Frontdoor began filing consolidated U.S. federal income tax returns. State and local returns are filed both on a separate company basis and on a combined unitary basis with Frontdoor. Current and deferred income taxes are provided for on a separate company basis. We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns.
We record a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns. We recognize potential interest and penalties related to its uncertain tax positions in income tax expense.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We assess the impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market and discounted cash flow approaches. The discounted cash flow approach uses expected future operating results. The market approach uses comparable company information to determine revenue and earnings multiples to value our reporting units. Failure to achieve these expected results or market multiples may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. We conducted our annual impairment tests of goodwill and trade names as of October 1, 2020 and 2019. There were no goodwill or trade name impairment charges recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. See Note 4 to the audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to our goodwill and intangible assets.
Newly Issued Accounting Standards
New accounting rules and disclosure requirements can significantly impact our reported results and the comparability of our financial statements. See Note 2 to the audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on newly issued accounting standards.
‎
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
________________________________
* not meaningful
Revenue
We reported revenue of $1,474 million and $1,365 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Revenue by major customer acquisition channel is as follows:
_________________________________
* not meaningful
(1)First-year revenue only.
Revenue increased eight percent for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by higher renewal revenue due to improved price realization and growth in the number of renewed home service plans, due, in part, to customer retention initiatives. Real estate revenue was flat, as a decline in the number of first-year real estate home service plans was offset by improved price realization. Sales in the first-year real estate channel were impacted by a 19 percent decline in U.S. existing home sales during the second quarter as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which impacted revenue growth for the remainder of the year. The increase in direct-to-consumer revenue reflects growth in the number of first-year direct-to-consumer home service plans, mostly driven by increased investments in marketing, and improved price realization. The increase in other revenue was driven by the acquisition of Streem in December 2019 and growth in our ProConnect on-demand business, including the impact of a business we acquired in 2020 to expand our on-demand offering.
Number of home service plans, growth in number of home service plans and customer retention rate are presented below.
Cost of Services Rendered
We reported cost of services rendered of $758 million and $687 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following table provides a summary of changes in cost of services rendered:
The increase in contract claims costs reflects higher incidence beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in the appliance and plumbing trades, which is primarily a result of customers sheltering at home in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, increased cost pressures in the appliance trade due to industry-wide availability challenges, and normal inflation across other trades. The impact of higher incidence in the appliance trade was approximately $36 million. Further, appliance parts availability challenges drove additional replacements, contributing to the increased cost pressures. Contract claims costs also reflects a favorable weather impact of approximately $7 million and process improvement benefits.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we reported selling and administrative expenses of $467 million and $392 million, respectively, which comprised sales, marketing and customer service costs of $340 million and $278 million, respectively, and general and administrative expenses of $127 million and $114 million, respectively. The following table provides a summary of changes in selling and administrative expenses:
The increase in sales and marketing costs was primarily driven by higher targeted marketing spend to drive growth in the direct-to-consumer channel. The increase in customer service costs was primarily related to managing a higher number of service requests and investments in customer retention initiatives. General and administrative costs increased compared to prior year primarily due to investments in technology, offset, in part, by lower professional fees.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense was $22 million and $18 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense was $12 million and $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was primarily due to amortization of intangible assets recognized from the acquisition of Streem.
Restructuring Charges
We incurred restructuring charges of $8 million and $1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In 2020, restructuring charges comprised $3 million of lease termination costs and severance and other costs related to the decision to consolidate certain operations of Landmark with those of OneGuard, $3 million of severance costs related to the reorganization of certain sales and customer service operations and $2 million of accelerated depreciation related to the disposal of certain technology systems. At December 31, 2020, these activities were substantially complete.
In 2019, restructuring charges comprised severance costs and non-personnel charges primarily related to the decision to consolidate certain operations of Landmark with those of OneGuard.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $57 million and $62 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was due to a decline in interest rates on the unhedged portion of our variable rate debt.
Interest and Net Investment Loss (Income)
Interest and net investment loss (income) reflects a loss of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and income of $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, amounts primarily comprised a $3 million loss on investment, offset, in part, by interest on our investment portfolio. For the year ended December 31, 2019, amounts primarily comprised interest on our investment portfolio.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate on income was 24.5 percent and 24.9 percent for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net Income
Net income was $112 million and $153 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was driven by the aforementioned operating results, offset, in part, by a $14 million decrease in the provision for income taxes.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $270 million and $303 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following table provides a summary of changes in our Adjusted EBITDA. For a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA, see “Item 6. Selected Financial Data.”
The increase in contract claims costs reflects higher incidence beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in the appliance and plumbing trades, which is primarily a result of customers sheltering at home in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, increased cost pressures in the appliance trade due to industry-wide availability challenges, and normal inflation across other trades. The impact of higher incidence in the appliance trade was approximately $36 million. Further, appliance parts availability challenges drove additional replacements, contributing to the increased cost pressures. Contract claims costs also reflects a favorable weather impact of approximately $7 million and process improvement benefits.
The increase in sales and marketing costs was primarily driven by higher targeted marketing spend to drive growth in the direct-to-consumer channel. The increase in customer service costs was primarily related to managing a higher number of service requests and investments in customer retention initiatives. General and administrative costs increased compared to prior year primarily
due to investments in technology, offset, in part, by lower professional fees. Other primarily consists of interest and net investment income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
A substantial portion of our liquidity needs are due to debt service requirements on our indebtedness. The Credit Agreement, as well as the Indenture, contain covenants that limit or restrict our ability, including the ability of certain of our subsidiaries, to incur additional indebtedness, repurchase debt, incur liens, sell assets, make certain payments (including dividends) and enter into transactions with affiliates. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants under the agreements that were in effect on such date. Based on current conditions, we do not believe the COVID-19 pandemic will affect our ongoing ability to meet the covenants in our debt instruments, including our Credit Agreement and Indenture.
Cash and short-term marketable securities totaled $597 million and $434 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash and short-term marketable securities include balances associated with regulatory requirements in our business. See “-Limitations on Distributions and Dividends by Subsidiaries.” As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the total net assets subject to these third-party restrictions was $180 million and $168 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, there were no letters of credit outstanding, and there was $250 million of available borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility. Available liquidity was $668 million at December 31, 2020, consisting of $418 million of cash not subject to third-party restrictions and $250 million of available borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility. We currently believe that cash generated from operations, our cash on hand and available borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility at December 31, 2020 will provide us with sufficient liquidity to meet our obligations for the foreseeable future.
We closely monitor the performance of our investment portfolio. From time to time, we review the statutory reserve requirements to which our regulated entities are subject and any changes to such requirements. These reviews may result in identifying current reserve levels above or below minimum statutory reserve requirements, in which case we may adjust our reserves. The reviews may also identify opportunities to satisfy certain regulatory reserve requirements through alternate financial vehicles.
We may, from time to time, repurchase or otherwise retire or extend our debt and/or take other steps to reduce our debt or otherwise improve our financial position, gross leverage, results of operations or cash flows. These actions may include open market debt repurchases, negotiated repurchases, other retirements of outstanding debt and/or opportunistic refinancing of debt. The amount of debt that may be repurchased or otherwise retired or refinanced, if any, and the price of such repurchases, retirements or refinancings will depend on market conditions, trading levels of our debt, our cash position, compliance with debt covenants and other considerations.
Partial Repayment of Term Loan Facility
On February 17, 2021, we repaid $100 million of the outstanding principal amount of the Term Loan Facility. In connection with the repayment, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $1 million, which included the write-off of debt issuance costs and original issue discount.
Limitations on Distributions and Dividends by Subsidiaries
We depend on our subsidiaries to distribute funds to us so that we may pay obligations and expenses, including satisfying obligations with respect to indebtedness. The ability of our subsidiaries to make distributions and dividends to us depends on their operating results, cash requirements, financial condition and general business conditions, as well as restrictions under the laws of our subsidiaries’ jurisdictions.
Our subsidiaries are permitted under the terms of the Credit Agreement and other indebtedness to incur additional indebtedness that may restrict or prohibit the making of distributions, the payment of dividends or the making of loans by such subsidiaries to us.
Furthermore, there are third-party restrictions on the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to transfer funds to us. These restrictions are related to regulatory requirements. The payments of ordinary and extraordinary dividends by certain of our subsidiaries (through which we conduct our business) are subject to significant regulatory restrictions under the laws and regulations of the states in which they operate. Among other things, such laws and regulations require certain subsidiaries to maintain minimum capital and net worth requirements and may limit the amount of ordinary and extraordinary dividends and other payments that these subsidiaries can pay to us. We expect that such limitations will be in effect for the foreseeable future. In Texas, we are relieved of the obligation to post 75 percent of our otherwise required reserves because we operate a captive insurer approved by Texas regulators in order to satisfy such obligations. None of our subsidiaries are obligated to make funds available to us through the payment of dividends.
Cash Flows
Cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as reflected in the audited consolidated and combined statements of cash flows included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, are summarized in the following table.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided from operating activities was $207 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $200 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided from operating activities in 2020 comprised $170 million in earnings adjusted for non-cash charges and a $37 million decrease in cash required for working capital. The decrease in cash required for working capital was primarily driven by an increase in amounts payable to contractors and suppliers, due, in part, to the timing of claims payments as a result of industry-wide availability challenges in the appliance trade, and the timing of trade payables.
Net cash provided from operating activities in 2019 comprised $189 million in earnings adjusted for non-cash charges and a $11 million decrease in cash required for working capital. The decrease in cash required for working capital was driven by growth in our underlying business and the timing of trade payables.
Investing Activities
Net cash used for investing activities was $31 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $61 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Capital expenditures increased to $32 million in 2020 from $22 million in 2019 and included recurring capital needs and technology projects. We expect capital expenditures for the full year 2021 relating to recurring capital needs and the continuation of investments in information systems and productivity enhancing technology to be approximately $35 million to $45 million. We have no additional material capital commitments at this time.
Cash payments for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, were $5 million and $38 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing ongoing strategic investments in our business. In 2020, we acquired a business to expand our ProConnect on-demand offering for $5 million in cash. In 2019, activity included $35 million in net cash paid to acquire Streem and $3 million in cash paid to acquire another business.
Cash flows provided from purchases, sales and maturities of securities, net, in 2020 and 2019 were $7 million and $3 million, respectively, and were driven by the maturities and sales of marketable securities.
Cash flows used for other investing activities were $4 million in 2019 and represent ongoing strategic investments in our business.
Financing Activities
Net cash used for financing activities was $7 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and primarily consisted of payments to service our debt obligations.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020.
_________________________________
* These items are reported in the audited consolidated statements of financial position included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1)These amounts represent future interest payments related to existing debt obligations based on interest rates and principal maturities specified in the associated debt agreements. As of December 31, 2020, payments related to the Term Loan Facility are based on applicable rates at December 31, 2020 plus the specified margin in the Credit Agreement for each period presented. As of December 31, 2020, the estimated debt balance (including finance leases) as of each fiscal year end from 2021 through 2025 is $979 million, $972 million, $966 million, $959 million and $350 million, respectively, and the weighted-average interest rate on the estimated debt balances is 5.0 percent at each fiscal year end from 2021 through 2024 and 3.5 percent at fiscal year end 2025. See Note 14 to the audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the terms and maturities of existing debt obligations.
(2)These amounts primarily represent future payments relating to real estate operating leases. Amounts do not include payments for an additional real estate lease that has not yet commenced, which will result in future operating lease payments of less than $1 million in 2021 and $7 million in the years thereafter (2022-2028).
Financial Position
The following discussion describes changes in our financial position from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
Cash and cash equivalents increased from prior year levels, primarily due to cash provided from operating activities.
Intangible assets, net decreased from prior year levels, primarily due to changes in the valuations of certain intangible assets related to our acquisition of Streem. See Note 7 to the audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding acquisitions.
Home service plan claims increased from prior year levels, reflecting an increase in amounts payable to contractors and suppliers, due, in part, to the timing of claims payments as a result of industry-wide availability challenges in the appliance trade.
Other long-term liabilities increased from prior year levels, primarily due to the change in the valuation of our interest rate swap. See Note 19 to the audited consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Total shareholders’ equity was a deficit of $61 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to a deficit of $179 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by the $112 million of net income generated in 2020, which reduced our accumulated deficit. See the consolidated and combined statements of changes in (deficit) equity included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant off-balance sheet arrangements.
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Accordingly, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
‎