ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (amounts in thousands of dollars)
Executive Summary
In 2020, the Company continued to experience a challenging operational environment resulting from the ongoing substitution of gas-fired and renewable energy plant for coal-fired installations. Our cost control efforts reduced selling, general and administrative expenses from fiscal 2019 by 21% and the net loss by 46%. We continue to invest in new technologies to expand our product offerings into the water pollution control and treatment market. Our capital resources are sufficient for our immediate and longer-term needs and we continue to enjoy the services and support of a dedicated workforce. We expect that our cost control efforts will continue to yield reduced losses and the diminishing effects of the pandemic should lead to an improved market outlook.
Background
We have two broad technology segments that provide advanced engineered solutions to meet the pollution control, efficiency improvement and operational optimization needs of energy-related facilities worldwide. They are as follows:
Air Pollution Control Technologies
The Air Pollution Control technology segment includes technologies to reduce NOx emissions in flue gas from boilers, incinerators, furnaces and other stationary combustion sources. These include SCR systems, NOxOUT and HERT SNCR systems, Low NOx Burners (LNB), and OFA systems, and I-NOx systems. The I-NOx system includes LNB, OFA, and SNCR components, along with a downsized SCR catalyst, Ammonia Injection Grid (AIG), and Graduated Straightening Grid GSG™ systems to provide high NOx reductions at significantly lower capital and operating costs than conventional SCR systems. ULTRA technology creates ammonia at a plant site using safe urea for use with any SCR application. Our ESP products and services include complete turnkey ESP retrofits and related services. Flue Gas Conditioning systems are chemical injection systems offered in markets outside the U.S. and Canada to enhance electrostatic precipitator and fabric filter performance in controlling particulate emissions. We distribute our products through our direct sales force and third-party sales agents.
FUEL CHEM Technologies
The FUEL CHEM technology segment, which uses chemical processes in combination with advanced CFD and CKM boiler modeling, for the control of slagging, fouling, corrosion, opacity and other sulfur trioxide-related issues in furnaces and boilers through the addition of chemicals into the furnace using TIFI Targeted In-Furnace Injection technology. Fuel Tech sells its FUEL CHEM program through its direct sales force and agents to industrial and utility power-generation facilities. FUEL CHEM programs have been installed on combustion units in North America, Europe, China, and India, treating a wide variety of solid and liquid fuels, including coal, heavy oil, biomass and municipal waste. The FUEL CHEM program improves the efficiency, reliability and environmental status of plants operating in the electric utility, industrial, pulp and paper, waste-to-energy, university and district heating markets and offers numerous operational, financial and environmental benefits to owners of boilers, furnaces and other combustion units.
The key market dynamic for both technology segments is the continued use of fossil fuels, especially coal, as the principal fuel source for global electricity production. Coal currently accounts for approximately 21% of all U.S. electricity generation and roughly 33% of global electricity generation. Major coal consumers include China, the United States and India.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require us to make estimates and assumptions. We believe that, of our accounting policies (see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements), the following involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity and are deemed critical. We routinely discuss our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Fuel Tech’s sales of products to customers represent single performance obligations, which are not impacted upon the adoption of ASC 606. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
FUEL CHEM
Revenues from the sale of chemical products are recognized when control transfers to customer upon shipment or delivery of the product based on the applicable shipping terms. We generally recognize revenue for these arrangements at a point in time based on our evaluation of when the customer obtains control of the promised goods or services.
On occasion, Fuel Tech will engineer and sell its chemical pumping equipment. These projects are similar in nature to the APC projects described above and for those projects where control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the single performance obligation.
For projects containing multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the transaction price based on the estimated standalone selling price. The Company must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. The Company utilizes key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include other comparable transactions, pricing considered in negotiating the transaction and the estimated costs. Variable consideration is allocated specifically to one or more performance obligations in a contract when the terms of the variable consideration relate to the satisfaction of the performance obligation and the resulting amounts allocated are consistent with the amounts the Company would expect to receive for the satisfaction of each performance obligation.
The consideration allocated to each performance obligation is recognized as revenue when control is transferred for the related goods or services. For performance obligations which consist of licenses and other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
The Company receives payments from its customers based on billing schedules established in each contract. Up-front payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due until the Company performs its obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when the Company’s right to consideration is unconditional.
Air Pollution Control Technology
Fuel Tech’s APC contracts are typically six to eighteen months in length. A typical contract will have three or four critical operational measurements that, when achieved, serve as the basis for us to invoice the customer via progress billings. At a minimum, these measurements will include the generation of engineering drawings, the shipment of equipment and the completion of a system performance test.
As part of most of its contractual APC project agreements, Fuel Tech will agree to customer-specific acceptance criteria that relate to the operational performance of the system that is being sold. These criteria are determined based on modeling that is performed by Fuel Tech personnel, which is based on operational inputs that are provided by the customer. The customer will warrant that these operational inputs are accurate as they are specified in the binding contractual agreement. Further, the customer is solely responsible for the accuracy of the operating condition information; typically all performance guarantees and equipment warranties granted by us are voidable if the operating condition information is inaccurate or is not met.
Since control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the single performance obligation. Fuel Tech uses the cost-to-cost input measure of progress for our contracts since it best depicts the transfer of assets to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. Under the cost-to-cost input measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenues are recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. Costs to fulfill include all internal and external engineering costs, equipment charges, inbound and outbound freight expenses, internal and site transfer costs, installation charges, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, warehousing costs, project personnel travel expenses and other direct and indirect expenses specifically identified as project- or product-line related, as appropriate (e.g. test equipment depreciation and certain insurance expenses).
Fuel Tech has installed over 1,200 units with APC technology and normally provides performance guarantees to our customers based on the operating conditions for the project. As part of the project implementation process, we perform system start-up and optimization services that effectively serve as a test of actual project performance. We believe that this test, combined with the accuracy of the modeling that is performed, enables revenue to be recognized prior to the receipt of formal customer acceptance.
As of December 31, 2020 we had one construction contract in progress that were identified as a loss contract and a provision for losses of $176 was recorded in other accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2019, we had three construction contracts in progress that were identified as loss contracts and a provision for losses of $26 was recorded in other accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable, unbilled receivables (contract assets), and customer advances and deposits (contract liabilities) on the consolidated balance sheets. In our Air Pollution Control Technology segment, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms. Generally, billing occurs subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. These assets are reported on the consolidated balance sheet on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, contract assets were approximately $1,127 and $1,857, respectively, and are included in accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheets.
However, the Company will periodically bill in advance of costs incurred before revenue is recognized, resulting in contract liabilities. These liabilities are reported on the consolidated balance sheet on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period. Contract liabilities were $850 and $712 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are included in other accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts is management’s best estimate of the amount of credit losses in accounts receivable. In order to control and monitor the credit risk associated with our customer base, we review the credit worthiness of customers on a recurring basis. Factors influencing the level of scrutiny include the level of business the customer has with us, the customer’s payment history and the customer’s financial stability. Receivables are considered past due if payment is not received by the date agreed upon with the customer, which is normally 30 days. Representatives of our management team review all past due accounts on a weekly basis to assess collectability. At the end of each reporting period, the allowance for doubtful accounts balance is reviewed relative to management’s collectability assessment and is adjusted if deemed necessary through a corresponding charge or credit to bad debt expense, which is included in selling, general, and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. Bad debt write-offs are made when management believes it is probable a receivable will not be recovered.
Inventories
Inventories consist primarily of spare parts and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, using the weighted-average cost method. Usage is recorded in cost of sales in the period that parts were issued to a project or used to service equipment. Inventories are carried at weighted average cost and periodically evaluated to identify obsolete or otherwise impaired parts that are written off when management determines usage is not probable. The Company estimates the balance of excess and obsolete inventory by analyzing inventory by age using last used and original purchase date and existing sales pipeline for which the inventory could be used.
Assessment of Potential Impairments of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is reviewed annually (in the fourth quarter) or more frequently if indicators arise, for impairment. We do not have any indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill. Such indicators include a decline in expected cash flows, a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate, unanticipated competition, a decrease in our market capitalization to an amount less than the carrying value of our assets, or slower growth rates, among others.
Goodwill is allocated among and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. We have two reporting units: the FUEL CHEM segment and the APC technology segment.
Our evaluation of goodwill impairment involves first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. We may bypass this qualitative assessment, or determine that based on our qualitative assessment considering the totality of events and circumstances including macroeconomic factors, industry and market considerations, current and projected financial performance, a sustained decrease in our share price, or other factors, that additional impairment analysis is necessary. This additional analysis involves comparing the current fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. Fuel Tech uses a discounted cash flow (DCF) model to determine the current fair value of its FUEL CHEM reporting unit as this methodology was deemed to best quantify the present values of our expected future cash flows and yield a fair value that should be in line with the aggregate market value placed on the outstanding number of Common Shares as reflected by the current stock price multiplied by the outstanding common shares. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows, including markets and market share, sales volumes and prices, costs to produce and working capital changes. Events outside our control, specifically market conditions that impact revenue growth assumptions, could significantly impact the fair value calculated. Management considers historical experience and all available information at the time the fair values of its reporting units are estimated. However, actual fair values that could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from those used to evaluate the impairment of goodwill.
The application of our DCF model in estimating the fair value of each reporting segment is based on the ‘net asset’ approach to business valuation. In using this approach for each reportable segment, we forecast segment revenues and expenses out to perpetuity and then discount the resulting cash flows to their present value using an appropriate discount rate. The forecast considers, among other items, the current and expected business environment, expected changes in the fixed and variable cost structure as the business grows, and a revenue growth rate that we feel is both achievable and sustainable. The discount rate used is composed of a number of identifiable risk factors, including equity risk, company size, and certain company-specific risk factors such as our debt-to-equity ratio, among other factors, that when added together, results in a total return that a prudent investor would demand for an investment in our Company.
In the event the estimated fair value of a reporting unit per the DCF model is less than the carrying value, additional analysis would be required. The additional analysis would compare the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill with the implied fair value of that goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is the excess of the fair value of the reporting unit over the fair values assigned to all of the assets and liabilities of that unit as if the reporting unit was acquired in a business combination and the fair value of the reporting unit represented the purchase price.
The Company utilizes ASU 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment for the annual goodwill impairment test.
Fuel Tech performed its annual goodwill impairment analysis for each of its reporting units as of October 1, 2020 and determined that no impairment of goodwill existed within the FUEL CHEM technology segment.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Amortizable Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment (PP&E) and intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets (or asset group) may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators exist, we perform a more detailed analysis and an impairment loss is recognized when estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset (or asset group) and its eventual disposition are less than the carrying amount. This process of analyzing impairment involves examining the operating condition of individual assets (or asset group) and estimating a fair value based upon current condition, relevant market factors and remaining estimated operational life compared to the asset’s remaining depreciable life. Quoted market prices and other valuation techniques are used to determine expected cash flows. Due to the existence of impairment indicators as more fully described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements, we performed a more detailed analysis of potential long-lived and intangible asset impairment in the APC technology asset group during the fourth quarter of 2020 and determined no impairment exists.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded an abandonment charge of $197 due to the Company's decision to no longer maintain and defend certain patents and trademarks which are no longer contributing to operations. The abandonment charge was calculated by determining the net book values of the abandoned patent assets by deducting the accumulated amortization from the acquisition cost. The abandonment charge is included in “Intangible assets abandonment and building impairment” line in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year then ended December 31, 2020.
In the second and third quarters of 2019, the Company recorded an abandonment charge of $127 associated with certain international patent assets which the Company elected to not maintain and abandon in certain international locations due to limited business opportunities in those regions. The abandonment charge was calculated by determining the net book values of the abandoned patent assets by deducting the accumulated amortization from the acquisition cost. The abandonment charge of $127 is included in “Intangible assets abandonment and building impairment” line in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
A significant portion of our property and equipment is comprised of assets deployed at customer locations relating to our FUEL CHEM technology asset group, and due to the shorter-term duration over which this equipment is depreciated, the likelihood of impairment is mitigated. The discontinuation of a FUEL CHEM program at a customer site would most likely result in the re-deployment of all or most of the affected assets to another customer location rather than an impairment.
Valuation Allowance for Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets represent deductible temporary differences and net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. At the end of each reporting period, management reviews the realizability of the deferred tax assets. As part of this review, we consider if there are taxable temporary differences that could generate taxable income in the future, if there is the ability to carry back the net operating losses or credits, if there is a projection of future taxable income, and if there are any tax planning strategies that can be readily implemented. As required by ASC 740 "Income Taxes", a valuation allowance must be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. This assessment resulted in a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets of $15,971 and $15,394 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for employee equity awards ratably over the requisite service period of the award, adjusted for estimated forfeitures.
We utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards. Determining the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes model requires judgment, including estimates for (1) risk-free interest rate - an estimate based on the yield of zero-coupon treasury securities with a maturity equal to the expected life of the option; (2) expected volatility - an estimate based on the historical volatility of our Common Shares for a period equal to the expected life of the option; and (3) expected life of the option - an estimate based on historical experience including the effect of employee terminations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 842 using the modified retrospective method outlined in ASU 2018-11, “Leases (Topic 842) Targeted Improvements.” Refer to Note 10 for further details regarding the effect of adoption. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating leases are included in right-of-use ("ROU") operating lease assets, operating lease liabilities - current, and operating lease liabilities - non-current on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives and initial direct costs incurred. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, and we elected the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components for the majority of our leases. For certain equipment leases, such as vehicles, we account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component. We also elected the practical expedient to keep leases with an initial term of 12 months or less off of the consolidated balance sheet.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” The new rules reduce complexity by removing specific exceptions to general principles related to intra-period tax allocations, ownership changes in foreign investments, and interim period income tax accounting for year-to-date losses that exceed anticipated losses. The new rules also simplify accounting for franchise taxes that are partially based on income, transactions with a government that result in a step up in the tax basis of goodwill, separate financial statements of legal entities that are not subject to tax, and enacted changes in tax laws in interim periods. The new rules will be effective for the Company in the first quarter of 2021, with early adoption permitted. The ASU permits either a retrospective basis or a modified retrospective transition approach. The Company is currently in the process of evaluating the impact of adoption of the new rules on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and disclosures.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which amends the current accounting guidance and requires the measurement of all expected losses based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. For trade receivables, loans, and other financial instruments, we will be required to use a forward-looking expected loss model rather than the incurred loss model for recognizing credit losses which reflects losses that are probable. The standard will become effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. Application of the amendments is through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the effective date. The Company is currently in the process of evaluating the impact of adoption, but we do not believe the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on our financial statements.
2020 versus 2019
Highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019:
Revenues
Revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $22,550 and $30,467, respectively. The year-over-year decrease of $7,917 or 26%, was driven by decreased revenue in both APC and FUEL CHEM technology segments in our United States (U.S.) operations. Our U.S. revenues decreased by $7,260 or 28% from $25,882 to $18,622, and our international revenues decreased by $657 or 14% from $4,585 to $3,928.
Revenues for the APC technology segment were $8,557 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $5,525, or 39%, versus fiscal 2019. The decrease in APC revenue for the twelve month period ending December 31, 2020 in comparison to prior year amount was principally related to the timing of project execution and the decline in backlog which was $5.3 million and $9.7 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenues for the FUEL CHEM technology segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13,993, a decrease of $2,392, or 15% versus fiscal 2019. We remain focused on attracting new customers in our FUEL CHEM business, for both coal and non-coal applications, but our ability to attract new coal customers continues to be affected by the soft electric demand market and fuel switching as a result of low natural gas prices.
Cost of sales and gross margin
Consolidated cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $11,912 and $19,637, respectively. Consolidated gross margin percentages for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 47% and 36%, respectively. The gross margins for the APC technology segment increased to 46% in 2020 from 20% in 2019. The overall increase in gross margin in the APC technology segment from 2019 to 2020 is primarily due to the timing of a large insurance settlement of $2,589 which was used to fund the recovery plan for the project affected and project mix, timing of project execution and net of $1,427 of remediation costs incurred during 2020 to address non-conformance issues under the terms of a contract with a U.S. customer. Gross margin percentage for the FUEL CHEM technology segment decreased to 48% from 49% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $13,600 and $17,191, respectively. The decrease of $3,591 or 21%, is primarily attributed to the following:
•
A decrease in employee related costs of $190
•
A decrease in office and administrative costs relating to our foreign subsidiaries of $1,226 primarily related to the suspension of the APC business in Beijing, China
• A decrease in travel expense of $377
• A decrease in professional service fees of $165
• A decrease in bad debt of $997
•
An decrease in other administrative costs of $613
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization are calculated using the straight line method and included in selling, general and administrative expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded depreciation of $663 and $810 and amortization of $185 and $186, respectively.
Restructuring charge
Restructuring costs were $0 and $625 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. On January 18, 2019, the Company announced a planned suspension of the APC business operation in China. This action is part of Fuel Tech’s ongoing operational improvement initiatives designed to prioritize resource allocation, reduce costs, and drive profitability for the Company on a global basis. The transition associated with the suspension of the APC business includes staff rationalization, supplier and partner engagement, and the monetization of certain assets. See Note 16, Restructuring Activities, for further discussion.
Research and development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses were $1,177 and $1,127 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Intangible assets abandonment
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded an abandonment charge of $197 due to the Company's decision to no longer maintain and defend certain patents and trademarks which are no longer contributing to operations. In the second quarter of 2019, Fuel Tech recorded an abandonment charge of $127 associated with certain international patent assets which the Company elected to not maintain and abandon in certain international locations due to limited business opportunities in those regions. The abandonment charges were calculated by determining the net book values of the abandoned patent assets by deducting the accumulated amortization from the acquisition cost. The abandonment charges are included in “Intangible assets abandonment” line in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest (income) / expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4 versus income of $41 in 2019.
Foreign exchange gain
Foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0 after a gain of $370 in 2019 related to the Chile subsidiary.
Other income
Other income of $119 increased by $127 for the years ended December 31, 2020 compared to $(8) in 2019 due to the interest collected on resolution of legal judgment on a receivable payment from our China operations.
Income tax benefit (expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax expense of $57 on pre-tax loss of $4,221. Our effective tax rates were (1.4)% and 0.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective tax rate for the year-ended December 31, 2020, differed from the federal statutory rate of 21% as a result of establishing a deferred tax liability associated with a certain book-to-tax timing difference. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an income tax expense of $14 on pre-tax loss of $7,837. The effective tax rate for the year-ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 differed from the federal statutory rate of 34% as a result of net operating losses generated in the United States, China, and Italy, which were offset by establishment of full valuation allowances.
Loss from discontinued operations
The activity of the Fuel Conversion discontinued operations consisted of other costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $0 and $1, respectively. The activity of the Fuel Conversion discontinued operations consisted primarily of storage costs for holding the equipment at a third-party location totaling $21 for the year ended December 31, 2019 and the gain on sale of $20 from the sale of the remaining Fuel Conversion Assets Held for Sale recorded in discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Sources of Capital
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $10,640 (excluding restricted cash of $1,966) and working capital of $15,542 versus cash and cash equivalents of $10,914 (excluding restricted cash of $2,587) and working capital of $16,816 at December 31, 2019.
Operating activities used $2,707 of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the add back of non-cash items from our net loss from continuing operations of $266 including stock compensation expense of $290, depreciation and amortization of $848, intangible assets abandonment charge of $197, an increase in our accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities of $2, and an increase in our accounts payable balance of $198 offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current and non-current assets of $161, a decrease in our inventory balance of $171 and a decrease in our accounts receivable balance of $1,095.
Operating activities used $3,387 of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the add back of non-cash items from our net income from continuing operations of $7,851 including stock compensation expense of $574, depreciation and amortization of $996, intangible assets abandonment charge of $127, a reduction of the excess and obsolete inventory reserve of $131, a decrease in our accounts receivable balance of $11,415, a decrease in our inventory balance of $818, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current and non-current assets of $2,239, an decrease in our accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities of $5,010, and a decrease in our accounts payable balance of $7,331. Cash used in operating activities also included cash used of $21 associated with the activity of the Fuel Conversion discontinued operations.
Investing activities used cash of $247 and $45 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted principally of purchases of equipment of $247. Investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of purchases of equipment, patents, and other intangibles of $550 and proceeds from sale of equipment of $505.
Financing activities provided $1,282 and used $128 of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. In 2020, the Company received a Paycheck Protection Plan loan of $1,556 but used a net $276 for stock compensation related transactions. The cash used in 2019 was a result of $128 used for the acquisition of common shares held in treasury that were withheld for taxes due by employees upon lapsing of restricted stock units during 2019.
On June 19, 2019, the Company entered into a Cash Collateral Security agreement with BMO Harris Bank, N.A. (the BMO Harris agreement) to use for the sole purpose of issuing standby letters of credit. The BMO Harris agreement requires us to pledge as cash collateral 105% of the aggregate face amount of outstanding standby letters of credit. The Company pays 250 basis points on the face values of outstanding letters of credit. There are no financial covenants set forth in the BMO Harris agreement. At December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding standby letters of credit totaling approximately $1,873 under the BMO Harris agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the Company held $1,966 in a separate restricted use designated BMO Harris Bank N.A. deposit account. Fuel Tech is committed to reimbursing the issuing bank for any payments made by the bank under these instruments. The excess in restricted cash collateral at year-end is related to timing of the release of several standby letters of credit which expired just after year-end.
In connection with the transition to BMO Harris Bank N.A., the Company canceled its U.S. Domestic credit facility (the Facility) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (JPM Chase) effective on September 25, 2019.
Beijing Fuel Tech Environmental Technologies Company, Ltd. (Beijing Fuel Tech), was previously obligated under a revolving credit facility (the China Facility) agreement, as most recently amended on October 19, 2018, with JPM Chase which provided for maximum revolving credit borrowings of RMB 2.625 million (approximately $382) and matured on June 30, 2019. The Facility was secured by $520 in cash held by the Company in a separate restricted use designated JPM Chase deposit account. The China Facility bears interest at a rate of 140% of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) Base Rate, and is guaranteed by the Company. Beijing Fuel Tech can use this facility for cash advances and bank guarantees. As a result of the announcement of the suspension of the Air Pollution Control business in Beijing, the Company did not renew the China Facility upon its expiration on June 30, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 we have sustained a loss before discontinued operations totaling $4,278. Our cash used by continuing operations for this same period totaled $2,707. We have taken measures to reduce our expense infrastructure and have eliminated approximately $17.5 million in aggregate selling, general and administrative expenses primarily through headcount and other operating expense cutbacks since 2015.
We have experienced continued declines in revenues and recurring losses. As a result, we have evaluated our ongoing business needs, and considered the cash requirements of our base business of Air Pollution Control (APC) and FUEL CHEM businesses. This evaluation included consideration of the following: a) customer and revenue trends in our APC and FUEL CHEM business segments, b) current operating structure and expenditure levels, c) current availability of working capital, and d) support for our research and development initiatives.
Our cash balance as of December 31, 2020 totaled $12,606 (including our restricted cash balance), and our working capital totaled $15,542. We do not have any outstanding debt obligations other than for our letters of credit and our PPP loan which was forgiven on January 8, 2021. We currently have the BMO Harris agreement which we use to issue letters of credit to our customers, which is fully cash collateralized requiring us to deposit funds in a restricted cash account. We expect to continue operating under this arrangement for the foreseeable future.
On February 17, 2021 we consummated the sale of 5,000,000 shares of Fuel Tech common stock sold to certain investors in a private placement transaction. The Company received gross proceeds of $25.8 million. The Company intends to use for the proceeds for general corporate purposes. See Note 9B "Subsequent Events."
Commercial Commitments
Commitment expiration by period in thousands of dollars
Off-Balance-Sheet Transactions
There were no other off-balance-sheet transactions other than the obligations and commitments listed above for the year ended December 31, 2020.