ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Future FinTech is a holding company incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida. The Company historically engaged in the production and sale of fruit juice concentrates (including fruit purees and fruit juices), fruit beverages (including fruit juice beverages and fruit cider beverages) in the PRC. Due to drastically increased production costs and tightened environmental laws in China, the Company had transformed its business from fruit juice manufacturing and distribution to a real-name blockchain based e-commerce platform that integrates blockchain and internet technology. The main business of the Company includes an online shopping platform, Chain Cloud Mall (CCM), which is based on blockchain technology; a cross-border e-commerce platform (NONOGIRL); a blockchain-based application incubator; and technical service and support for real name and blockchain based assets and their operating entities; and the application and development of blockchain-based e-commerce technology and financial technology. The Company is also expanding into financial services.
On July 13, 2020, the Company entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Joy Rich Enterprises Limited (“Joy Rich”) to acquire 90% of the issued and outstanding shares of NTAM, a Hong Kong-based asset management company. However, the closing process was impacted by both the Covid-19 global pandemic and slow regulatory approval from Hong Kong regulatory agencies. Consequently, there had been delayed progress as to the closing of the acquisition. The closing date as stipulated in the Agreement was no later than December 31, 2020, but since July 2020 there have been changes in NTAM’s business performance as well as the price of FTFT’s common stock. The parties have agreed to renegotiate the purchase price in accordance with a new valuation of NTAM and the recent stock price level of the Company for the share exchange transaction. On April 9, 2021, the parties entered into the First Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Share Exchange Agreements. Pursuant to the Amendment, the parties agree to amend the purchase price and certain earn-out terms as follows: (i) the aggregate purchase price for Nice Shares shall be HK$144,000,000 (the “Purchase Price”) and it shall be paid in the shares of common stock of the Company (the “Company Shares”); (ii) 60% of the Purchase Price or HK$86,400,000 shall be paid in the shares of common stock of the Company based on 95% of the closing price of the Company’s common stock listed on Nasdaq Stock Exchange on the date prior to the date of the Amendment and the foreign exchange rate between HK$ and US$ shall be 7.7:1; (iii) 20% of Purchase Price shall be paid in the shares of common stock of the Company if Nice achieves an Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (the “EBIT”) of HK$14,000,000 (the “2021 EBIT Goal”), as evidenced in its 2021 audited financial statements for fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 audited by the auditor of the Company (the “2021 Earn-Out Shares”); (iv) the final 20% of Purchase Price shall be paid in the shares of common stock of the Company if Nice achieves an EBIT of HK$20,000,000 (the “2022 EBIT Goal”), as evidenced in its 2022 audited financial statements for fiscal year ended December 31, 2022 audited by the auditor of the Company (the “2022 Earn-Out Shares”); (v) if Nice does not achieve the EBIT Goal for a given year, the shortfall between EBIT Goal and the actual EBIT for that year shall be the EBIT Shortfall (the “EBIT Shortfall”) and the amount of an EBIT Shortfall Fee that equals to 10 (ten) times of the EBIT Shortfall amount (the “EBIT Shortfall Fee”) shall be paid in cash by the Seller to the Buyer even though such year’s Earn-Out Shares shall still be issued in full to the Seller.
On February 26, 2021, the Company and Future Supply Chain Co., Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and a company incorporated under the laws of China (“Buyer”) entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Sichuan Longma Electronic Technology Co. Ltd. (“Longma”) and Sichuan Ticode Supply Chain Management Co., Ltd. (the “Ticode”) to acquire a 60% equity interest of Ticode from Longma in exchange for 7,789,882 shares of common stock of the Company. Ticode provides financial services for the supply chain industry and its business includes procurement agent services, sales agent services, inventory pledged loan services, and supply chain financing intermediary services. Ticode’s supply chain related services cover electronic components, technology services to supply chain data management for the electronics industry, and supply chain management for various electronic components and materials, metal materials and raw plastic materials.
Business
Chain Cloud Mall adopts a “multi-vendor hosted stores + platform self-hosted stores” model. The platform supports various marketing methods, including point rewards programs, coupons, live webcasts, game interaction, and social media sharing. Besides the blockchain-powered features, CCM is also fully equipped with the same functions and services that other Chinese leading traditional e-commerce platforms provide.
Based on blockchain technology, CCM is established to transform the relationship between companies and consumers from traditional selling and buying relationships to a value-sharing relationship. The platform will fairly distribute the benefit of the entire mall to users who engaged in the promotion, development, and consumption based on their contributions to the platform. The members of CCM are not only consumers and entrepreneurs but also participants, promoters and beneficiaries. The CCM shared shopping mall platform is designed to be a block-chain based shopping mall for merchants and goods, not the exchange of digital currencies, and it currently only accepts payment from credit cards, Alipay and WeChat.
Chain Cloud Mall is an enterprise and customer interactive and comprehensive shopping and sales service platform. It is an open network promotion system with a blockchain based anti-counterfeit system including referral point and discount points issuance and settlement. The new business model creates a completely new source of data traffic for enterprises on our platform.
Merchants on the Chain Cloud Mall issue their own blockchain points and anti-counterfeiting QR codes. Every product comes with unique anti-counterfeiting QR codes on the label. Customers collect the points issued by the merchants by scanning products with their mobile phones on the anti-counterfeiting QR code. These QR codes are generated by blockchain system of Chain Cloud Mall and provided to merchants. The successful collection of the merchant points confirms that the authentication of product from such enterprise. The Chain Cloud Mall records and provides Chain Cloud Mall points to its members upon a successful new member and/or product referral, which can be used as credit when making purchases on CCM. It incentivizes its members to promote the platform and share the products with their social contacts, which in turn increases the sales through Chain Cloud Mall and helps the Company generate greater value.
NONOGIRL started its trial operation in March 2020 and formally launched in July 2020. It is a cross-border e-commerce platform, which aims to build a new s2b2c (supplier to business and consumer) outsourcing sales platform dominated by social media influencers. It is aimed at the growing female consumer market, with the ability to broadcast, short video, and all forms communication through the platform. It can also create a sale oriented sharing ecosystem with other major social media used by customers.
CCM shopping mall membership
Members are the key participants on CCM and drivers of its growth. Our members typically pay to gain access to a dedicated app that provides access to a curated selection of products, exclusive membership benefits, and features, including discounted prices and point rewards. Members can refer others to become members and are rewarded for doing so. Members can also promote products on various social platforms and are rewarded if those users purchase our products.
Sales of Goods
We have a unique real-name and membership-based blockchain e-commerce shopping platform that integrates blockchain, internet technology and distinguishes itself by utilizing the automatic value distribution system of the blockchain and sharing the value of the platform to all the participants in the system.
Our latest CCM v3.0 creates a new value cycle system of online shopping mall with the real-name blockchain system with following characteristics:
1. Blockchain anti-counterfeiting
Using real-name blockchain technology to carry out anti-counterfeiting for products produced by the enterprises. The essence of anti-counterfeiting is to determine the person responsible for the product. Using real-name blockchain system, it provides the assurance to our customers to the authentication of the products they purchase and solve the problem of counterfeiting products in online shopping mall.
2. Blockchain points settlement leads to secondary data traffic
Blockchain points are also discount coupons for merchants, guiding customers to the platform of the merchants, and provide them discounts when purchasing. This process is called secondary data traffic. It is important to maintaining old customers. Blockchain anti- counterfeiting technology through scanning of QR codes by the customers helps companies identify such customers and allows them to systematically maintain contacts with such customers.
3. Points promotion system
Points promotion system brings secondary data traffic comes with volume and high turnover ratio. All such sales are directed to the merchants’ stores when customers possess and use merchants’ coupons. With a high level of user stickiness, customers are likely to purchase products again and collect more blockchain points.
4. Member community system to build a high value community
Anti-counterfeiting technology plus the Company’s secondary data traffic platform have created great value for the merchants that have stores on our platform. By gathering all loyal customers to a merchant’s store, it can build a community of people with the common interest. Through the community, the merchant can form a self-organizing system with customer groups to maximize the interests of such merchant.
Recent Developments Related to the COVID-19 Outbreak
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, the pandemic quickly spread to many provinces, autonomous regions, and cities all over the China and other parts of the world. COVID-19 has materially and adversely affected our business, especially during the first six months of 2020. In early 2020, Chinese government took emergency measures to combat the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions, and the temporary closure of office buildings and facilities in China.
Substantially all of our revenues are generated in China. In response to the evolving dynamics related to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Company is following the guidelines of local authorities as it prioritizes the health and safety of its employees, contractors, suppliers and business partners. Our offices in China was closed and all of the Company’s employees worked from home from Chinese New Year at the end of January 2020 until late March 2020. Other businesses in China started reopening around the end of the first quarter as well, and more and more businesses, transportation, logistic and marketing activities have gradually resumed since then. Our offices currently are in normal operation. However, quarantines, travel restrictions, and the temporary closure of office buildings have negatively impacted our business during the outbreak. Our suppliers have negatively been affected, and could continue to be negatively affected in their ability to supply and ship products to our customers by any further outbreak or resurgence of COVID-19 in China. Our customers that are negatively impacted by the outbreak of COVID-19 may reduce their budgets to purchase products and services from us, which may materially adversely impact our revenue. The business operations of the third parties’ stores on our platform have been and could continue to be negatively impacted by any further outbreak or resurgence of COVID-19, which may negatively impact their operations and business, which may in turn adversely affect the business of our platform as a whole as well as our financial condition and operating results. The outbreak has had and might continue to have disruption to our supply chain, logistics providers, or customers if there is a resurgence of COVID-19 in China, which could materially adversely impact our business and results of operations, including causing our suppliers to cease manufacturing products for a period of time or materially delay delivery to us and customers, which may also lead to loss of customers, as well as reputational, competitive and business harm to us. The Company’s promotion strategy for our e-commerce platforms mainly relied on the training of members and distributors through meetings and conferences. Due to the outbreak of COVID-19, the Chinese government put a restriction on large gatherings and these restrictions made the promotion strategy for CCM Shopping Mall difficult to implement, which have caused the decrease in the sales and enrollment of new members. Some of our customers, contractors, suppliers and other business partners are small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which may not have strong cash flows or be well capitalized, and may be vulnerable to an epidemic outbreak and slowing macroeconomic conditions. If the SMEs that we work with cannot weather the COVID-19 and the resulting economic impact, or cannot resume business as usual after a prolonged outbreak, our revenues and business operations may be materially and adversely impacted.
The global economy has also been materially negatively affected by the COVID-19 and there is continued uncertainty about the duration and intensity of its impacts. The Chinese and global growth forecast is extremely uncertain, which would seriously affect customer spending in our shopping mall.
While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, a widespread pandemic may result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could materially affect our business and the value of the Company’s Common Stock.
Further, as we do not have access to a revolving credit facility, there can be no assurance that we would be able to secure commercial debt financing in the future in the event that we require additional capital. We currently believe that our financial resources will be adequate to see us through the outbreak. However, in the event that we do need to raise capital in the future, outbreak-related instability in the securities markets could adversely affect our ability to raise additional capital.
Consequently, our results of operations have been materially adversely affected. Any future impact to our results will depend on, to a large extent, future developments and new information that may emerge regarding the duration and severity of the COVID-19 and the actions taken by government authorities and other entities to contain the COVID-19 or treat its impact, almost all of which are beyond our control.
Discontinued Operations
On September 18, 2019, SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited, entered into a Share Transfer Agreement (the “Agreement”) with New Continent International Co., Ltd., (the “Buyer”) a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, the Buyer purchased 100% ownership of HeDeTang HK from SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited, which value is primarily derived from HeDeTang HK’s wholly-owned subsidiary HeDeJiaChuan Holdings Co., Ltd. and 73.41% owned subsidiary SkyPeople Juice Group Co., Ltd., for a total price of RMB 600,000 (approximately $85,714) (the “Sale Transaction”). The Sale Transaction was closed on February 27, 2020. In accordance with ASC Topic 205, Presentation of Financial Statement Discontinued Operations (“ASC Topic 205”), the Company presented the operation results from HeDeTang HK’s and subsidiaries as a discontinued operation, as the Company believed that no continued cash flow would be generated by the discontinued component and that the Company would have no significant continuing involvement in the operations of the discontinued component. The total assets of HeDeTang HK were $106.85 million as of February 27, 2020 and the total liabilities of HeDeTang HK were $231.21 million as of February 27, 2020, resulting in a gain on disposal of $123.69 million. There was no income or loss from HeDeTang HK from January 1, 2020 to the sale.
The discontinued operation presented in the financial statement for the period ended June 30, 2019 includes Huludao Wonder operation, a subsidiary which produces concentrated apple juice. In December 2016, the Company established a winding-down plan to close this operation. Based on the restructuring plan and in accordance with ASC 205-20, the Company presented the operating results from Huludao Wonder as a discontinued operation, as the Company believed that no continued cash flow would be generated by the disposed component (Huludao Wonder) and that the Company would have no significant continuing involvement in the operation of the discontinued component. Management of the Company initiated a plan to sell the property located in Huludao in December 2016, and ceased the depreciation of the property in accordance with ASC 205-20. In accordance with the restructuring plan, the Company intended to transfer the concentrated fruit juice production equipment in Huludao Wonder to another subsidiary and to sell the land use right and facilities upon favorable circumstances. On February 27, 2020 pursuant to a Share Transfer Agreement entered into SkyPeople Foods Holdings Limited and New Continent International Co., Ltd. on September 18, 2019, the ownership of Huludao Wonder was transferred as a subsidiary of HeDeTang HK to New Continent International Co., Ltd.
On March 11, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors passed a resolution to sell the operation of Globalkey Supply Chain limited and Zhonglian Hengxin Assets Management Co., Ltd (“Zhonglian Hengxin”) and close the operation of Digital Online Marketing Limited, Future Digital Fintech (Xi’an) Co., Ltd., SkyPeople Foods Holding Ltd. and Chain Future Digital Tech (Beijing) Co., Ltd. Based on the disposal plan and in accordance with ASC 205-20, the Company presented the operating results from these operations as a discontinued operation.
On July 24, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors passed a resolution to sale the operation of Hedetang Farm Products Trading Markets (Mei County) Co., Ltd. and close the operation of Chain Cloud Mall Logistics Center (Shaanxi) Co., Ltd, a subsidiary located in the national kiwifruit Industrial Park of Baoji City. On July 27,2020, Skypeople Foods Holdings Limited was dissolved; On July 28, 2020, Digital Online Marketing Limited was dissolved; On October 31, 2020, Chain Cloud Mall Network and Technology (Tianjin) Co., Limited and Chain Cloud Mall Logistics Center (Shanxi) Co., Ltd. completed the transfer of its ownership in Hedetang Farm Products Trading Markets (Mei county) Co., Ltd.
On November 12, 2020, CCM Tianjin, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company entered into an Equity Transfer Agreement with Xi’an Yishengkang Information Technology, Ltd. (“Xi’an Yishengkang”), an unrelated third party, pursuant to which CCM Tianjin agreed to sell 90% of total issued and outstanding capital stock of Hedetang Market that it owns to Xi’an Yishengkang for RMB9,000 (approximately $1,324). On the same date, CCM Logistics entered into another Equity Transfer Agreement with an individual and unrelated third party, Liyuan Ying, pursuant to which CCM Tianjin agreed to sell 10% of total issued and outstanding capital stock of Hedetang Market that it owns to Liyuan Ying for RMB1,000 (approximately $147).
Segment Information Reclassification
Historically, the Company operated in five segments: concentrated apple juice and apple aroma, concentrated kiwifruit juice and kiwifruit puree, concentrated pear juice, fruit juice beverages, and others.
As the Company classified the juice related operation into discontinued operation in the beginning of year 2019, and in accordance with the Company’s new business strategy, the Company classified business segment into CCM Shopping Mall Membership, sales of goods and others.
Use of Estimates
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and this requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure at contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The significant areas requiring the use of management estimates include the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable, estimated useful life and residual value of property, plant and equipment, impairment of long-lived assets, provision for staff benefit, valuation of change in fair value of warrant liability, recognition and measurement of deferred income taxes and valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. Although these estimates are based on management’s knowledge of current events and actions management may undertake in the future, actual results may ultimately differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
On January 1, 2009, the Company adopted FASB Accounting Standard Codification Topic on Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC 820”), which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in GAAP, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. ASC 820 does not require any new fair value measurements, but provides guidance on how to measure fair value by providing a fair value hierarchy used to classify the source of the information. In February 2008, FASB deferred the effective date of ASC 820 by one year for certain non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except those that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). The Company adopted the provisions of ASC 820, except as it applies to those non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities for which the effective date has been delayed by one year.
ASC 820 establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy of valuation techniques based on observable and unobservable input, which may be used to measure fair value and include the following:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Input other than Level 1 that is observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other input that is observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Unobservable input that is supported by little or no market activity and that is significant to the fair value of the assets or liabilities. Classification within the hierarchy is determined based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, from January 1, 2018. The adoption had no impact on the Company’s retained earnings as of January 1, 2018 as well as the Company’s financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019. To achieve that core principle, we apply the five steps defined under Topic 606: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We assess its revenue arrangements against specific criteria in order to determine if it is acting as principal or agent. Revenue is recognized upon the transfer of control of promised goods or services to a customer. Historically, the Company has not had any returned products. Accordingly, no provision has been made for returnable goods. The Company is not required to rebate or credit a portion of the original fee if it subsequently reduces the price of its product and the distributor still has rights with respect to that product.
Foreign Currency and Other Comprehensive Income
The financial statements of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries are measured using the local currency as the functional currency; however, the reporting currency of the Company is the United States dollar (“USD”). Assets and liabilities of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries have been translated into USD using the exchange rate at the balance sheet date, while equity accounts are translated using historical exchange rate. The average exchange rate for the period has been used to translate revenues and expenses. Translation adjustments are reported separately and accumulated in a separate component of equity (cumulative translation adjustment).
Other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 represented foreign currency translation adjustments and were included in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
There is no guarantee the RMB amounts could have been, or could be, converted into USD at rates used in translation.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided on an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting of income taxes. Any tax paid by subsidiaries during the year is recorded. Current tax is based on the profit or loss from ordinary activities adjusted for items that are non-assessable or disallowable for income tax purpose and is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted at the balance sheet date. Deferred income tax liabilities or assets are recorded to reflect the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the financial reporting amounts at each period end. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
ASC 740 provides guidance for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions, and it prescribes a threshold condition that a tax position must meet for any of the benefits of the uncertain tax position to be recognized in the financial statements. ASC 740 also provides accounting guidance on derecognizing, classification and disclosure of these uncertain tax positions.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with the FASB ASC 360-10, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment and purchased intangibles subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. It is reasonably possible that these assets could become impaired as a result of technological or other industrial changes. Determination of recoverability of assets to be held and used is by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to future net undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the assets.
If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13 (“ASU 2016-13”) “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses” (“ASC 326”): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” which requires the measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held at amortized cost. ASU 2016-13 replaces the existing incurred loss impairment model with an expected loss model which requires the use of forward-looking information to calculate credit loss estimates. It also eliminates the concept of other-than-temporary impairment and requires credit losses related to available-for-sale debt securities to be recorded through an allowance for credit losses rather than as a reduction in the amortized cost basis of the securities. These changes will result in earlier recognition of credit losses. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10 “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842)” (“ASC 2019-10”), which defers the effective date of ASU 2016-13 to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years, for public entities which meet the definition of a smaller reporting company. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-13 effective January 1, 2023. Management is currently evaluating the effect of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on the consolidated financial statements. The effect will largely depend on the composition and credit quality of our investment portfolio and the economic conditions at the time of adoption.
In December 2019, the FASB issued the amendments in ASU 2019-12 ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes: Simplifying Accounting for Income Taxes, which removes specific exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 in Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The amendments eliminate the need for an organization to analyze whether the specific exceptions apply in a given period, improve financial statement preparers’ application of income tax-related guidance and simplify GAAP. The amendments are effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years. While early application is permitted, including adoption in an interim period, the Company has not elected to early adopt. The effectiveness of this update is not expected to have a significant effect on the Company’s consolidated financial position or results of operations.
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company.
Comparison of Operation Results of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
The following table presents our consolidated revenues for our main products for the fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively, (in thousands):
In 2019, the Company started to sell products on its on-line shopping platform, Chain Cloud Mall (CCM) based on blockchain technology to its members or non- members.
In fiscal year 2020, the Company’s main business was on-line shopping platform, Chain Cloud Mall (CCM) based on blockchain technology to its members or non- members.
In order to increase the repeat sales from customers and drive sales growth, the Company also subscribes members on its sales platform. Currently, there are three kinds of membership programs, Diamond Elite, Gold Elite and Silver Elite, with different membership fees and benefits. The higher membership fee provides more benefits to the members. Members can earn points on the Company’s sales platform and enjoy discounts on their purchases. Members can refer others to become members and are rewarded for doing so. Members can also promote products on various social platforms and are rewarded if those users purchase the Company’s products. Membership revenue is recognized when member registers and makes his/her first order on our sales platform. Due to the Covid-19 and change of marketing and business development model due to the restriction of large gathering for meetings and conference which primarily used by us before the pandemic, the Company had less new member subscription in 2020.
Revenue decreased from $0.94 million in 2019 to $0.37 million in 2020, decrease of $0.57 million or 61%. The decrease in revenue was mainly due to a decrease in sales through the e-commerce business.
The revenue generated by the CCM Shopping Mall Membership segment in fiscal year 2020 was $0.34 million, which accounted for 91% of total revenue. Decrease in revenue is due to less new member subscription.
The revenue generated by the sale of goods segment in fiscal year 2020 was $0.009 million, which accounted for 2% of total revenue, due to the business is mainly fruit juice related goods and ceased to operate in 2020.
As a percentage of total revenue, the revenue generated by others was 6% of total revenue in fiscal years 2020, and the revenue was mainly services charge for companies to use the CCM platform.
Gross Margin
(in thousands)
Overall gross margin as a percentage of revenue was 90% in fiscal year 2020, an increase of 42% compared to gross margin 49% in fiscal year 2019. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of revenue was mainly attributable to the CCM Shopping Mall Membership segments, which has high gross margin. In terms of dollar value, the overall gross profit for fiscal year 2020 was $0.36 million, a decrease of $0.13 million, compared to gross profit of $0.49 million for fiscal year 2019. The decrease in the dollar value of overall gross profit was mainly due to the change of marketing and business development model caused by Covid-19 pandemic resulting less new member subscription.
The gross margin as a percentage of revenue in the CCM Shopping Mall Membership segment was 99.0% in fiscal year 2020, this is mainly due to there is very minimal costs related to the revenue.
The gross margin as a percentage of revenue in the sale of goods segment was 22.0% in the fiscal year 2020. There is no significant changes in margin as the business is mostly fruit juice related goods and it ceased to operate in 2020.
The gross margin as a percentage of revenue in the other revenue segment was (4) % in fiscal year 2020, as compared to gross margin of 7% in fiscal year 2019. The decrease in gross margin percentage was due to increase in labor costs.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents consolidated operating expenses and operating expenses as a percentage of revenue for 2020 and 2019, respectively, (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses remained stable as there is no significant changes to the overhead structure, changes in general expenses are mainly due to reclassification of discontinued operation related costs.
Selling expenses decreased by $0.40 million to $0.04 million in 2020 as compared to $0.44 million in 2019, mainly due to a decrease in selling expenses from our E-commerce business.
The Company recorded $1.76 million of impairment loss in fiscal year 2020 related with the equity investment in INU that Digipay Finteh Limited invested in June 2018. According to the understanding that INU is currently in a state of cessation of operation, the investment has been unable to bring economic benefits to company. The Company decided to fully impair the investment in fiscal year 2020. In addition, the intangible assets include patent rights, software and e-platform, of which $1.86 million for the shared platform system of Chain Cloud Mall that completed its final development and construction stage and became intangible assets in 2020, and it was fully impaired of the assets in fiscal year 2020.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations increased by $7.44 million to $15.02 million for 2020 from $7.58 million for 2019, mainly due to an increase in stock compensation expenses and reclassification of operating expenses to discontinued operation.
Noncontrolling Interests
As of December 31, 2020, Shaanxi Chunlv Ecological Agriculture Co., Ltd. (“Shaanxi Chunlv”) holds 20.0% interest in CCM logistics, Nature Worldwide Resources Ltd. holds 40% interest in DCON DigiPay Limited (“DCON Digipay”).
Loss from Continuing Operations
Loss from continuing operations increased by $42.53 million from $10.95 million in 2019 to $53.48 million in 2020 as the result a decrease in revenue and an increase in bad debt and Impairment Loss.
Loss per Share
Basic and diluted loss per share from continuing operations were $1.41 and $1.41 in fiscal 2020, as compared to $0.35 and $0.35 in fiscal 2019, respectively. Basic and diluted income per share attributable to discontinued operations was $3.75 and $3.32 for fiscal year 2019 as compared to $0.45 and $0.45 for fiscal year 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $9.79 million, an increase of $9.6 million, from $0.19 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash was mainly due to financing from the issuance of shares of common stock and issuance of debt instruments.
Our working capital has historically been generated from our operating cash flows, advances from our customers and loans from bank facilities. Our working capital was positive $10.34 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $113.21 million from negative $102.87 million as of December 31, 2019, mainly due to a decrease in current liabilities.
In 2020, net cash generated in our operating activities was $3.98 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $26.32.84 million in 2019. The decrease in net cash used in our operating activities was primarily due to a decrease in gain on sale of discontinued operations in the fiscal year 2020 as compared to the fiscal year 2019. In additions, as the fruit juice business is causing cash loss, the business was transferred in operation in beginning of 2020 also reflected positive in the operating cash.
In 2020, net cash used in our investing activities was $7.36 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $0.05 million in 2019. The increase in net cash used in our investing activities was primarily due to an increase in short-term loan investment and intangible assets in the fiscal year 2020 as compared to the fiscal year 2019.
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $16.71 million as compared to cash used in financing activities $0.63 million in 2019. In 2020, we issued shares of common stock, promissory note and impairment of long-term investment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.