Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, the accompanying notes, and other financial information included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed under “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
Fathom is a cloud-based, technology-driven platform-as-a-service company operating in the real estate industry. Our primary operation, Fathom Realty (as defined below), operates as a real estate brokerage company, working with real estate agents to help individuals purchase and sell residential and commercial properties, primarily in the South, Atlantic, Southwest, and Western parts of the United States, with the intention of expanding into all states.
Fathom Realty Holdings, LLC, a Texas limited liability company (“Fathom Realty”), is a wholly owned subsidiary of Fathom Holdings Inc. that was formed on April 11, 2011 and is headquartered in Cary, North Carolina. Fathom Realty owns 100% of 28 subsidiaries, each an LLC representing the state in which the entity operates (e.g. Fathom Realty NJ, LLC).
On August 4, 2020, the Company completed an IPO of its common stock, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 3,430,000 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share, generating net proceeds of $31.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs.
On November 24, 2020, the Company completed its acquisition of Verus. Verus partners with real estate brokerage firms and lender institutions to offer title and settlement solutions, as well as insurance premium services, associated with real estate transactions. Verus operates as a technology enabled title agency offering a client-focused approach to real estate transactions in the South, Atlantic and Northeast parts of the United States. The acquisition of Verus complements the Company's suite of services focused on title and settlement solutions, as well as insurance premium services, associated with real estate transaction in the residential real estate market, gives agents another distinct competitive advantage, and further positions the Company to continue on our growth trajectory.
COVID-19
Our business is dependent on the economic conditions within the markets in which we operate. Changes in these conditions can have a positive or negative impact on our business. The economic conditions influencing the housing markets primarily include economic growth, interest rates, unemployment, consumer confidence, mortgage availability, and supply and demand.
In periods of economic growth, demand typically increases resulting in increasing home sales transactions and home sales prices. Similarly, a decline in economic growth, increasing interest rates and declining consumer confidence generally decreases demand. Additionally, regulations imposed by local, state, and federal government agencies, and geopolitical instability, can also negatively impact the housing markets in which we operate.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was identified in Wuhan, China. This new coronavirus has caused a global health emergency and was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020 (“COVID-19’’ or the “Pandemic”). In an effort to contain and slow the spread of COVID-19, governments implemented various measures, such as, ordering non-essential businesses to close, issuing travel advisories, cancelling large scale public events, ordering residents to shelter in place, and requiring the public to practice social distancing. In most states, real estate has been considered an essential business.
We are continually monitoring the affects COVID-19 could have on our business. We believe that in the states and regions in which we operate the social and economic impacts, which include, but are not limited to, the following, could have a significant bearing on our future financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations: (i) restrictions on in-person activities associated with residential real estate transactions arising from shelter-in-place, or similar isolation orders; (ii) decline in consumer demand for in-person interactions and physical home tours; and (iii) deteriorating economic conditions, such as increased unemployment rates, recessionary conditions, lower yields on individual investment portfolios, and more stringent mortgage financing conditions. In response to COVID-19, the Company implemented cost-saving measures early on to include the elimination of non-essential travel and in-person training activities, and deferral of certain planned expenditures.
COVID-19 has materially and adversely affected businesses worldwide. While the Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing and lowering of interest rates could offset some of the negative impacts on housing demand, it is too early to determine whether the lower interest rates can overcome the current economic concerns and rising uncertainty. According to the NAR housing statistics, existing home sales saw a seasonal decrease of 3.9% in December 2020 from the previous month, but actually increased 22.2% in December 2020 compared to the previous year. We believe these trends were driven by declining mortgage rates, a decline in inventory, and an increasing demand for remote workspace, among other factors.
Despite the ongoing Pandemic, the Company’s transactions and base of agents increased during 2020. However, while the Company believes it is well positioned in times of economic uncertainty, it is not able to estimate the effects of COVID-19 on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for the year ending December 31, 2020 and beyond. If the Pandemic continues, it might have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations.
Agents
Due to our low-overhead business model, which leverages our proprietary technology, we can offer our agents the ability to keep significantly more of their commissions compared to traditional real estate brokerage firms. We believe we offer our agents some of the best technology, training, and support available in the industry. We believe our business model and our focus on treating our agents well will attract more agents and higher-producing agents.
We had the following number of agents as of:
Reportable Segments
Historically, management has not made operating decisions nor assessed performance based on geographic locations. Rather, the chief operating decision maker makes operating decisions and assesses performance based on the services of identified operating segments. While management does consider real estate and brokerage services and affiliated services (e.g. title insurance) to be identified operating segments, the profits and losses and assets of the affiliated services segment are not material. The Company aggregates the identified operating segments for reporting purposes.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company’s revenue substantially consists of commissions generated from real estate brokerage services.
We recognize commission-based revenue on the closing of a transaction, less the amount of any closing-cost reductions. Furthermore, in connection with our acquisition of Verus, we also recognized property settlement and title insurance revenue upon the closing of the transaction. Revenue is affected by the number of real estate transactions we close, the mix of transactions, home sale prices, and commission rates.
Agent Equity Ownership
Effective January 1, 2019, agents can receive stock grants, which vest in three years based on continued affiliation with the Company, in two ways: 1) when the agent closes a sale of a property for the Company; and 2) when the agent refers another agent to join the Company. These stock grants are granted quarterly.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of agent commissions, less fees paid to us by our agents, order fulfillment, and title searches. We expect cost of revenue to continue to rise in proportion to the expected increase in revenue.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, share-based compensation, and fees for professional services. Professional services principally consist of external legal, audit, and tax services. In the short term, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars due to the anticipated growth of our business and to meet the increased compliance requirements associated with our transition to, and operation as, a public company. However, in the long term, we anticipate general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time, if and as we are able to increase revenue.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of expenses for online and traditional advertising, as well as costs for marketing and promotional materials. Advertising costs are expensed as they are incurred. We expect marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we use the proceeds of our IPO to expand advertising programs and we anticipate marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time, if and as we are able to increase revenue.
Income Taxes
We have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of $9.2 million and $6.2 million and state net operating loss carryforwards of $4.5 million and $3.0 million, respectively. Losses will begin to expire, if not utilized, in 2032. Utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation according to Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended, and similar state law provisions.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue increased by approximately $65.6 million or 59%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to an increase in transaction volume from approximately 17,800 transactions for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately 25,700 transactions for the year ended December 31, 2020, and revenue generated from property settlement and title insurance. Our transaction volume increased primarily due to the growth in the number of agents contracted with us. Furthermore, revenues from Verus totaled approximately $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 post-acquisition closing.
Cost of Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of revenue increased by approximately $61.1 million, or 58%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue primarily includes costs related to agent commissions, net of fees paid to us by our agents. These costs are generally correlated with recognized revenues. As such, the increase in cost of revenue compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase in agent commissions paid due to higher transaction volume and rising home prices.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.1 million, or 12%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to our growth and becoming a public company, including a $0.9 million increase in payroll salaries and benefits, a $0.5 million increase in professional fees, a $0.5 million increase in insurance expenses, a $0.4 million increase in recruiting and training expenses, a $0.2 million increase in technology expenses, a $0.1 million increase in office expenses, and a $0.1 million increase in Board expenses, offset by a $0.9 million decrease in share-based compensation expense, and a $0.7 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, marketing expenses increased by approximately $0.6 million, or 185%, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in direct advertising costs, which we expanded using proceeds from our IPO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
On August 4, 2020 the Company completed its IPO, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 3,430,000 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share, generating net proceeds of $31.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs.
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the IPO and, historically, private sales of our common stock, as well as proceeds from loans and operations. As of December 31, 2020, our available cash totaled $28.6 million, which represented an increase of $28.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had net working capital of $27.9 million, which represented an increase of $29.1 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. We anticipate that our existing balances of cash and cash equivalents and future expected cash flows generated from our operations will be sufficient to satisfy our operating requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Our future capital requirements depend on many factors, including potential acquisitions, our level of investment in technology, and our rate of growth into new markets. Our capital requirements might also be affected by factors which we cannot control such as the residential real estate market, interest rates, and other monetary and fiscal policy changes to the manner in which we currently operate. Additionally, as the impact of COVID-19 on the economy and operations evolves, we will continuously assess our liquidity needs. In the event of a sustained market deterioration, we may need or seek advantageously to obtain additional funding through equity or debt financing, which might not be available on favorable terms or at all and could hinder our business and dilute our existing shareholders.
Cash Flows
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a net loss of $1.3 million, non-cash charges of $1.0 million, including $0.7 million of share-based compensation expense, $0.1 million of bad debt, and $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization. Changes in assets and liabilities were primarily driven by a $1.5 million increase in accounts payable due primarily to the increase in agent transaction volume, a $0.6 million increase in escrow liabilities, partially offset by a $1.3 million increase in accounts receivable, a $0.8 million increase in prepaid and other current assets, a $0.7 million decrease in accrued liabilities, and a $0.1 million increase in agent annual fees receivable due primarily to an increase in the number of agents.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a net loss of $4.1 million, offset by non-cash charges of $1.9 million, including $1.6 million of share-based compensation expense, $0.2 million of bad debt expense, and $0.1 million of depreciation and amortization. Changes in assets and liabilities were primarily driven by a $1.2 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $0.3 million decrease in prepaid and other current assets, a $0.1 million increase in accounts payable, partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in accrued liabilities, and a $0.2 million increase in annual fees due from agents.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $0.5 million for purchases of capitalized software as well as computers and equipment, $0.3 million for the purchase of Verus, net of cash acquired, and $0.2 million for the issuance of a loan to Naberly. See Note 7-Loan Receivable and Note 18-Subsequent Events
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $0.4 million for purchases of capitalized software as well as computers and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $34.3 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the IPO, $0.5 million in proceeds from notes payable, and $0.1 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock, which was offset by $3.2 million in payments of offering costs in connection with issuance of common stock in connection with IPO, $0.5 million payments on the note payable, purchase of treasury stock, and our principal payments on an outstanding loan.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $1.1 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock and principal payments to the Company on an outstanding loan.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), we use Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, to understand and evaluate our core operating performance. This non-GAAP financial measure, which may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies, is presented to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our financial performance and should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
We define the non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), excluding other expense, income tax benefit, depreciation and amortization, and share-based compensation expense.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information about our financial performance, enhances the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allows for greater transparency with respect to a key metric used by our management for financial and operational decision-making. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that otherwise could be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude in Adjusted EBITDA. In particular, we believe the exclusion of share-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards and stock options provides a useful supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our operations and provides better transparency into our results of operations.
We are presenting the non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EBITDA to assist investors in seeing our financial performance through the eyes of management, and because we believe this measure provides an additional tool for investors to use in comparing our core financial performance over multiple periods with other companies in our industry.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA compared to net income (loss), the closest comparable GAAP measure. Some of these limitations are that:
· Adjusted EBITDA excludes share-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards and stock options, which have been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, significant recurring expenses in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy; and
· Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and capitalized software costs, however, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future.
The following tables present a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue, and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
We apply the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”), and all related appropriate guidance. We recognize revenue under the core principle to depict the transfer of control to our customers in an amount reflecting the consideration to which we expect to be entitled. In order to achieve that core principle, we apply the following five step approach: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
Our revenue consists of commissions charged to individual customers (i.e. the seller or buyer of a residential property) on each real estate transaction completed, net of any closing-cost reductions. We are contractually obligated to provide for the fulfillment of transfers of real estate between buyers and sellers. We provide these services ourselves and control the services of our agents necessary to legally transfer the real estate. As such, we are defined as the principal. As principal, we satisfy our obligation upon the closing of a real estate transaction. As principal, and upon satisfaction of our obligation, we recognize revenue in the gross amount of consideration we expect we are entitled to receive. We calculate the transaction price by applying the Company’s portion of the agreed upon commission rate to the property’s selling price. We may provide services to the buyer, seller, or both parties to a transaction. When we provide services to the seller in a transaction, we recognize revenue for our portion of the commission, which is calculated as the sales price multiplied by the commission rate less the commission separately distributed to the buyer’s agent, or the “sell” side portion of the commission. When we provide services to the buyer in a transaction, we recognize revenue in an amount equal to the sales price for the property multiplied by the commission rate for the “buy” side of the transaction. In instances in which we represent both the buyer and the seller in a transaction, we recognize the full commission on the transaction. Commissions revenue contains a single performance obligation that is satisfied upon the closing of a real estate transaction, at which point the entire transaction price is earned. We are not entitled to any commission until the performance obligation is satisfied and are not owed any commission for unsuccessful transactions, even if services have been provided.
The Company's revenue also consists of fees charged for title, property settlement and title insurance services provided in association with property acquisitions. We provide the title and property settlement services ourselves and control the services before they are transferred to our customers since we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise and also have full discretion in establishing the price for the services. As such, we are defined as the principal. As principal, we satisfy our obligation upon the closing of a real estate transaction. Upon satisfaction of our obligation, we recognize revenue in the gross amount of consideration we are entitled to receive. The transaction price for title and property settlement services is determined by the fixed fees we charge for our services. We provide our services to the buyers and sellers involved in the transaction. Title and property settlement revenue contains a single performance obligation that is satisfied upon the closing of a real estate transaction, at which point the entire transaction price is earned. The Company is not entitled to any title and property settlement revenue until the performance obligation is satisfied and is not owed any consideration for unsuccessful transactions, even if services have been provided.
For title insurance services, we work in conjunction with insurance underwriters to perform these services, obtain the insurance policy premiums associated with title insurance on behalf of customers and remit the policy premium to the insurance underwriters. Since the insurance underwriter is ultimately providing the insurance policy to the borrower, we are not responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified services. Additionally, we do not have discretion in dictating the price for the insurance policy, which is set by each jurisdiction. Therefore, we do not control the specified service provided by the insurance underwriter. As such, in these circumstances, we act as an agent. As the agent, we satisfy our obligation upon the closing of a real estate transaction. Upon satisfaction of our obligation, we recognize revenue in the net amount of consideration we are entitled to receive, which is our fee for brokering the insurance policy less any consideration paid to the insurance underwriters. The transaction price for title insurance services is fixed, based on statutory rates depending on the jurisdiction. We negotiate with insurance underwriters the percentage they receive, and the rest is recognized as revenue. Title insurance revenue contains a single performance obligation that is satisfied upon the closing of a real estate transaction, at which point the entire transaction price is earned. The Company is not entitled to any title insurance revenue until the performance obligation is satisfied and is not owed any consideration for unsuccessful transactions, even if services have been provided.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for its business combinations under the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 805-10, Business Combinations ("ASC 805-10"), which requires that the purchase method of accounting be used for all business combinations. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. For transactions that are business combinations, the Company evaluates the existence of goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over the fair value of the tangible net assets and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. ASC 805-10 also specifies criteria that intangible assets acquired in a business combination must meet to be recognized and reported apart from goodwill. Acquisition-related expenses are recognized separately from the business combinations and are expensed as incurred.
The estimated fair value of net assets acquired, including the allocation of the fair value to identifiable assets and liabilities, was determined using established valuation techniques. A fair value measurement is determined as the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the context of purchase accounting, the determination of fair value often involves significant judgments and estimates by management, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The estimated fair values reflected in the purchase accounting rely on management’s judgment and the expertise of a third-party valuation firm engaged to assist in concluding on the fair value measurements. The estimated fair value of identifiable intangible assets, consisting of trade names acquired, was determined using relief from royalty method.
The most significant assumptions under the relief from royalty method used to value trade names include estimated remaining useful life, expected revenue, royalty rate, tax rate, discount rate and tax amortization benefit. Management has developed these assumptions on the basis of historical knowledge of the business and projected financial information of the Company. These assumptions may vary based on future events, perceptions of different market participants and other factors outside the control of Management, and such variations may be significant to estimated values.
Goodwill
Goodwill, which represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired, is carried at cost. Goodwill is not amortized; rather, it is subject to a periodic assessment for impairment by applying a fair value-based test. The Company is organized in one reporting unit and evaluates the goodwill for the Company as a whole. Goodwill is assessed for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Under the authoritative guidance issued by the FASB, the Company has the option to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the goodwill impairment test is performed. The goodwill impairment test requires the Company to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit and to compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount. If the fair value exceeds the carrying amount, then no impairment is recognized. If the carrying amount recorded exceeds the fair value calculated, then an impairment charge is recognized for the difference. The judgments made in determining the projected cash flows used to estimate the fair value can materially impact the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. There was no impairment of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Share-based Compensation
Share-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award.
Valuation of Common Stock
In order to determine the fair value of our common stock for stock option awards granted prior to our IPO, we considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our common stock, our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations; the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, or sale, given prevailing market conditions; the lack of marketability of our common stock; the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions. The fair value of our other restricted stock awards has been based on sales of the Company’s common stock to third parties. Following the IPO, it is not necessary to estimate the fair value of our common stock, as our shares are traded in the public market.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the combined financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities at the applicable enacted tax rates. We establish a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if it is probable that these items will expire before either we are able to realize their benefit or that future deductibility is uncertain.
We believe that it is currently more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized and as such, we have recorded a full valuation allowance for these assets. We evaluate the likelihood of the ability to realize deferred tax assets in future periods on a quarterly basis, and when appropriate evidence indicates we will release our valuation allowance accordingly. The determination to provide a valuation allowance is dependent upon the assessment of whether it is more likely than not that sufficient taxable income will be generated to utilize the deferred tax assets. Based on the weight of the available evidence, which includes our historical operating losses, lack of taxable income, and accumulated deficit, we provided a full valuation allowance against our tax assets resulting from the tax losses and credits carried forward.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information on recent accounting standards, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
JOBS Act Transition Period
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
Subject to certain conditions, as an emerging growth company, we may rely on certain other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act. Certain of these exemptions are, including without limitation, from the requirements of (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of (1) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the effectiveness of this registration statement, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.