Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("Management’s Discussion") relates to Fulton Financial Corporation (the "Corporation"), a financial holding company registered under the Bank Holding Company Act and incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1982, and its wholly owned subsidiaries. Management’s Discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and other financial information presented in this report.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The Corporation has made, and may continue to make, certain forward-looking statements with respect to its financial condition, results of operations and business. Do not unduly rely on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of words such as "may," "should," "will," "could," "estimates," "predicts," "potential," "continue," "anticipates," "believes," "plans," "expects," "future," "intends," "projects," the negative of these terms and other comparable terminology. These forward-looking statements may include projections of, or guidance on, the Corporation's future financial performance, expected levels of future expenses, including future credit losses, anticipated growth strategies, descriptions of new business initiatives and anticipated trends in the Corporation's business or financial results.
Forward-looking statements are neither historical facts, nor assurance of future performance. Instead, they are based on current beliefs, expectations and assumptions regarding the future of the Corporation's business, future plans and strategies, projections, anticipated events and trends, the economy and other future conditions. Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict and many of which are outside of the Corporation's control, and actual results and financial condition may differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements. Therefore, you should not unduly rely on any of these forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement is based only on information currently available and speaks only as of the date when made. The Corporation undertakes no obligation, other than as required by law, to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Many factors could affect future financial results including, without limitation:
•the impact of adverse conditions in the economy and financial markets on the performance of the Corporation’s loan portfolio and demand for the Corporation’s products and services;
•the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, actions taken by governmental authorities in response to the pandemic, the Corporation’s participation in the PPP and other COVID-19 relief programs, and the direct and indirect impacts of the pandemic on the Corporation, its customers and third parties;
•the determination of the ACL, which depends significantly upon assumptions and judgments with respect to a variety of factors, including the performance of the loan portfolio, the weighted-average remaining lives of different classifications of loans within the loan portfolio and current and forecasted economic conditions, among other factors;
•increases in non-performing assets, which may require the Corporation to increase the allowance for credit losses, charge off loans and incur elevated collection and carrying costs related to such non-performing assets;
•investment securities gains and losses, including other-than-temporary declines in the value of securities which may result in charges to earnings;
•the effects of market interest rates, and the relative balances of interest rate-sensitive assets to interest rate-sensitive liabilities, on net interest margin and net interest income;
•the planned phasing out of LIBOR as a benchmark reference rate;
•the effects of changes in interest rates on demand for the Corporation’s products and services;
•the effects of changes in interest rates or disruptions in liquidity markets on the Corporation’s sources of funding;
•the effects of the extensive level of regulation and supervision to which the Corporation and Fulton Bank, N.A. are subject;
•the effects of the significant amounts of time and expense associated with regulatory compliance and risk management;
•the potential for negative consequences resulting from regulatory violations, investigations and examinations, or failure to comply with the BSA, the Patriot Act and related AML requirements, including potential supervisory actions, the assessment of fines and penalties, the imposition of sanctions, the need to undertake remedial actions and possible damage to the Corporation’s reputation;
•the continuing impact of the Dodd-Frank Act on the Corporation’s business and results of operations;
•the effects of, and uncertainty surrounding, new legislation, changes in regulation and government policy, which could result in significant changes in banking and financial services regulation;
•the effects of actions by the federal government, including those of the Federal Reserve Board and other government agencies, that impact money supply and market interest rates;
•the effects of changes in U.S. federal, state or local tax laws;
•the effects of negative publicity on the Corporation’s reputation;
•the effects of adverse outcomes in litigation and governmental or administrative proceedings;
•the potential to incur losses in connection with repurchase and indemnification payments related to sold loans;
•the Corporation’s ability to achieve its growth plans;
•completed and potential acquisitions may affect costs and the Corporation may not be able to successfully integrate the acquired business or realize the anticipated benefits from such acquisitions;
•the potential effects of climate change on the Corporation’s business and results of operations;
•the Corporation’s ability to implement from time to time measures intended to manage growth in non-interest expenses and improve the efficiency of its operations and realize the intended effects of those initiatives;
•the effects of competition on deposit rates and growth, loan rates and growth and net interest margin;
•the Corporation’s ability to manage the level of non-interest expenses, including salaries and employee benefits expenses, operating risk losses and goodwill impairment;
•the effects of changes in accounting policies, standards, and interpretations on the Corporation’s reporting of its financial condition and results of operations, including the Corporation’s adoption of ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (CECL);
•the impact of operational risks, including the risk of human error, inadequate or failed internal processes and systems, computer and telecommunications systems failures, faulty or incomplete data and an inadequate risk management framework;
•the impact of failures of third parties upon which the Corporation relies to perform in accordance with contractual arrangements;
•the failure or circumvention of the Corporation’s system of internal controls;
•the loss of, or failure to safeguard, confidential or proprietary information;
•the Corporation’s failure to identify and to address cyber-security risks, including data breaches and cyber-attacks;
•the Corporation’s ability to keep pace with technological changes;
•the Corporation’s ability to attract and retain talented personnel;
•capital and liquidity strategies, including the Corporation’s ability to comply with applicable capital and liquidity requirements, and the Corporation’s ability to generate capital internally or raise capital on favorable terms;
•the Corporation’s reliance on its subsidiaries for substantially all of its revenues and its ability to pay dividends or other distributions; and
•the effects of any downgrade in the Corporation’s or Fulton Bank’s credit ratings on their borrowing costs or access to capital markets.
OVERVIEW
The Corporation is a financial holding company, which, through its wholly owned banking subsidiary, provides a full range of retail and commercial financial services in Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey and Virginia. In 2018, the Corporation had three banking subsidiaries. During 2019, the Corporation consolidated two of its wholly owned banking subsidiaries into Fulton Bank ("Charter Consolidation").
The Corporation generates the majority of its revenue through net interest income, or the difference between interest earned on loans and investments and interest paid on deposits and borrowings. Growth in net interest income is dependent upon balance sheet growth and maintaining or increasing the net interest margin, which is FTE net interest income as a percentage of average interest-earning assets. The Corporation also generates revenue through fees earned on the various services and products offered to its customers and through gains on sales of assets, such as loans, investments and properties. Offsetting these revenue sources are provisions for credit losses on loans and OBS credit risks, non-interest expenses and income taxes.
The following table presents a summary of the Corporation’s earnings and selected performance ratios:
(1)Ratio represents a financial measure derived by methods other than GAAP. See reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable GAAP measure under the heading, "Supplemental Reporting of Non-GAAP Based Financial Measures," in Item 6. Selected Financial Data.
(2)Presented on an FTE basis, using a 21% Federal tax rate and statutory interest expense disallowances. See also the "Net Interest Income" section of Management’s Discussion.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused substantial disruptions in economic and social activity, both globally and in the United States. The spread of COVID-19, and related governmental actions to mandate or encourage temporary closures of businesses, quarantines, social distancing, "stay at home" orders and other restrictions on in-person operations and activities, have caused severe disruptions in the U.S. economy, which has, in turn, disrupted, and will likely continue to disrupt, the business, activities, and operations of the Corporation’s customers, as well as the Corporation’s own business and operations. The resulting impacts of the pandemic on consumers, including high levels of unemployment, have continued to cause changes in consumer and business spending, borrowing needs and saving habits, which have and will likely continue to affect the demand for loans and other products and services the Corporation offers, as well as the creditworthiness of its borrowers. The significant decrease in commercial activity and disruptions in supply chains associated with the pandemic, both nationally and in the Corporation’s markets, may cause customers, vendors and counterparties to be unable to meet existing payment or other obligations to the Corporation.
While portions of the national economy have reopened, there is still significant uncertainty concerning the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as their impact on the U.S. economy. The extent to which the pandemic impacts the Corporation’s results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the continuing severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, whether there are additional outbreaks of COVID-19, and the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact. Moreover, although multiple COVID-19 vaccines have received regulatory approval and are currently being distributed to certain high-risk population groups, it is too early to know how quickly these vaccines can be distributed to the general population and how effective they will be in mitigating the adverse social and economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Corporation’s business is dependent upon the willingness and ability of its customers to conduct banking and other financial transactions. In an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, the Corporation has adjusted service models at certain of its financial center locations, including limiting some locations to drive-up and ATM services only, offering lobby access by
appointment only, and encouraging the Corporation’s customers to use electronic banking platforms. Approximately 25% of the Corporation’s locations are expected to provide lobby access by appointment only on a long-term basis.
A significant portion of the Corporation’s employees have transitioned to working remotely as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which, in addition to requiring added support from the Corporation’s information technology infrastructure, increases cybersecurity risks. The continued spread of COVID-19 (or an outbreak of a similar highly contagious disease) could also negatively impact the business and operations of third-party service providers who perform critical services for the Corporation’s business.
COVID-19 has significantly affected the financial markets and has resulted in a number of responses by the U.S. government, including reductions in interest rates by the FOMC. These reductions in interest rates, especially if prolonged, could adversely affect the Corporation’s net interest income and margins and the Corporation’s profitability.
The CARES Act was enacted in March 2020 and, among other provisions, authorized the SBA to guarantee loans under the PPP for small businesses who meet the necessary eligibility requirements in order to keep their workers on the payroll. During 2020, the Corporation funded approximately $2.0 billion loans under the PPP.
Stimulus payments to eligible consumers, enhanced unemployment benefits provided by the federal government and traditional, state-provided unemployment compensation, as well as other forms of relief provided to consumers and businesses, have helped to limit some of the adverse impacts of COVID-19. The reduction, expiration or discontinuation of these measures may adversely impact the recovery of economic activity and the ability of borrowers to meet their payment and other obligations to the Corporation, either of which could require the Corporation to increase the ACL through provisions for credit losses.
The impact of COVID-19 on the Corporation’s financial results is evolving and uncertain. The Corporation has limited exposure to some of the industries that were initially most significantly impacted by COVID-19, such as hospitality and food services, energy and entertainment, and most of these loans are secured by real estate and other forms of collateral. While many areas of the economy began to exhibit signs of recovery during the second half of 2020, the lingering effects of the pandemic, particularly in certain sectors of the economy, or a resurgence in COVID-19 infections that prompts the continuation or imposition of governmental restrictions on activities, may result in decreased demand for the Corporation’s loan products. In addition, the decline in economic activity occurring due to COVID-19 and the actions by the FOMC with respect to interest rates are likely to affect the Corporation’s net interest income, non-interest income and credit-related losses for an uncertain period of time. As a result, the Corporation took steps to maintain liquidity and conserve capital during this period of uncertainty. The Corporation has been holding excess cash reserves since the end of the first quarter of 2020, has additional liquidity available through borrowing arrangements and other sources, and plans to maintain its excess cash and these arrangements until there is more clarity surrounding economic conditions. See additional discussion in "Results of Operations" and "Financial Condition" of Management's Discussion.
Adoption of CECL
On January 1, 2020, the Corporation adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (ASC Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which replaced the incurred loss methodology, and is referred to as CECL. The measurement of expected credit losses under CECL is applicable to financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loans and HTM debt securities. It also applies to OBS credit exposures, such as loan commitments, standby letters of credit, financial guarantees, and other similar instruments, and net investments in leases recognized by a lessor in accordance with ASC Topic 842. Refer to "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information on the adoption of CECL.
The Corporation adopted CECL using the modified retrospective method for all financial assets measured at amortized cost, and OBS credit exposures. Results for 2020 are presented under CECL, while prior years' results are reported in accordance with the previously applicable incurred loss methodology. The Corporation recorded an increase of $58.3 million to the ACL on January 1, 2020, primarily as a result of the adoption of CECL. Retained earnings decreased $43.8 million and deferred tax assets increased by $12.4 million on January 1, 2020, representing the cumulative effect of adoption.
Financial Highlights
Following is a summary of the financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Net Income Per Share - Diluted net income per share decreased $0.27, or 20.0%, to $1.08 in 2020 compared to $1.35 in 2019. The decline in net income per share was due to a $50.4 million, or 22.3%, decrease in net income available to common shareholders partially offset by a decrease in weighted average diluted shares outstanding.
•Net Interest Income - The $19.2 million, or 3.0%, decrease in net interest income resulted from lower yields on interest-earning assets, partially offset by balance sheet growth and the impact of lower funding costs.
◦Net Interest Margin - For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net interest margin decreased to 2.86%, or 50 bp compared to 2019, driven by a 90 bp decrease in yields on interest-earning assets, partially offset by a 42 bp decrease in the cost of funds.
◦Loan Growth - Average Net Loans grew by $1.8 billion, or 11.2%, in comparison to 2019. The increase was driven largely by the issuance of PPP loans, included in commercial and industrial loans, and growth in the real estate commercial and residential mortgage portfolios.
◦Deposit Growth - Average deposits increased $2.6 billion, or 15.7%, in comparison to 2019. The increase was the result of growth in all deposit types except time deposits. At December 31, 2020, the loan-to-deposit ratio was 94.2%, as compared to 98.0% at December 31, 2019.
•Asset Quality - Non-performing assets increased $3.3 million, or 2.2%, as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Net charge-offs to average loans outstanding were 0.05% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 0.22% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The provisions for credit losses increased $44.1 million, to $76.9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $32.8 million for the same period in 2019. The higher provision in 2020 was largely driven by the adoption of CECL, which, as a result of an overall downturn in economic forecasts due to COVID-19, resulted in increases in the ACL due to higher expected future credit losses under CECL.
•Non-Interest Income - Non-interest income, excluding investment securities gains, increased $14.9 million, or 7.1%, in comparison to 2019. Increases were experienced in mortgage banking and wealth management, partially offset by decreases in commercial and consumer banking.
•Investment Securities Gains/Balance Sheet Restructurings - During both 2020 and 2019, the Corporation completed limited balance sheet restructurings which included sales of investment securities and corresponding prepayment of FHLB advances. As a result, investment securities gains totaled $3.1 million in 2020, as compared to $4.7 million in 2019, a $1.7 million, or 35.5%, decrease. In addition, included in non-interest expense were prepayment penalties on FHLB advances of $2.9 million and $4.3 million incurred during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
•Non-Interest Expense - Non-interest expense increased $11.7 million, or 2.1%, in comparison to 2019, driven largely by higher salaries and employee benefits expense, state taxes and data processing and software expenses. Partially offsetting these increases were reductions in other outside services and marketing.
In 2020, the Corporation completed a strategic operating expense review, which resulted in a number of cost-saving initiatives that are expected to result in annual expense savings of $25 million, which is not expected to be fully realized until mid-2021. The Corporation expects to reinvest a portion of the cost savings to accelerate digital transformation initiatives. In 2020, $16.2 million of expenses were recognized related to the cost-savings initiatives in the following categories: $5.6 million of severance expense (included in salaries and employee benefits) and $4.8 million of write-offs of fixed assets and $5.8 million of lease termination charges (both included in other expense).
•Income Taxes - Income tax expense for 2020 resulted in an ETR of 12.0%, as compared to 14.3% for 2019. The ETR was lower mainly due to lower income before income taxes. The ETR is generally lower than the federal statutory rate of 21% due to tax-exempt interest income earned on loans, investments in tax-free municipal securities and TCIs.
•Long-term Borrowings - In March 2020, the Corporation issued a total of $375.0 million of subordinated notes, with $200.0 million of subordinated notes due in 2030 having a fixed-to-floating rate of 3.25% and an effective rate of 3.35% and $175.0 million of subordinated notes due in 2035 having a fixed-to-floating rate of 3.75% and an effective rate of 3.85%.
•Preferred Stock - In October 2020, the Corporation issued 8.0 million depositary shares ("Depositary Shares"), each representing a 1/40th interest in a share of Fulton’s 5.125% Fixed Rate Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series A, with a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share (equivalent to $25.00 per Depositary Share), for an aggregate offering amount of $200.0 million. The Corporation received net proceeds from the offering of $192.9 million, after deducting issuance costs.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The following is a summary of those accounting policies that the Corporation considers to be most important to the presentation of its financial condition and results of operations, because they require management’s most difficult judgments as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. See additional information regarding these critical accounting policies in "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Allowance for Credit Losses - The Corporation adopted new accounting guidance for estimating credit losses, known as CECL, in the first quarter of 2020. In accordance with CECL, the ACL, which includes both the ACL - loans and the ACL - OBS credit exposures, is based on estimated losses over the remaining expected life of loans and OBS exposures. Management's determination of the appropriateness of the reserve is based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio, lending-related commitments, current and forecasted economic factors and other relevant factors.
In determining the ACL, the Corporation uses three inputs in to the model estimate. These inputs are PD, which estimates the likelihood that a borrower will be unable to meet its debt obligations; LGD, which estimates the share of an asset that is lost if a borrower defaults; and EAD which estimates the gross exposure under a facility upon default. The PD models were developed based on historical default data. Both internal and external variables are evaluated in the process. The main internal variables are risk rating or delinquency history and the external variables are economic variables obtained from third-party provided forecasts. Management applies risk rating transition matrices to pools of loans and lending-related commitments with similar risk characteristics to determine default probabilities, utilizes economic forecasts, applies modeled LGD results to associated EAD and incorporates modeled overlays and qualitative adjustments to estimate ACL. As such, the calculation of the ACL is inherently subjective and requires management to exercise significant judgment.
The ACL is estimated over a reasonable and supportable forecast period based on the projected performance of specific economic variables that statistically correlate with PD rates. As economic variables revert to long-term averages through the forecast process, externally developed long-term economic forecasts are used to establish the impacts of the economic scenario, reversion, and long-term averages in the development of losses over the expected life of the assets being modeled. The ACL reserve is highly sensitive to the economic forecasts used to develop the reserve. Due to the high level of uncertainty regarding significant assumptions, such as the ultimate impact of COVID-19 and effectiveness of the related governmental responses, since the beginning of 2020, the Corporation has evaluated a range of economic scenarios, including more and less severe economic deteriorations, with varying speeds of recovery.
The ACL includes qualitative adjustments, as appropriate, intended to capture the impact of uncertainties not reflected in the quantitative models. Qualitative adjustments include and consider changes in national, regional and local economic and business conditions, an assessment of the lending environment, including underwriting standards and other factors affecting credit quality. Qualitative adjustments have increased compared to those at the time of the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020 primarily as a result of uncertainties related to the economic impact of COVID-19, including consideration for the future performance of loans that received deferrals or forbearances as a result of COVID-19 and the impact COVID-19 had on certain industries where the quantitative models was not fully capturing the appropriate level of risk.
For further discussion of the methodology used in the determination of the ACL, refer to Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Goodwill - Goodwill recorded in connection with acquisitions is not amortized to expense, but is tested at least annually for impairment. A quantitative annual impairment test is not required if, based on a qualitative analysis, the Corporation determines that the existence of events and circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that goodwill is not impaired. The Corporation completes its annual goodwill impairment test in October of each year.
Goodwill valuation is inherently subjective, with a number of factors based on assumptions and management judgments. Among these are selection of comparable market transactions, discount rates and earnings capitalization rates. Changes in assumptions and results due to economic conditions, industry factors and reporting unit performance could result in different assessments of the fair values of reporting units and could result in impairment charges.
For additional details related to the annual goodwill impairment test, see "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Income Taxes - The provision for income taxes is based upon income before income taxes, adjusted for the effect of certain tax-exempt income, non-deductible expenses and credits. In addition, certain items of income and expense are reported in
different periods for financial reporting and tax return purposes. The tax effects of these temporary differences are recognized currently in the deferred income tax provision or benefit. DTAs or deferred tax liabilities are computed based on the difference between the financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using the applicable enacted marginal tax rate.
The Corporation must also evaluate the likelihood that DTAs will be recovered through future taxable income. If any such assets are determined to be more likely than not unrecoverable, a valuation allowance must be recognized. The assessment of the carrying value of DTAs is based on certain assumptions, changes in which could have a material impact on the Corporation’s consolidated financial statements.
On a periodic basis, the Corporation evaluates its income tax positions based on tax laws, regulations and financial reporting considerations, and records adjustments as appropriate. Recognition and measurement of tax positions is based upon management’s evaluations of current taxing authorities’ examinations of the Corporation’s tax returns, recent positions taken by the taxing authorities on similar transactions and the overall tax environment.
Fair Value Measurements - Assets and liabilities are categorized in a fair value hierarchy for the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure at fair value based on the following categories (from highest to lowest priority):
•Level 1 - Inputs that represent quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
•Level 2 - Inputs that represent quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, or quoted prices for identical instruments in non-active markets. Also included are valuation techniques whose inputs are derived principally from observable market data other than quoted prices, such as interest rates or other market-corroborated means.
•Level 3 - Inputs that are largely unobservable, as little or no market data exists for the instrument being valued.
The determination of fair value for assets categorized as Level 3 items involves significant subjectivity due to the use of unobservable inputs. In addition, determining when a market is no longer active and placing little or no reliance on distressed market prices requires the use of management’s judgment. The Corporation's Level 3 assets include AFS securities in the form of pooled trust preferred securities, certain single-issuer trust preferred securities issued by financial institutions and ARCs. The Corporation also categorizes net loans individually evaluated for impairment, OREO and MSRs as Level 3 assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis.
The Corporation engages third-party valuation experts to assist in valuing interest rate swap derivatives and most AFS investment securities, both measured at fair value on a recurring basis, and MSRs, which are measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis. The pricing data and market quotes the Corporation obtains from outside sources are reviewed internally for reasonableness.
For additional details see "Note 19 - Fair Value Measurements," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a description of accounting standards recently issued, but not yet adopted by the Corporation, see "Recently Issued Accounting Standards," in "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the most significant component of the Corporation’s net income. The Corporation manages the risk associated with changes in interest rates through the techniques described within Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk." The following table provides a comparative average balance sheet and net interest income analysis for 2020 compared to 2019 and 2018. Interest income and yields are presented on an FTE basis, using a 21% federal tax rate, as well as statutory interest expense disallowances. The discussion following this table is based on these tax-equivalent amounts.
(1)Average balances include non-performing loans.
(2) Average balances include amortized historical cost for AFS securities; the related unrealized holding gains (losses) are included in other assets.
(3) ACL - loans relates to the ACL specifically for Net Loans and does not include the ACL for OBS credit exposures, which is included in other
liabilities.
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
The following table summarizes the changes in FTE interest income and interest expense resulting from changes in average balances (volumes) and changes in rates:
(1) Average balance includes non-performing loans.
Note: Changes which are partially attributable to both volume and rate are allocated to the volume and rate components presented above based on the percentage of the direct changes that are attributable to each component.
In March 2020, the FOMC decreased the Fed Funds Rate by a total of 150 bp in response to COVID-19. These changes in the Fed Funds Rate resulted in corresponding decreases to the index rates for the Corporation's variable and adjustable rate loans, primarily the prime rate and LIBOR as well as for certain interest-bearing liabilities.
FTE net interest income decreased $19.8 million, or 3.0%, to $641.5 million in 2020. Net interest margin decreased 50 bp to 2.86% in 2020 from 3.36% in 2019. As summarized above, FTE interest income decreased $176.2 million as the result of a 90 bp decrease in the yield on interest-earning assets, and increased $93.1 million as the result of a $2.8 billion, or 14.1%, increase in average interest-earning assets, primarily loans. The average yield on the loan portfolio decreased 92 bp, to 3.63%, largely due to the aforementioned decreases in the Fed Funds Rate in 2020 and corresponding decreases to loan index rates. All variable and certain adjustable rate loans repriced to lower rates as a result of these interest rate decreases, and yields on new loan originations were lower than the average yield on the loan portfolio. Adjustable rate loans reprice on dates specified in the loan agreements, which may be later than the date the Fed Funds Rate and related loan index rates increase or decrease. Therefore, the benefit of increases or the reverse effect of decreases in index rates on adjustable rate loans may not be fully realized until future periods. In addition, 2020 interest income included $6.5 million of unamortized origination fees and direct origination costs recognized as interest income at the time of PPP loan forgiveness, which is in addition to the normal amortization of those items of approximately $22.5 million recognized in 2020.
Interest expense decreased $63.2 million, with a 52 bp decrease in the rate on average interest-bearing liabilities contributing $76.7 million to this decrease, partially offset by a $13.4 million increase in expense as a result of a $1.4 billion, or 10.1%, increase in interest-bearing liabilities, primarily demand deposits and long-term borrowings. The rates on average interest-bearing demand and savings accounts decreased 54 and 57 bp, respectively, which contributed $26.8 million and $31.2 million to the decrease in interest expense, respectively. In addition, the 106 bp decrease in the cost of short-term borrowings contributed $8.7 million to the decrease in interest expense.
Average loans and average FTE yields, by type, are summarized in the following table:
(1) Includes average PPP loans of $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Consists of overdrafts and net origination fees and costs.
Average loans increased $1.8 billion, or 11.2%, which contributed $77.7 million to the increase in FTE interest income. The increase was driven largely by growth in the commercial and industrial portfolio as a result of loans originated under the PPP. Excluding loans originated under the PPP, commercial and industrial loan balances declined $2.4 million. Commercial and residential mortgage loan portfolios, as well as the construction, consumer and equipment lease financing portfolios, experienced growth, partially offset by decreases in the home equity loan portfolio.
Average investment securities increased $228.6 million, or 8.2%, in comparison to 2019, which contributed a $7.3 million increase in FTE interest income. This was partially offset by a 7 bp decrease in average yields, resulting in a $3.0 million decrease in FTE interest income. Other interest-earning assets increased $675.7 million, primarily the result of an increase in cash pledged with counterparties for interest rate swap contracts, contributing $6.9 million to FTE interest income. The yield on other interest-earning assets decreased 159 bp in comparison to 2019, as a result of the Fed Funds Rate decreases during 2020, resulting in a $10.7 million decrease in FTE interest income.
Average deposits and interest rates, by type, are summarized in the following table:
The average cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 54 bp to 0.51% from 1.05% in 2019 and contributed $66.2 million to the decrease in interest expense compared to 2019. These rates do not include the impact of non-interest bearing deposits, which lower the cost of total deposits to 0.36% and 0.79% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in the cost is mainly as a result of reductions in deposit rates in response to the FOMC reductions to the Fed Funds Rate as well as deposit rate decreases implemented after the Fed Funds Rate cuts during the second half of 2019. The majority of deposit rates are discretionary, with the exception of indexed municipal balances. The average balance of interest-bearing deposits increased $1.2 billion, or 9.3%, partially offsetting the decrease in interest expense by $4.4 million in comparison to 2019.
Average borrowings and interest rates, by type, are summarized in the following table:
(1) Includes repurchase agreements and short-term promissory notes.
(2) Represents FHLB advances with an original maturity term of less than one year.
Total average borrowings increased $272.6 million, or 15.2%, while the total average cost of these funds decreased 40 bp, to 2.11% compared to 2019. Total average short-term borrowings decreased $39.1 million, or 4.6%, due to a decrease in short-term FHLB advances and other borrowings and federal funds purchased, partially offset by increases in average customer funding. The cost of average short-term borrowings decreased 106 bp to 0.64% in 2020, largely due to the net impact of changes in the Fed Funds Rate.
Average long-term borrowings increased $311.7 million, or 33.1%, and the average rate decreased 19 bp compared to 2019, as a result of the issuance of $375.0 million of subordinated notes in March of 2020.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
The following table summarizes the changes in FTE interest income and interest expense resulting from changes in average balances (volumes) and changes in rates:
(1) Average balance includes non-performing loans.
Note: Changes which are partially attributable to both volume and rate are allocated to the volume and rate components presented above based on the percentage of the direct changes that are attributable to each component.
The FOMC increased the Fed Funds Rate by 25 bp in each of March, June, September and December of 2018. During 2019, the FOMC decreased the Fed Funds Rate by 25 bp in each of August, September and October. These changes in the Fed Funds Rate resulted in corresponding increases or decreases to the index rates for the Corporation's variable and adjustable rate loans, primarily the prime rate and the LIBOR, as well as for certain interest-bearing liabilities.
FTE net interest income increased $18.8 million, or 2.9%, to $661.4 million in 2019. Net interest margin decreased 4 bp to 3.36% in 2019 from 3.40% in 2018. As summarized above, FTE interest income increased $35.4 million as the result of an 18 basis point increase in the yield on interest-earning assets, and increased $32.3 million as the result of a $796.4 million, or 4.2%, increase in average interest-earning assets, primarily loans. The average yield on the loan portfolio increased 17 bp, to 4.55%, largely due to the aforementioned increases in the Fed Funds Rate in 2018 and corresponding increases to loan index rates. All variable and certain adjustable rate loans repriced to higher rates as a result of these interest rate increases, and yields on new loan originations exceeded the average yield on the loan portfolio. Adjustable rate loans reprice on dates specified in the loan agreements, which may be later than the date the Fed Funds Rate and related loan index rates increase or decrease. Therefore, the benefit of increases or the reverse effect of decreases in index rates on adjustable rate loans may not be fully realized until future periods.
Interest expense increased $48.9 million, with a 28 basis point increase in the rate on average interest-bearing liabilities contributing $39.7 million to this increase. The rates on average interest-bearing time, savings accounts and demand deposits increased 45, 25 and 20 bp, respectively. These rate increases contributed $12.9 million, $12.5 million and $8.6 million, respectively, to the increase in interest expense. In addition, the 63 basis point increase in the rates on short-term borrowings contributed $5.3 million to the increase in interest expense.
Average loans and average FTE yields, by type, are summarized in the following table:
(1) Consists of overdrafts and net origination fees and costs.
Average loans increased $615.1 million, or 3.9%, which contributed $27.5 million to the increase in FTE interest income. In addition, the average yield on the loan portfolio increased 17 bp, contributing $27.7 million to the increase in FTE interest income. As mentioned above, the increase in average yields on loans was driven by the repricing of existing variable and adjustable rate loans as a result of increases in the prime rate and LIBOR during 2018 that were only partially offset by decreases in those same rates that occurred in the second half of 2019.
Average investment securities increased $116.0 million, or 4.4%, in comparison to 2018, which contributed $9.2 million to the increase in FTE interest income. The average yield on investment securities increased 21 bp, contributing $5.7 million to the increase in FTE interest income. Other interest-earning assets increased $62.4 million, or 16.3%, primarily the result of an increase in cash pledged with counterparties for interest rate swap contracts. The yield on other interest-earning assets increased 46 bp in comparison to 2018, as a result of the Fed Funds Rate increases during 2018 that were only partially offset by the decreases during 2019, resulting in a $1.9 million increase in FTE interest income.
Average deposits and interest rates, by type, are summarized in the following table:
Average interest-bearing deposits contributed $44.1 million to the increase in interest expense, increasing $971.8 million, or 8.4%, in comparison to 2018. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits increased 29 bp to 1.05% in 2019 from 0.76% in 2018, due to increases in the rates on all types of interest-bearing deposits as a result of the Fed Funds Rate increases and related market competition that occurred in 2018, and was only partially impacted by decreases to the Fed Funds Rate that occurred in 2019.
Average brokered deposits increased $123.6 million, to $245.5 million, as a result of continued growth of brokered deposit programs introduced in 2018.
Average borrowings and interest rates, by type, are summarized in the following table:
(1) Includes repurchase agreements and short-term promissory notes.
(2) Represents FHLB advances with an original maturity term of less than one year.
Total average borrowings increased $28.8 million, or 1.6%, while the total average cost of these funds increased 22 bp, to 2.51%. Total average short-term borrowings increased $63.8 million, or 8.1%, due to an increase in short-term FHLB advances and other borrowings, partially offset by decreases in average short-term customer funding and federal funds purchased. The cost of average short-term borrowings increased 63 bp to 1.70% in 2019, largely due to the annual average impact of Fed Funds Rate increases.
Average long-term FHLB advances decreased $35.7 million, or 6.0%, and the average rate decreased 8 bp as higher rate advances were paid off or matured and replaced with advances at lower average rates.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses increased $44.1 million, to $76.9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was the result of several factors, most notably, the overall uncertainty in economic forecasts due to COVID-19. See additional details under "Allowance for Credit Losses and Asset Quality" in the "Financial Condition" section below.
Non-Interest Income and Expense
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
Non-Interest Income
The following table presents the components of non-interest income:
Excluding net investment securities gains, non-interest income increased $14.9 million, or 7.1%, in 2020, as compared to 2019.
Total commercial banking income decreased $831,000, compared to 2019, driven mainly by a decrease in other commercial banking income (SBA lending income and other service charges as a result of COVID-19). This decrease was somewhat offset by an increase in capital markets revenue.
Total consumer banking decreased $7.9 million, or 16.0%, compared to 2019, driven primarily by lower overdraft fees. Other consumer banking income decreased largely due to lower ATM fees.
Wealth management revenues increased $3.4 million, or 6.1%, resulting primarily from growth in brokerage income due to an increase in client asset levels and improved overall market performance.
Mortgage banking income increased $19.2 million, or 83.2%, mainly due to gains on sales of mortgage loans, partially offset by a decrease in mortgage servicing income. Gains increased as a result of both higher volumes of loans sold and higher spreads on sales. The decrease in mortgage servicing income was driven by $10.5 million of MSR impairment charges and higher MSR amortization due to higher prepayments as a result of the lower rate environment. There were no MSR impairment charges in 2019.
Investment securities gains decreased $1.7 million, or 35.5%, mainly attributed to the difference in scope of the limited balance sheet restructures in 2020 and 2019. See Note 3, "Investment Securities," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table presents the components of non-interest expense:
In the third quarter of 2020, the Corporation announced cost-savings initiatives which will result in approximately $25 million in annual expense savings, not to be fully realized until mid-2021. In 2020, $16.2 million of expenses were recognized related to the cost-savings initiatives in the following categories: $5.6 million of severance expense (included in salaries and employee benefits) and $4.8 million of write-offs of fixed assets and $5.8 million of lease termination charges (both included in other expense).
In 2019, the Corporation recognized $10.9 million of expenses related to the Charter Consolidation, primarily in the following categories: $1.9 million of severance expense (included in salaries and employee benefits), $6.6 million of other outside services, $1.0 million of an intangible write-off (included in intangible amortization) and $600,000 in marketing expense.
The more significant fluctuations in expense levels, excluding the cost-savings initiatives in 2020 and the charter consolidation costs in 2019, by category are explained below:
•Salaries and employee benefits increased $9.0 million mainly due to increases in employee salaries (annual merit increases), overtime and incentive compensation (primarily COVID-19 related for front-line employees).
•Other outside services decreased $2.0 million, or 5.9%, primarily due to more in-house development and less reliance on third-party service providers.
•Data processing and software increased $3.4 million reflecting higher transaction volumes and costs related to growth and technology initiatives.
•Marketing decreased $4.1 million, or 44.3%, as a result of reduced marketing campaigns.
•State taxes increased $3.7 million, or 41.8%, as a result higher Pennsylvania Bank Shares tax due to the Bank's increased equity as well as higher sales taxes.
•Other expenses decreased $4.3 million compared to 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in travel and entertainment, influenced by the restrictions due to COVID-19.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
Non-Interest Income
The following table presents the components of non-interest income:
Excluding net investment securities gains, non-interest income increased $15.9 million, or 8.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the same period in 2018, with increases across all major categories
Wealth management fees increased $3.5 million, or 6.8%, resulting primarily from growth in brokerage income due to an increase in client asset levels and improved overall market performance, as well as the acquisitions of two small wealth management firms in 2019.
Total commercial banking income increased $7.2 million, or 11.2%, compared to 2018, driven mainly by an increase in capital markets revenue along with increases in merchant and card income and cash management fees.
Total consumer banking increased $1.1 million, or 2.2%, compared to 2018, driven primarily by card income.
Mortgage banking income increased $4.1 million, or 21.4%, mainly due to gains on sales of mortgage loans. The increase in gains resulted from both higher volumes of loans sold and higher spreads on sales.
Investment securities gains increased $4.7 million compared to 2018, mainly attributed to the sale of approximately $400 million of investment securities and a corresponding prepayment of FHLB advances. This balance sheet restructuring occurred in the third quarter of 2019. See Note 3, "Investment Securities," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table presents the components of non-interest expense:
In 2019, $10.9 million of expenses were incurred related to Charter Consolidation, as compared to $3.6 million in 2018, a $7.3 million increase. The 2019 expenses were primarily in salaries and benefits ($1.9 million of severance expense), other outside services ($6.6 million), intangible amortization ($1.0 million write-off) and marketing ($650,000).
The more significant fluctuations in expense levels, excluding charter consolidation costs, by category are explained below:
•Salaries and employee benefits increased $6.8 million mainly due to an increase in employee salaries (annual merit increases). Healthcare and 401(k) plan matching expense also increased, but were partially offset by lower defined benefit pension expense driven by changes in the discount rate compared to 2018.
•Net occupancy expense increased $1.1 million, or 2.2%, due mainly to the addition of new properties.
•Data processing and software increased $3.4 million, or 8.2%, reflecting higher transaction volumes and costs related to growth and technology initiatives.
•Marketing increased $1.0 million, or 11.2%, due to additional promotions, primarily related to deposits.
•FDIC insurance expense decreased $3.2 million, or 29.2%, due to the recognition of assessment credits in 2019.
•Amortization of tax credit investments decreased $5.4 million as 2018 included amortization for one significant investment which generated a corresponding credit to income taxes.
•2019 includes approximately $4.3 million of penalties related to the prepayment of certain FHLB advances in conjunction with the previously mentioned balance sheet restructuring.
•Other expenses increased $5.4 million due to losses on sale of fixed assets, telecommunications expense and operating risk losses.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense for 2020 was $24.2 million, a $13.5 million, or 35.7%, decrease from $37.6 million in 2019. The ETR was 12.0% in 2020, as compared to 14.3% in 2019. The decrease in income tax expense and the ETR primarily resulted from lower income before income taxes. The ETR is generally lower than the federal statutory rate of 21% due to tax-exempt interest income earned on loans, investments in tax-free municipal securities and TCIs that generate tax credits under various federal programs.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
The table below presents condensed consolidated ending balance sheets.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The $1.3 billion increase in cash and cash equivalents mainly resulted from additional cash maintained at the FRB due to deposit growth as well as additional collateral required to be posted with counterparties for derivative contracts.
Loans Held for Sale
Loans held for sale increased $46.1 million, or 121.8%, primarily as the result of an increase in the volume of residential mortgage originations due to higher refinancing activity.
Investment Securities
The following table presents the carrying amount of investment securities as of December 31:
Total AFS securities increased $564.6 million, or 22.6%, to $3.1 billion at December 31, 2020 primarily due to the investment of a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of $375.0 million of subordinated notes and investment of excess funding, partially offset by the sale of investment securities, with an estimated fair value of $82.0 million, completed during the second quarter of 2020 as part of a limited balance sheet restructuring that included the redemption of FHLB advances. See Note 9, "Short-term and Long-Term Borrowings," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail on the subordinated notes issuance. Total HTM securities decreased $91.6 million, or 24.8%, primarily as a result of principal repayments and premium amortization. There were no purchases of or transfers into HTM securities during 2020.
Loans
The following table presents ending loans outstanding, by type, as of the dates shown, and the changes in balances for the most recent year:
(1) Includes PPP loans totaling $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2020.
Net Loans increased $2.1 billion, or 12.3%, as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to growth in commercial and industrial loans and commercial and residential mortgage loans, partially offset by decreases in home equity loans and equipment lease financing. The increase in commercial and industrial loans was impacted by approximately $1.6 billion of PPP loans.
The Corporation does not have a significant concentration of credit risk with any single borrower, industry or geographic location within its footprint. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $8.2 billion, or 43.1%, of the loan portfolio was comprised of commercial mortgage and construction loans. The Corporation's policies limit the maximum total lending commitment to an individual borrower to $55.0 million as of December 31, 2020. In addition, the Corporation has established lower total lending limits for certain types of lending commitments, and lower total lending limits based on the Corporation's internal risk rating of an individual borrower at the time the lending commitment is approved.
The following table summarizes the industry concentrations within the commercial mortgage and the commercial and industrial loan portfolios (including PPP loans) as of December 31:
(1) Includes commercial loans to borrowers engaged in the business of: renting, leasing or managing real estate for others; selling and/or buying real estate for others; and appraising real estate.
(2) Includes commercial loans to borrowers engaged in the construction industry.
(3) Excludes public administration.
(4) Includes energy sector.
The following table presents the changes in non-accrual loans for the years ended December 31:
Non-accrual loans increased $12.1 million, or 9.7%, in 2020. Non-accrual loans as a percentage of Net Loans decreased to 0.72% at December 31, 2020, as compared to 0.74% at December 31, 2019.
The following table presents non-performing assets as of the dates shown:
(1)In 2020, the total interest income that would have been recorded if non-accrual loans had been current in accordance with their original terms was $5.8 million. The amount of interest income on non-accrual loans that was recognized in 2020 was approximately $290,000.
(2)Accrual of interest is generally discontinued when a loan becomes 90 days past due. In certain cases a loan may be placed on non-accrual status prior to being 90 days delinquent if there is an indication that the borrower is having difficulty making payments, or the Corporation believes it is probable that all amounts will not be collected according to the contractual terms of the agreement. When interest accruals are discontinued, unpaid interest previously credited to income is reversed. Non-accrual loans may be restored to accrual status when all delinquent principal and interest has been paid currently for six consecutive months or the loan is considered to be adequately secured and in the process of collection. Certain loans, primarily adequately collateralized residential mortgage loans, may continue to accrue interest after reaching 90 days past due.
(3)Excluded from non-performing assets as of December 31, 2020, were $68.4 million of loans modified under TDRs. These loans continue to accrue interest and are, therefore, not included in non-accrual loans.
(4) Excludes $8.1 million of residential mortgage properties for which formal foreclosure proceedings were in process as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents non-performing loans, by type, as of the dates shown:
The following table presents TDRs as of the dates shown:
(1) Included within non-accrual loans in the preceding table.
The increase in TDRs in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily the result of one large borrower in the commercial mortgage portfolio.
Total TDRs modified during 2020 and still outstanding as of December 31, 2020, were $45.3 million. Of these loans, $15.5 million, or 34.3%, had a payment default during 2020, which the Corporation defines as a single missed scheduled payment, subsequent to modification. TDRs modified during 2019 and still outstanding as of December 31, 2019, totaled $10.6 million. Of these loans, $2.0 million, or 18.5%, had a payment default during 2019, which the Corporation defines as a single missed scheduled payment, subsequent to modification.
The following table summarizes OREO, by property type, as of December 31:
As noted under the heading "Critical Accounting Policies" within Management's Discussion, the Corporation's ability to identify potential problem loans in a timely manner is key to maintaining an adequate ACL. For commercial loans, commercial mortgages and construction loans to commercial borrowers, an internal risk rating process is used to monitor credit quality. For a complete description of the Corporation's risk ratings, refer to the "Allowance for Credit Losses" section within "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." The evaluation of credit risk for residential mortgages, home equity loans, construction
loans to individuals, consumer loans and equipment lease financing is based on aggregate payment history, through the monitoring of delinquency levels and trends.
Total internally risk rated loans were $13.7 billion and $12.0 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following table presents criticized and classified loans, or those with internal risk ratings of Special Mention (1) or Substandard or Lower (2) for commercial mortgages, commercial and industrial loans and construction loans to commercial borrowers, by class segment, as of December 31:
(1) Considered "criticized" loans by banking regulators
(2) Considered "classified" loans by banking regulators
(3) Excludes construction - other
As of December 31, 2020, total loans with risk ratings of special mention increased by $323.0 million, or 100.2%, and total loans with a risk rating of substandard or lower decreased by $24.5 million, or 7.2%, resulting in an overall increase in total criticized loans of $298.5 million, 45.0% higher than 2019. The largest driver of the migration into these risk rating categories was within the hospitality industry, which is included in the real estate - commercial mortgage category.
The following table presents, by class segment, a summary of delinquency status and rates, as a percentage of total loans, for loans that do not have internal risk ratings as of December 31:
(1) Includes all accruing loans 30 days to 89 days past due.
(2) Includes all accruing loans 90 days or more past due and all non-accrual loans and leases.
Allowance for Credit Losses and Asset Quality
The Corporation accounts for the credit risk associated with lending activities through the ACL and the provision for credit losses.
A summary of the Corporation’s activity in the ACL, including loans and OBS credit exposures:
(1) Reserve for OBS credit exposures is recorded within other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. Prior to 2020, it was referred to as "reserve for unfunded lending commitments". See "Note 4 - Allowance for Credit Losses and Asset Quality" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." for further details.
(2) Includes accruing loans past due 90 days or more.
(3) Ratio represents a financial measure derived by methods other than GAAP. See reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly
comparable GAAP measure under the heading, "Supplemental Reporting of Non-GAAP Based Financial Measures," in Item 6. "Selected Financial Data."
The provision for credit losses increased $44.1 million in comparison to 2019. Prior periods did not incorporate "life of loan" losses under CECL and applied an incurred loss model, which would not have considered economic forecasts or forward-looking considerations over the remaining expected lives of loans. The amounts recorded in 2020 were primarily driven by economic assumptions, which considered the impact of COVID-19. See "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." for further details.
The following table summarizes the allocation of the ACL - loans:
N/A - Not applicable
(1) Ending loan balances as a % of total loans for the years presented.
Management believes that the $277.6 million ACL - loans as of December 31, 2020, was sufficient to cover expected losses in the loan portfolio. See additional disclosures in "Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," and "Note 4 - Allowance for Credit Losses and Asset Quality," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data;" and "Critical Accounting Policies" above.
Other Assets
Other assets increased $234.7 million, or 25.6%, to $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher fair values of derivative contracts for interest rate swaps, earnings on bank-owned life insurance, and an increase in the net DTA mainly as the result of the adoption of CECL.
Deposits and Borrowings
The following table presents ending deposits, by type, as of December 31:
The following table presents ending borrowings, by type as of December 31:
(1) Includes repurchase agreements and short-term promissory notes.
(2) Consists of FHLB advances with an original maturity term of less than one year.
Total short-term borrowings decreased $253.2 million, or 28.7%, as a result of higher balances of deposits and the increase in long-term borrowings, reducing the need for short-term borrowings. Long-term FHLB advances increased $44.9 million, or 9.2%, and other long-term debt increased $369.5 million as the result of the issuance of $375.0 million of subordinated notes in March 2020 as discussed in the "Overview" section of Management's Discussion.
Other Liabilities
Other liabilities increased $139.4 million, or 36.2%, to $524.4 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily as the result of an increase in the fair values of derivative contracts related to interest rate swaps.
Shareholders’ Equity
Total shareholders’ equity increased $274.7 million, or 11.7%, to $2.6 billion, or 10.1% of total assets, as of December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily to the $192.9 million of net proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock, $178.0 million of net income, a $65.2 million net increase in AOCI, $7.5 million of stock-based compensation awards and $7.4 million of common stock issued, partially offset by $90.7 million of common stock cash dividends, a $43.8 million reduction to retained earnings as a result of the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, $39.7 million of common stock repurchases and $2.1 million of preferred stock dividends.
See "Note 14 - Shareholders' Equity" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." for details of the issuance of preferred stock and the Corporation's share repurchase programs and activities. Under all repurchase programs, repurchased shares are added to treasury stock, at cost. As permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements, and subject to market conditions and other factors, purchases may be made from time to time in open market or privately negotiated transactions, including, without limitation, through accelerated share repurchase transactions. See "Note 4 - Allowance for Credit Losses and Asset Quality," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." for details of the adoption of CECL.
The Corporation and its wholly owned subsidiary bank, Fulton Bank, are subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the FRB and OCC. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can trigger certain actions by these regulators that could have a material effect on the Corporation’s financial statements. The regulations require that banks and bank holding companies maintain minimum amounts and ratios of total, Tier I and Common Equity Tier I capital (as defined in the regulations) to risk-weighted assets (as defined), and Tier I capital to average assets (as defined).
The following table summarizes the Corporation’s capital ratios in comparison to regulatory requirements at December 31:
In July 2013, the FRB approved final rules (the "U.S. Basel III Capital Rules") establishing a new comprehensive capital framework for U.S. banking organizations and implementing the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's December 2010 framework for strengthening international capital standards. The U.S. Basel III Capital Rules substantially revise the risk-based capital requirements applicable to bank holding companies and depository institutions.
The U.S. Basel III Capital Rules require the Corporation and its bank subsidiary to:
•Meet a minimum Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 4.50% of risk-weighted assets and a Tier 1 capital ratio of 6.00% of risk-weighted assets;
•Continue to require a minimum Total capital ratio of 8.00% of risk-weighted assets and a Tier 1 leverage capital ratio of 4.00% of average assets; and
•Comply with a revised definition of capital to improve the ability of regulatory capital instruments to absorb losses as a result of which certain non-qualifying capital instruments, including cumulative preferred stock and TruPS, will be excluded as a component of Tier 1 capital for institutions of the Corporation's size.
As of January 1, 2019, the Corporation and its bank subsidiary were also required to maintain a "capital conservation buffer" of 2.50% above the minimum risk-based capital requirements, which must be maintained to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and certain discretionary bonus payments.
The U.S. Basel III Capital Rules use a standardized approach for risk weightings that expand the risk-weightings for assets and off-balance sheet exposures from the previous 0%, 20%, 50% and 100% categories to a much larger and more risk-sensitive number of categories, depending on the nature of the assets and off-balance sheet exposures, resulting in higher risk weights for a variety of asset categories.
As of December 31, 2020, Fulton Bank was well capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action based on its capital ratio calculations. To be categorized as well capitalized, the bank must maintain minimum total risk-based, Tier I risk-based, Common Equity Tier I risk-based and Tier I leverage ratios as set forth in the table above. There are no conditions or events since December 31, 2020 that management believes have changed the institution's categories. See "Note 11 - Regulatory Matters," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Corporation has various financial obligations that require future cash payments. These obligations include payments for liabilities recorded on the Corporation’s consolidated balance sheets as well as contractual obligations for purchased services.
The following table summarizes the Corporation's significant contractual obligations to third parties, by type, that were fixed and determinable as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Includes demand deposits, savings accounts and brokered deposits, which can be withdrawn at any time.
(2)See additional information regarding time deposits in "Note 8 - Deposits," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
(3)See additional information regarding borrowings in "Note 9 - Short-Term and Long-Term Borrowings," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
(4)See additional information regarding operating leases in "Note 17 - Leases," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
(5)Includes information technology, telecommunication and data processing outsourcing contracts.
(6)Includes accrued interest. See additional information related to uncertain tax positions in "Note 12 - Income Taxes," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
In addition to the contractual obligations listed in the preceding table, the Corporation is a party to financial instruments with OBS risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and standby and commercial letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk that are not recognized on the consolidated balance sheets. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued to guarantee the financial or performance obligation of a customer to a third party. Commercial letters of credit are conditional commitments issued to facilitate foreign or domestic trade transactions for customers. Commitments and standby and commercial letters of credit do not necessarily represent future cash needs, as they may expire without being drawn.
The following table presents the Corporation’s commitments to extend credit and letters of credit as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):