ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which are included in Item 8 of Part II of this annual report.
Overview
First United Corporation is a bank holding company that, through the Bank and its non-bank subsidiaries, provides an array of financial products and services primarily to customers in four Western Maryland counties and four Northeastern West Virginia counties. Its principal operating subsidiary is the Bank, which consists of a community banking network of 25 branch offices located throughout its market areas. Our primary sources of revenue are interest income earned from our loan and investment securities portfolios and fees earned from financial services provided to customers.
Consolidated net income was $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Basic and diluted net income per share for the year of 2020 were $1.98 and $1.97, respectively, compared to basic and diluted net income per share of $1.85 for the same period of 2019, a 7.0% increase. Subsequent to the issuance of a press release on February 19, 2021 that described the Corporation’s financial results for the 12 and three month periods ended December 31, 2020, management determined that approximately $0.6 million of previously deferred costs associated with consulting for automated services should be expensed during the fourth quarter of 2020. This determination negatively impacted net income for 2020 by approximately $0.4 million. The increase in earnings when comparing 2020 to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in net interest income of $2.2 million, an increase in other operating income, including gains, of $1.8 million, and a decrease in other operating expenses of $1.5 million partially offset by an increase in the provision for loan losses of $4.1 million. The increase in provision expense for 2020 was driven by an increase in the qualitative factors reflecting the uncertainty of the economic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our borrowers. Of the $5.4 million net provision expense for the year, $5.9 million was related to COVID-19 qualitative factor adjustments and $0.8 million was related to loan growth and the change in loan mix. Provision expense was partially offset by the release of a specific allocation of $1.3 million based on a new appraisal, as a non-accrual loan moved to the OREO portfolio. Other operating income, including net gains, increased $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due primarily to gains on the sale of mortgages to the secondary market as well as gains on sales of investment securities. Trust and brokerage income were strong despite market volatility early in 2020. These increases were partially offset by reduced service charge income, primarily NSF income, due to reduced consumer and business overdraft activity. Bank owned life insurance (“BOLI”) income decreased due to the receipt of death claim benefits in 2019. The net interest margin, on a fully-taxable equivalent (“FTE”) basis, declined for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 3.34% compared to 3.68% for the same period of 2019.
The provision for loan losses was $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in provision expense for 2020 was driven by an increase in the qualitative factors reflecting the uncertainty of the economic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our borrowers. Of the $5.4 million net provision expense for the year, $5.9 million was related to COVID-19 qualitative factor adjustments and $0.8 million was related to loan growth and the change in loan mix. Provision expense was partially offset by the release of a specific allocation of $1.3 million based on a new appraisal, as a non-accrual loan moved to the other real estate owned (“OREO”) portfolio.
Other operating income, including gains, increased $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the $2.5 million increase in net gains, due primarily to the increase in mortgage origination in 2020 and the sale of those loans to the secondary market. Additionally, as prepayment speeds on investments held for sale were elevated due to the low-rate environment and the investments were prepaying at par, we made the decision to capture gains through the sale of these investments. The increased gains were offset by a $1.0 million decline in BOLI income due to the receipt of $1.1 million in death benefits in the third quarter of 2019. Service charge income, primarily NSF income, decreased as the consumer and business overdraft activity decreased in the year of 2020 due to reduced consumer spending and increased cash balances resulting from borrowers’ receipt of government stimulus payments and loans under the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). Trust and brokerage income increased $0.4 million year-over-year although it was negatively affected by market volatility early in the year as trustee fees are directly related to the value of assets under management. Debit card income increased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the same period of 2019 despite reduced consumer spending. Debit card income continued to increase as we grew our deposit relationships and our customers increased use of our electronic services.
Other operating expenses decreased $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the same period of 2019. Salaries and benefits decreased $3.6 million, primarily due to the $2.5 million salary expense offset related to loan originations, primarily PPP loans, as well as the reduced headcount resulting from the voluntary separation program implemented in the fourth quarter of 2019 and reduced life and health insurance costs. These reductions offset the annual merit increases awarded to our associates in April 2020, Financial First Responder bonuses paid and increased incentives for mortgage production. FDIC premiums increased
slightly due to credits received on quarterly assessments in 2019. Equipment, occupancy and technology expenses remained stable when compared to 2019, as we began to realize cost savings from our core processor related to a new contract negotiated in 2020. Professional services increased $2.7 million primarily due to increased legal and professional expenses related to the 2020 proxy contest and related litigation. Investor relations expenses increased $1.0 million, also related to the 2020 proxy contest. OREO expenses decreased $1.5 million when compared to 2019, as we experienced lower valuation allowance write-downs related to updated appraisals. Increased marketing, consulting, miscellaneous expenses, dues and licenses, fraud expenses, miscellaneous loan fees and Visa processing fees were offset by reductions in schools and seminars, contributions, personnel related expenses, printed and office supplies, travel and lodging, mileage, contract labor, business related meals and other employee benefits expenses, most of which were related to limited operations as a result of the pandemic and management’s continued focus on cost savings and efficiencies. Other operating expenses recorded for 2020 include the above-mentioned $0.6 million of expenses associated with consulting for automated services that were previously deferred but that management determined, subsequent to February 19, 2021, should be expensed during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Outstanding loans increased to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019. The $117.4 million of growth was primarily attributable to the participation in the PPP loan program and core commercial loan growth partially offset by a decline in our mortgage loan portfolio. CRE loans increased by $33.7 million due to expansion of several new customer relationships as well as an increase in small business loans. Acquisition and development (“A&D”) loans declined by $1.0 million as amortization and payoffs offset new production. Commercial and industrial (“C&I”) loans increased by $144.4 million, including $114.0 million of PPP loans which remained on the balance sheet at December 31, 2020. The growth in the commercial portfolios was offset by a decline in residential mortgage loans of $59.3 million, as refinancing activity continued during the fourth quarter of 2020. Given the current low interest rate environment, customers have preferred longer-term fixed-rate loans. Management has elected to utilize the secondary market rather than hold mortgage loans in the portfolio at the longer-term fixed rates. The consumer loan portfolio declined slightly by $0.4 million during 2020.
Net interest income, on a non-GAAP, FTE basis, increased $2.2 million (4.7%) during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a $0.3 million (0.6%) increase in interest income and a $1.9 million (16.3%) decrease in interest expense. The net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 3.34%, compared to 3.68% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The impact of average balances of PPP loans of approximately $137.0 million, offset by the $3.0 million of interest and fees related to these loans, had a negative impact on the margin of approximately 13 basis points. The margin was also negatively affected by the 2.25% drop in the Fed Funds rate since August 2019, which resulted in new loan production and existing loans repricing at lower rates. These factors resulted in a decrease of approximately 14 basis points in average loan yield when compared with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019, interest income remained stable. The increase in interest and fees on loans of $2.0 million was partially offset by the reduction in investment income of $1.0 million. While the average balance of the investment portfolio remained consistent, bonds, at higher yielding rates, were called and replaced with lower yielding investments resulting in a decrease in average yield on the investment portfolio of 44 basis points. Excess cash balances attributable to deposit growth were invested at the lower Fed Funds rate, which also negatively affected interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020. Due to the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the volatile economic environment, the Bank maintained higher levels of liquidity throughout 2020 when compared to 2019. The increase in interest and fees on loans was due primarily to an increase in average balances of $144.5 million, primarily driven by the PPP loans but partially offset by the declining yield. The rate earned on the loan portfolio decreased by 46 basis points as a result of the significant decline in the rate environment over the past year and the high volume of PPP loans booked at the low 1.00% interest rate as noted above.
Total deposits at December 31, 2020 increased by $280.3 million when compared with deposits at December 31, 2019. During 2020, non-interest-bearing deposits increased by $125.8 million. This growth was driven by our retail and commercial account growth as well as deposits from PPP loans. Traditional savings accounts increased by $37.1 million, as we continued to see significant growth in our Prime Saver product. Total demand deposits increased by $42.0 million and total money market accounts increased by $101.1 million, due primarily to growth in our variable rate Value Money Market account. Time deposits less than $100,000 decreased by $7.5 million and time deposits greater than $100,000 decreased by $18.2 million. The decline in time deposits greater than $100,000 was due to a local municipality utilizing a maturing certificate of deposit for cash needs during this unprecedented economic environment as well as our repayment of the full outstanding balance of $10.0 million in a brokered CD that matured in May 2020.
The decrease in interest expense, despite an increase in average interest bearing liabilities of $79.7 million, was a direct result of a reduction in the cost of deposits of 21 basis points, a 24 basis point decrease in our short-term borrowings and a 34 basis point decrease in long-term borrowings, primarily driven by maturity of an interest rate swap. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, management restructured three long-term FHLB advances that resulted in a reduced weighted rate on the $70.0 million portfolio of 80 basis points. A portion of this interest expense savings was captured in the fourth quarter of 2020 with the full impact expected in 2021. We proactively monitored the rate environment and reduced rates on our deposit portfolio throughout 2020. The average balance on our interest-bearing money market accounts increased $60.1 million, while the rate on these accounts decreased by 43 basis points. Average growth of $101.4 million in our non-interest-bearing accounts benefited our overall cost of deposits. Deposit growth was
attributable to PPP loan funding and organic deposit growth in low cost core deposits with existing customers as well as new relationship customers during 2020.
Estimates and Critical Accounting Policies
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent liabilities. (See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.) On an on-going basis, management evaluates estimates and bases those estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowance for Loan Losses
One of our most important accounting policies is that related to the monitoring of the loan portfolio. A variety of estimates impact the carrying value of the loan portfolio and resulting interest income, including the calculation of the ALL, the valuation of underlying collateral, and the timing of loan charge-offs. The ALL is established and maintained at a level that management believes is adequate to cover losses resulting from the inability of borrowers to make required payments on loans. Estimates for loan losses are arrived at by analyzing risks associated with specific loans and the loan portfolio, current and historical trends in delinquencies and charge-offs, and changes in the size and composition of the loan portfolio. The analysis also requires consideration of the economic climate and direction, changes in lending rates, political conditions, legislation impacting the banking industry and economic conditions specific to Western Maryland and Northeastern West Virginia. Because the calculation of the ALL relies on management’s estimates and judgments relating to inherently uncertain events, actual results may differ from management’s estimates.
The ALL is also discussed below in Item 7 under the heading “Allowance for Loan Losses” and in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill
ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other provides guidance with respect to goodwill. Under this guidance, goodwill is not amortized but shall be tested at least annually for impairment at a level of accounting referred to as a reporting unit. The Corporation is considered the sole reporting unit. Goodwill of a reporting unit shall be tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Impairment of goodwill is the condition that exists when the carrying amount of a reporting unit that includes goodwill exceeds its fair value. A goodwill impairment loss is recognized for the amount that the carrying amount of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
An entity may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances qualitatively, an entity determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the entity shall perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. However, if, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances qualitatively, an entity determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test is unnecessary.
The emergence of COVID-19 as a global pandemic in beginning in March 2020, resulted in significant deterioration in general economic conditions and caused a deterioration in the environment in which the Corporation operates. This uncertainty resulted in a significant decrease in the market prices for the stock of institutions in the financial services industry, including the Corporation. Based on the totality of the circumstances and the impact of the economic conditions on the stock price, the events more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount, including goodwill. As such, quantitative analyses of the fair value of the Corporation were performed by a third party for each of the first three quarters of 2020 and no impairment was recognized.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the economy began to see improvements with stimulus funding, decreasing unemployment rates within our market areas, the distributions of COVID-19 vaccines and the significant improvement in our stock price since September 2020. Based on these positive circumstances, Management performed a qualitative assessment on the impairment of goodwill at December 31, 2020.
Having considered each of the qualitative factors and the negative and positive evidence of the totality of events and circumstances qualitatively, management has determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less
than its carrying amount and a quantitative goodwill impairment test is unnecessary. As such, management concludes there is no goodwill impairment at December 31, 2020.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes”. Under this guidance, deferred taxes are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates that will apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
We regularly review the carrying amount of our net deferred tax assets to determine if the establishment of a valuation allowance is necessary. If based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of our net deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods, then a deferred tax valuation allowance must be established. Consideration is given to various positive and negative factors that could affect the realization of the deferred tax assets. In evaluating this available evidence, management considers, among other things, historical performance, expectations of future earnings, the ability to carry back losses to recoup taxes previously paid, length of statutory carry forward periods, experience with utilization of operating loss and tax credit carry forwards not expiring, tax planning strategies and timing of reversals of temporary differences. Significant judgment is required in assessing future earnings trends and the timing of reversals of temporary differences. Our evaluation is based on current tax laws as well as management’s expectations of future performance.
Management expects that the Corporation’s adherence to the required accounting guidance may result in increased volatility in quarterly and annual effective income tax rates because of changes in judgment or measurement including changes in actual and forecasted income before taxes, tax laws and regulations, and tax planning strategies.
Additional information about income taxes is set forth below under the heading, “CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME REVIEW - Applicable Income Taxes” and in Note 18 to Consolidated Financial Statements presented in Item 8 of Part II of this annual report.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment of Investment Securities
Management systematically evaluates the securities in our investment portfolio for impairment on a quarterly basis. Based upon the application of accounting guidance for subsequent measurement in ASC Topic 320 (Section 320-10-35), management assesses whether (i) we have the intent to sell a security being evaluated and (ii) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security prior to its anticipated recovery. If neither applies, then declines in the fair values of securities below their cost that are considered other-than-temporary declines are split into two components. The first is the loss attributable to declining credit quality. Credit losses are recognized in earnings as realized losses in the period in which the impairment determination is made. The second component consists of all other losses, which are recognized in other comprehensive loss. In estimating other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) losses, management considers (a) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, (b) adverse conditions specifically related to the security, an industry, or a geographic area, (c) the historic and implied volatility of the fair value of the security, (d) changes in the rating of the security by a rating agency, (e) recoveries or additional declines in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date, (f) failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principal payments, and (g) the payment structure of the debt security and the likelihood of the issuer being able to make payments that increase in the future. Management also monitors cash flow projections for securities that are considered beneficial interests under the guidance of ASC Subtopic 325-40, Investments - Other - Beneficial Interests in Securitized Financial Assets, (ASC Section 325-40-35). This process is described more fully in the section of the Consolidated Balance Sheet Review entitled “Investment Securities”.
Fair Value of Investments
We have determined the fair value of our investment securities in accordance with the requirements of ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about fair value measurements required under other accounting pronouncements. We measure the fair market values of our investments based on the fair value hierarchy established in Topic 820. The determination of fair value of investments and other assets is discussed further in Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pension Plan Assumptions
Our pension plan costs are calculated using actuarial concepts, as discussed within the requirements of ASC Topic 715, Compensation - Retirement Benefits. Pension expense and the determination of our projected pension liability are based upon two critical assumptions: the discount rate and the expected return on plan assets. We evaluate each of these critical assumptions annually. Other assumptions impact the determination of pension expense and the projected liability including the primary employee
demographics, such as retirement patterns, employee turnover, mortality rates, and estimated employer compensation increases. These factors, along with the critical assumptions, are carefully reviewed by management each year in consultation with our pension plan consultants and actuaries. Further information about our pension plan assumptions, the plan’s funded status, and other plan information is included in Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other than as discussed above, management does not believe that any material changes in our critical accounting policies have occurred since December 31, 2020.
Response to COVID-19
Early in 2020, we established a set of COVID-19 protocols, focused on protecting the health, safety, and financial well-being of our associates and customers. We sustained frequent ongoing communication with associates and customers, enhanced the use of electronic and digital banking services and upheld consistently high standards for fraud and internal controls all while delivering our full array of financial services to our customers. In addition, we made significant efforts to relieve pandemic related financial pressures for customers:
oWaived certificate of deposit early withdrawal penalties and NSF overdraft fees
oTemporarily waived positive pay/Treasury Management fees for new customer signup, aiding in fraud prevention efforts
oModified and deferred loans for eligible consumer and commercial loan customers experiencing hardships; total of 562 modifications for 2020 totaling $230.6 million; 40 active loan modifications totaling approximately $18.2 million, or 1.7% of the loan portfolio remaining as of February 28, 2021
oSuspended repossession and foreclosure activity
oCommunicated frequently with associates and borrowers, keeping them apprised of changing regulations regarding PPP loan application processes and forgiveness procedures
oProcessed approximately 1,174 PPP loan applications totaling $148.9 million
oProcessed approximately 348, or $34.5 million, in PPP loan forgiveness requests
oAdjusted community office lobby access based upon COVID-19 related spikes within each of our market areas.
oProvided remote work and flexible work hours for 90% of associates to protect their health and allow for care of children or other family members
oWeekly Be Informed! virtual calls and COVID-19 update email for our First United team
oPaid Financial First Responder bonuses to associates
Paycheck Protection Program
The CARES Act established the PPP, which provided small businesses with resources to maintain payroll, hire back employees who may have been laid off, and to cover applicable overhead expenses. We acted expeditiously to prepare our associates so they could guide our customers on the proper procedures necessary to enable them to take advantage of this program. We developed a PPP specific information site within our website that provided detailed information, links and materials for eligible customers to access. Internally, we reallocated resources to review, process and data enter customer applications, working tirelessly over extended hours to provide access to as many local business owners as possible. These loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA, have up to a two or five year maturity, provide for the earlier of when the Bank received forgiveness payment from the SBA or 10 months after the end of the covered payroll period, and have an interest rate of 1%. These loans may be forgiven, in whole or in part, by the SBA if the borrower meets certain conditions, including by using at least 60% of the loan proceeds for payroll costs. The SBA also established processing fees from 1% to 5%, depending on the loan amount. Of the $3.7 million of deferred loan fees, we recognized approximately $2.0 million in 2020.
In April 2020, the Bank established eligibility to participate in the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”) which was established by Congress and administered by the Federal Reserve Bank. This facility uses the SBA guaranteed PPP loans as collateral, offering 100% collateral coverage with no recourse to the Bank. The Bank’s board of directors and management team believe that it is prudent to maintain our existing liquidity facilities available for our contingency funding plan given the current economic conditions. The majority of the PPP loan disbursements have been to internal, non-interest-bearing accounts awaiting use by borrowers. As a result, we did not access the PPPLF during 2020, but are prepared to utilize the fund if and when management determines the timing is appropriate.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Bank was approved to participate in the Main Street Lending Program established by the Federal Reserve. This program supports lending to small and medium-sized businesses and non-profit organizations that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Bank implemented PPP loan forgiveness processes to assist our borrowers with applications. Communication with the associates and borrowers was a focus as we helped them through this process. As of December 31, 2020, we have processed loan forgiveness applications for approximately $34.5 million of PPP loans.
In January 2021, President Trump signed the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act into law. This act provides an extension of stimulus package benefits and unemployment through March 14, 2021 as well as funding for additional PPP loans. As of March 11, 2021, we have processed 561 PPP2 loan applications totaling $56.4 million.
Liquidity Sources
Management has reviewed its Liquidity Contingency Funding Plan in preparation of funding needs as it relates to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had approximately $130.0 million in unsecured lines of credit with its correspondent banks, $1.1 million with the Federal Reserve Discount Window, and approximately $134.4 million of secured borrowings with the FHLB. Additionally, the Corporation has access to the brokered certificates of deposit market.
As noted above, the Corporation is eligible to access the PPPLF when it is deemed appropriate.
Capital
The Corporation’s and the Bank’s capital ratios are strong, and both institutions are considered to be well-capitalized by applicable regulatory measures
Adoption of New Accounting Standards and Effects of New Accounting Pronouncements
Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements discusses new accounting pronouncements that, when adopted, could affect our future consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME REVIEW
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is our largest source of operating revenue. Net interest income is the difference between the interest that we earn on our interest-earning assets and the interest expense we incur on our interest-bearing liabilities. For analytical and discussion purposes, net interest income is adjusted to a FTE basis to facilitate performance comparisons between taxable and tax-exempt assets by increasing tax-exempt income by an amount equal to the federal income taxes that would have been paid if this income were taxable at the statutorily applicable rate. This is a non-GAAP disclosure and management believes it is not materially different than the corresponding GAAP disclosure.
The table below summarizes net interest income for 2020 and 2019.
Net interest income, on a non-GAAP, FTE basis, increased $2.2 million (4.7%) during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a $0.3 million (0.6%) increase in interest income and a $1.9 million (16.3%) decrease in interest expense. The net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 3.34%, compared to 3.68% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The impact of average balances of PPP loans of approximately $137.0 million, offset by the $3.0 million of interest and fees related to these loans, had a negative impact on the margin of approximately 13 basis points. The margin was also negatively affected by the 2.25% drop in the Fed Funds rate since August 2019, which resulted in new loan production and existing loans repricing at lower rates. These factors resulted in a decrease of approximately 14 basis points in average loan yield when compared with the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019, interest income remained stable. The increase in interest and fees on loans of $2.0 million was partially offset by the reduction in investment income of $1.0 million. While the average balance of the investment portfolio remained consistent, bonds, at higher yielding rates, were called and replaced with lower yielding investments resulting in a decrease in average yield on the investment portfolio of 44 basis points. Excess cash balances attributable to deposit growth were invested at the lower Fed Funds rate which also negatively affected interest income for the year
ended December 31, 2020. In late December, approximately $70.0 million of excess cash was deployed into the investment portfolio at an average yield of 1% that will provide additional interest income in 2021. Due to the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the volatile economic environment, the Bank maintained higher levels of liquidity in 2020 than in 2019. The increase in interest and fees on loans was due primarily to an increase in average balances of $144.5 million, primarily driven by the PPP loans but partially offset by the declining yield. The rate earned on the loan portfolio decreased by 46 basis points as a result of the significant decline in the rate environment over the past year and the high volume of PPP loans booked at the low 1.00% interest rate as noted above.
The decrease in interest expense, despite an increase in average interest bearing liabilities of $79.7 million, was a direct result of a reduction in the cost of deposits of 21 basis points, a 24 basis point decrease in our short-term borrowings and a 34 basis point decrease in long-term borrowings, primarily driven by maturity of an interest rate swap. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, management restructured three long-term FHLB advances that resulted in a reduced weighted rate on the $70.0 million portfolio of 80 basis points. A portion of this interest expense savings was captured in the fourth quarter of 2020 with the full impact expected in 2021. We proactively monitored the rate environment and reduced rates on our deposit portfolio throughout 2020. The average balance on our interest-bearing money market accounts increased $60.1 million, while the rate on these accounts decreased by 43 basis points. Average growth of $101.4 million in our non-interest-bearing accounts benefited our overall cost of deposits. Deposit growth was attributable to PPP loan funding and organic deposit growth in low cost core deposits with existing customers as well as new relationship customers during 2020.
As shown below, the composition of total interest income between 2020 and 2019 remained relatively stable.
‎
The following table sets forth the average balances, net interest income and expense, and average yields and rates for our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Distribution of Assets, Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Interest Rates and Interest Differential - Tax Equivalent Basis
Notes:
(1)The above table reflects the average rates earned or paid stated on a FTE basis assuming a tax rate of 21% for 2020 and 2019, and 35% for 2018. Non-GAAP interest income on a fully taxable equivalent basis for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $917, $868, and $796, respectively.
(2)The average balances of non-accrual loans for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, which were reported in the average loan balances for these years, were $9,945, $11,455, and $5,023, respectively.
(3)Net interest margin is calculated as net interest income divided by average earning assets.
(4)The average yields on investments are based on amortized cost.
‎
The following table sets forth an analysis of volume and rate changes in interest income and interest expense of our average interest-earning assets and average interest-bearing liabilities for 2020, 2019 and 2018. This table distinguishes between the changes related to average outstanding balances (changes in volume created by holding the interest rate constant) and the changes related to average interest rates (changes in interest income or expense attributed to average rates created by holding the outstanding balance constant).
Interest Variance Analysis (1)
Note:
(1)The change in interest income/expense due to both volume and rate has been allocated to volume and rate changes in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of the change in each.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses was $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net charge-offs of $1.5 million were recorded for 2020, compared to net recoveries of $0.2 million for 2019. The increase in provision expense for 2020 was driven by an increase in the qualitative factors reflecting the uncertainty of the economic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our borrowers. Of the $5.4 million net provision expense for the year, $5.9 million was related to COVID-19 qualitative factor adjustments and $0.8 million was related to loan growth and the change in loan mix. Provision expense was partially offset by the release of a specific allocation of $1.3 million based on a new appraisal, as a non-accrual loan moved to the OREO portfolio. Management believes that the ALL reflects a level commensurate with the risk inherent in our loan portfolio.
‎
Other Operating Income
The following table shows the major components of other operating income for the past two years, exclusive of net gains, and the percentage changes during these years:
Other operating income, exclusive of gains, decreased $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period of 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of the decrease in BOLI income relating to the $1.1 million BOLI death benefit proceeds received during the third quarter 2019. Service charge income, primarily NSF income, decreased as the consumer and business overdraft activity decreased in the year of 2020 due to reduced consumer spending and increased cash balances resulting from the receipt of government stimulus payments and PPP funding. Trust and brokerage income increased $0.4 million year-over-year although it was negatively affected by market volatility early in the year as trustee fees are directly related to the value of assets under management. Debit card income increased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared with the same period of 2019 despite reduced consumer spending. Debit card income continues to increase as we grow our deposit relationships and our customers increase use of our electronic services.
Net gains of $2.8 million and $0.3 million were reported through other income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $2.5 million increase in gains was attributable to the increased sales of mortgage loans to Fannie Mae as well as gains on sales in the investment portfolio.
Other Operating Expense
The following table compares the major components of other operating expense for 2020 and 2019:
Other operating expenses decreased $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period of 2019. Salaries and benefits decreased $3.6 million, primarily due to the $2.5 million salary expense offset related to loan originations, primarily PPP loans, as well as the reduced headcount resulting from the voluntary separation program implemented in the fourth quarter of 2019 and reduced life and health insurance costs. These reductions offset the annual merit increases awarded to our associates in April 2020, our payment of Financial First Responder bonuses, and increased incentives for mortgage production. FDIC premiums increased slightly due to credits received on quarterly assessments in 2019. Equipment, occupancy and technology expenses remained stable when compared with 2019 as we began to realize cost savings from our core processor related to a new contract negotiated in 2020. Professional services increased $2.7 million primarily due to increased legal and professional expenses related to the 2020 proxy contest and related litigation. Investor relations expenses increased $1.0 million, also related to the 2020 proxy contest. OREO expenses decreased $1.5 million as compared with 2019 as we experienced lower valuation allowance write-downs related to updated appraisals.
Increased marketing, consulting, miscellaneous expenses, dues and licenses, fraud expenses, miscellaneous loan fees and Visa processing fees, were offset by reductions in schools and seminars, contributions, personnel related expenses, printed and office supplies, travel and lodging, mileage, contract labor, business related meals and other employee benefits expenses, most of which were related to limited operations as a result of the pandemic and management’s continued focus on cost savings and efficiencies. Other operating expenses recorded for 2020 include $0.6 million of expenses associated with consulting for automated services that were previously deferred but that management determined, subsequent to February 19, 2021, should be expensed during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Applicable Income Taxes
We recognized a tax expense of $3.9 million in 2020, compared to a tax expense of $3.3 million in 2019. See the discussion under “Income Taxes” in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented elsewhere in this annual report for a detailed analysis of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. Our effective tax rate was 22.2% in 2020 and 20.3% in 2019. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the reduced tax exempt income, particularly related to the $1.1 million of BOLI death benefit proceeds received in 2019.
At December 31, 2020, the Corporation had Maryland Net Operating Losses (“NOLs”) of $40.4 million for which a deferred tax asset of $2.7 million has been recorded. There has been and continues to be a full valuation allowance on these NOLs based on management’s belief that it is more likely than not that these NOLs will not be realized prior to the expiration of their carry-forward periods because the Corporation will not generate sufficient taxable income in the future to fully utilize the NOLs. The valuation allowance was $2.7 million at December 31, 2020 and $2.6 million at December 31, 2019.
We have concluded that no valuation allowance is deemed necessary for our remaining federal and state deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020, as it is more likely than not that they will be realized based on the expected reversal of deferred tax liabilities, the generation of future income sufficient to realize the deferred tax assets as they reverse, and the ability to implement tax planning strategies to prevent the expiration of any carry-forward periods.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET REVIEW
Overview
Total assets at December 31, 2020 increased by $291.4 million to $1.7 billion from December 31, 2019. During 2020, cash and interest-bearing deposits in other banks increased by $99.5 million, the investment portfolio increased by $69.9 million and gross loans increased by $117.4 million but were offset by an increase in unearned fees of $1.0 million and an increase to the ALL of $4.0 million. The increase in cash was due to continued deposit growth, consisting of both core deposit growth and deposits related to the PPP loans, cash flow from calls on the investment portfolio, commercial loan payoffs as well as continued refinances of balances in our mortgage portfolio. The increase in the securities portfolio resulted from a strategic decision to purchase approximately $70.0 million of new investments in December 2020 as an alternative to holding low yielding cash balances. These investments will provide additional earnings in 2021 of approximately $0.7 million. OREO balances increased due to the movement of one large commercial participation loan from non-accrual loans to OREO after the foreclosure sale of the property early in the fourth quarter of 2020. This addition was partially offset by the sale of properties during the fourth quarter of 2020. Accrued interest receivable and other assets increased $3.6 million during 2020. Total liabilities increased by $286.3 million when compared with liabilities at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to the strong deposit growth of $280.3 million, inclusive of the remaining deposit balances related to the PPP loans at December 31, 2020. Deposit growth of $182.9 million, excluding the PPP deposits, during the year of 2020 was due to increased relationship balances as we continued to grow core relationships and customers favored insured products given the volatile economic environment. Our Treasury Management overnight investment sweep remained constant. Accrued interest payable and other liabilities increased $5.8 million. This increase was primarily related to $2.1 million of assets in 2019 in reserve for taxes moving to a liability in 2020. Total shareholders’ equity increased by $5.1 million during 2020, primarily due to the increase in earnings attributable to year-to-date net income, partially offset by common stock dividends of $3.6 million and the decline in surplus of $2.8 million related to stock repurchases during the first quarter of 2020 and the increase of $2.9 million in accumulated other comprehensive loss.
‎
As indicated below, the total interest-earning asset mix remained constant at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019. The mix for each year is illustrated below:
The year-end total liability mix has remained consistent during the two-year period as illustrated below.
Loan Portfolio
The Bank is actively engaged in originating loans to customers primarily in Allegany County, Frederick County, Garrett County, and Washington County in Maryland, and in Berkeley County, Mineral County, Monongalia County, and Harrison County in West Virginia; and the surrounding regions of West Virginia and Pennsylvania. We have policies and procedures designed to mitigate credit risk and to maintain the quality of our loan portfolio. These policies include underwriting standards for new credits as well as continuous monitoring and reporting policies for asset quality and the adequacy of the ALL. These policies, coupled with ongoing training efforts, have provided effective checks and balances for the risk associated with the lending process. Lending authority is based on the type of the loan, and the experience of the lending officer.
Commercial loans are collateralized primarily by real estate and, to a lesser extent, equipment and vehicles. Unsecured commercial loans represent an insignificant portion of total commercial loans. Residential mortgage loans are collateralized by the related property. Generally, a residential mortgage loan exceeding a specified internal loan-to-value ratio requires private mortgage insurance. Installment loans are typically collateralized, with loan-to-value ratios which are established based on the financial condition of the borrower. We also have made unsecured consumer loans to qualified borrowers meeting our underwriting standards. Additional information about our loans and underwriting policies can be found in Item 1 of Part I of this annual report under the heading “Banking Products and Services”.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio. Historically, our policy has been to make the majority of our loan commitments in our market areas. We had no foreign loans in our portfolio as of December 31 for any of the years presented.
Summary of Loan Portfolio
The following table presents the composition of our loan portfolio as of December 31 for the past five years:
Outstanding loans increased to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019. The $117.4 million of growth was primarily attributable to the participation in the PPP loan program and core commercial loan growth partially offset by a decline in our mortgage loan portfolio. CRE loans increased by $33.7 million due to expansion of several new customer relationships as well as an increase in small business loans. A&D loans declined by $0.9 million as amortization and payoffs offset new production. C&I loans increased by $144.4 million, including $114.0 million of PPP loans which remained on the balance sheet at December 31, 2020. The growth in the commercial portfolios was offset by a decline in residential mortgage loans of $59.3 million, as we saw robust refinancing activity during 2020. Given the current low interest rate environment, customers preferred
longer-term fixed-rate loans. Management elected to utilize the secondary market rather than hold mortgage loans in the portfolio at the longer-term fixed rates. The consumer loan portfolio declined slightly by $0.5 million during 2020.
Commercial loan production for 2020 was approximately $190.1 million, including PPP loan originations. Commercial construction funding continued to ramp up during the fourth quarter as projects are entering their larger draw periods, which should result in increased outstanding balances in 2021. At 2020 year-end, unfunded, committed commercial construction loans equaled $41.0 million. Commercial amortization and payoffs were approximately $85.2 million through December 31, 2020, including approximately $34.5 million of PPP loan forgiveness. Consumer mortgage loan production continued at a record pace, with the production of approximately $144.6 million for 2020. The production and pipeline mix of in-house, portfolio loans and investor loans remained robust at December 31, 2020, with those loans totaling $24.6 million, consisting of $12.0 million in portfolio loans and $12.6 million in investor loans.
The following table sets forth the maturities, based upon contractual dates, for selected loan categories as of December 31, 2020:
Maturities of Loan Portfolio at December 31, 2020
Management monitors the performance and credit quality of the loan portfolio by analyzing the age of the portfolio as determined by the length of time a required payment is past due. A loan is considered to be past due when a scheduled payment has not been received for 30 days past its contractual due date. For all loan segments, the accrual of interest is discontinued when principal or interest is delinquent for 90 days or more unless the loan is well-secured and in the process of collection. All non-accrual loans are considered to be impaired. Interest payments received on non-accrual loans are applied as a reduction of the loan principal balance. Loans are returned to accrual status when all principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured. Our policy for recognizing interest income on impaired loans does not differ from our overall policy for interest recognition.
‎
The following sets forth the amounts of non-accrual, past-due and restructured loans for the past five years:
Risk Elements of Loan Portfolio
We would have recognized $0.5 million in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 had our non-accrual loans been current and performing in accordance with their terms. During 2020, we recognized, on a cash basis, $0.1 million of interest income on non-accrual loans that paid off.
Performing loans considered to be impaired (including performing troubled debt restructurings, or TDRs), as defined and identified by management, amounted to $4.1 million at December 31, 2020 and $4.6 million at December 31, 2019. Loans are identified as impaired when, based on current information and events, management determines that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to contractual terms. These loans consist primarily of A&D loans and CRE loans. The fair values are generally determined based upon independent third-party appraisals of the collateral or discounted cash flows based upon the expected proceeds. Specific allocations have been made where management believes there is insufficient collateral to repay the loan balance if liquidated and there is no secondary source of repayment available. The decrease in valuation allowance related to impaired loans is due to the movement of the A&D loan to OREO, as previously discussed.
The level of performing impaired loans (other than performing TDRs) increased by $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
A troubled debt restructuring is the restructuring of a loan in which one or more concessions are granted to a borrower who is experiencing financial difficulties. A loan will be classified as a TDR if the Bank restructures the loan’s terms (i.e., interest rate, payment amount, amortization period and/or maturity date) after determining that the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties. A modified loan is considered to be a TDR when the Bank has determined that the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties. The Bank evaluates the probability that the borrower will be in payment default on any of its debt in the foreseeable future without modification. To make this determination, the Bank performs a global financial review of the borrower and loan guarantors to assess their current ability to meet their financial obligations. The following table presents the details of TDRs by loan class at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The level of TDRs decreased by $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no new loans added to TDRs and nine loans already in performing TDRs were re-modified. During the year ended December 31, 2020, one loan totaling $32 thousand paid off. Net principal payments totaling $0.2 million were received during the same time period.
At December 31, 2020, there were no additional funds committed to be advanced in connection with TDRs. Interest income not recognized due to rate modifications of TDRs was $28 thousand and interest income recognized on all TDRs was $0.2 million in 2020.
Section 4013 of the CARES Act allows financial institutions to suspend application of certain current TDR accounting guidance under ASC Subtopic 310-40 for loan modifications related to the COVID-19 pandemic made between March 1, 2020 and the date that is 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency, provided that certain criteria are met. This relief can be applied to loan modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019 and to loan modifications that defer or delay the payment of principal or interest, or that change the interest rate on the loan. In April 2020, federal and state banking regulators issued the Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus to provide further interpretation of when a borrower is experiencing financial difficulty, specifically indicating that if the modification is either short-term (i.e., six months or less) or mandated by a federal or state government in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the borrower is not experiencing financial difficulty as determined under ASC Subtopic 310-40. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank developed a set of guidelines to provide relief to qualified commercial, mortgage and consumer loans customers,
including the deferment of certain loan payments on these loans of up to 180 days. Initial deferrals of 90 days were granted to qualified customers with the option to request a second deferral for an additional 90 days. During 2020, 562 loans totaling $230.6 million were granted deferrals for interest or principal and interest payments. At December 31, 2020, 40 loans totaling $18.2 million remain in modification status. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented elsewhere in this annual report for additional information regarding these modified loans.
The Bank has not characterized any of these modified loans as TDRs because they met the criteria established pursuant to Section 4013 of the CARES Act and the guidance issued thereunder, nor has the Bank designated them as past due or nonaccrual. The Bank continues to prudently work with borrowers who have been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic while managing credit risks and recognizing an appropriate ALL.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The ALL is maintained to absorb losses from the loan portfolio. The ALL is based on management’s continuing evaluation of the quality of the loan portfolio, assessment of current economic conditions, diversification and size of the portfolio, adequacy of collateral, past and anticipated loss experience, and the amount of non-performing loans.
The ALL is also based on estimates, and actual losses will vary from current estimates. These estimates are reviewed quarterly, and as adjustments, either positive or negative, become necessary, a corresponding increase or decrease is made in the ALL. The methodology used to determine the adequacy of the ALL is consistent with prior years. An estimate for probable losses related to unfunded lending commitments, such as letters of credit and binding but unfunded loan commitments is also prepared. This estimate is computed in a manner similar to the methodology described above, adjusted for the probability of actually funding the commitment.
The ALL was $16.5 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $12.5 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of 31.5% that resulted primarily from adjustments to qualitative factors associated with the negative trend in the economic outlook and uncertainties in credit quality directly related to COVID-19. Net charge-offs of $1.5 million were recorded for 2020, compared to net recoveries of $0.2 million for 2019. The ratio of the ALL to loans outstanding, including PPP loan balances, was 1.41% at December 31, 2020 compared to 1.19% at December 31, 2019 and 1.36% at September 30, 2020. The ALL to loans outstanding, excluding PPP loan balances of $114.0 million, was 1.55% at December 31, 2020.
The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 was an annualized 0.13%, compared to net recoveries to average loans of 0.02% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Details of the ratio, by loan type are shown below. The increase in net charge offs in the A&D portfolio is related to the $1.1 million charge off of a formerly allocated specific allowance on an adversely classified non-accrual participation loan during the third quarter of 2020. This loan was subsequently purchased by the lending group at foreclosure and moved to the OREO portfolio. The project is now being aggressively marketed. Our special assets team continues to effectively collect on charged-off loans, resulting in ongoing overall low charge-off ratios.
Accruing loans past due 30 days or more decreased to 0.20%, including PPP loans, or 0.22% excluding PPP loans, compared to 0.67% at December 31, 2019. Non-accrual loans totaled $3.3 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $10.8 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in non-accrual balances at December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the movement of the $8.0 million A&D participation loan to OREO as described previously. In February 2021, a parcel was sold within the development which reduced the OREO balance by $2.2 million.
Management believes that the ALL at December 31, 2020 is adequate to provide for probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio. Amounts that will be recorded for the provision for loan losses in future periods will depend upon trends in the loan balances, including the composition of the loan portfolio, changes in loan quality and loss experience trends, potential recoveries on previously charged-off loans and changes in other qualitative factors. Management also applies interest rate risk, collateral value and debt service sensitivity analyses to the CRE loan portfolio and obtains new appraisals on specific loans under defined parameters to assist in the determination of the periodic provision for loan losses.
The following table presents the activity in the ALL by major loan category for the past five years.
Analysis of Activity in the Allowance for Loan Losses
The following presents management’s allocation of the ALL by major loan category in comparison to that loan category’s percentage of total loans. Changes in the allocation over time reflect changes in the composition of the loan portfolio risk profile and refinements to the methodology of determining the ALL. Specific allocations in any particular category may be reallocated in the future as needed to reflect current conditions. Accordingly, the entire ALL is considered available to absorb losses in any category.
Allocation of the Allowance for Loan Losses
Investment Securities
The following table sets forth the composition of our securities portfolio by major category as of the indicated dates:
Total fair value of investment securities available-for-sale at December 31, 2020 increased by $95.6 million when compared to December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the securities classified as available-for-sale included a net unrealized loss of $3.6 million, compared to a net unrealized loss of $3.7 million at December 31, 2019. These unrealized losses represent the difference between the fair value and amortized cost of securities in the portfolio. On June 1, 2014, management reclassified an amortized cost basis of $107.6 million of available-for-sale securities to held to maturity. The unrealized loss of approximately $4.0 million, at the date of transfer, will continue to be reported in a separate component of shareholders’ equity as accumulated other comprehensive income and will be amortized over the remaining life of the securities as an adjustment of yield in a manner consistent with the amortization of any premium or discount.
As discussed in Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we measure fair market values based on the fair value hierarchy established in ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). Level 3 prices or valuation techniques require inputs that are both significant to the valuation assumptions and are not readily observable in the market (i.e. supported with little or no market activity). These Level 3 instruments are valued based on both observable and unobservable inputs derived from the best available data, some of which is internally developed, and considers risk premiums that a market participant would require.
Approximately $213.6 million of the available-for-sale portfolio was valued using Level 2 pricing and had net unrealized gains of $1.7 million at December 31, 2020. The remaining $13.3 million of the securities available-for-sale represents the entire CDO portfolio, which was valued using significant unobservable inputs, or Level 3 pricing. The $5.3 million in net unrealized losses associated with the collateralized debt obligation (“CDO”) portfolio relates to nine pooled trust preferred securities. Unrealized losses of $3.8 million represent non-credit related OTTI charges on seven of the securities, while $1.5 million of unrealized losses relates to two securities which have no credit related OTTI. The unrealized losses on these securities are primarily attributable to continued depression in the marketability and liquidity associated with CDOs.
‎
The following table provides a summary of the trust preferred securities in the CDO portfolio and the credit status of the securities as of December 31, 2020.
The terms of the debentures underlying trust preferred securities allow the issuer of the debentures to defer interest payments for up to 20 quarters, and, in such case, the terms of the related trust preferred securities require their issuers to contemporaneously defer dividend payments. The issuers of the trust preferred securities in our investment portfolio have defaulted and/or deferred payments, ranging from 5.14% to 14.83% of the total collateral balances underlying the securities. The securities were designed to include structural features that provide investors with credit enhancement or support to provide default protection by subordinated tranches. These features include over-collateralization of the notes or subordination, excess interest or spread which will redirect funds in situations where collateral is insufficient, and a specified order of principal payments. There are securities in our portfolio that are under-collateralized, which does represent additional stress on our tranche. However, in these cases, the terms of the securities require excess interest to be redirected from subordinate tranches as credit support, which provides additional support to our investment.
Management systematically evaluates securities for impairment on a quarterly basis. Based upon application of ASC Topic 320 (Section 320-10-35), management must assess whether (i) the Corporation has the intent to sell the security and (ii) it is more likely than not that the Corporation will be required to sell the security prior to its anticipated recovery. If neither applies, then declines in the fair value of securities below their cost that are considered other-than-temporary declines are split into two components. The first is the loss attributable to declining credit quality. Credit losses are recognized in earnings as realized losses in the period in which the impairment determination is made. The second component consists of all other losses. The other losses are recognized in other comprehensive income. In estimating OTTI charges, management considers (a) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, (b) adverse conditions specifically related to the security, an industry, or a geographic area, (c) the historic and implied volatility of the security, (d) changes in the rating of a security by a rating agency, (e) recoveries or additional declines in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date, (f) failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest payments, and (g) the payment structure of the debt security and the likelihood of the issuer being able to make payments that increase in the future. Due to the duration and the significant market value decline in the pooled trust preferred securities held in our portfolio, we performed more extensive testing on these securities for purposes of evaluating whether or not an OTTI has occurred.
The market for these securities as of December 31, 2020 is not active and markets for similar securities are also not active. The inactivity was evidenced first by a significant widening of the bid-ask spread in the brokered markets in which these securities trade and then by a significant decrease in the volume of trades relative to historical levels. The new issue market is also inactive, as no new CDOs have been issued since 2007. There are currently very few market participants who are willing to effect transactions in these securities. The market values for these securities are very depressed relative to historical levels. Therefore, in the current market, a low market price for a particular bond may only provide evidence of stress in the credit markets in general rather than being an indicator of credit problems with a particular issue. Given the conditions in the current debt markets and the absence of observable transactions in the secondary and new issue markets, management has determined that (i) the few observable transactions and market quotations that are available are not reliable for the purpose of obtaining fair value at December 31, 2020, (ii) an income valuation approach technique (i.e. present value) that maximizes the use of relevant unobservable inputs and minimizes the use of observable inputs will be equally or more representative of fair value than a market approach, and (c) the CDO segment is appropriately classified within Level 3 of the valuation hierarchy because management determined that significant adjustments were required to determine fair value at the measurement date.
Management relies on an independent third party to prepare both the evaluations of OTTI and the fair value determinations for the CDO portfolio. Management does not believe that there were any material differences in the OTTI evaluations and pricing between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The approach used by the third party to determine fair value involved several steps, which included detailed credit and structural evaluation of each piece of collateral in each bond, projection of default, recovery and prepayment/amortization probabilities for each piece of collateral in the bond, and discounted cash flow modeling. The discount rate methodology used by the third party combines a baseline current market yield for comparable corporate and structured credit products with adjustments based on evaluations of the differences found in structure and risks associated with actual and projected credit performance of each CDO being valued. Currently, the only active and liquid trading market that exists is for stand-alone trust preferred securities, with a limited market for highly-rated CDO securities that are more senior in the capital structure than the securities in the CDO portfolio. Therefore, adjustments to the baseline discount rate are also made to reflect the additional leverage found in structured instruments.
Based upon a review of credit quality and the cash flow tests performed by the independent third party, management determined that no additional credit-related OTTI was required during 2020.
The following table sets forth the contractual or estimated maturities of the components of our securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and the weighted average yields on a tax-equivalent basis.
Investment Security Maturities, Yields, and Fair Values at December 31, 2020
The weighted average yield was calculated using historical cost balances and does not give effect to changes in fair value. The negative weighted average yield was due to increased paydowns on mortgage-backed securities which impacted their factors and three month conditional prepayment rate. At December 31, 2020, one Tax Increment Funding bond totaling $18.4 million exceeded 10% of shareholders’ equity.
‎
Deposits
The following table sets forth the actual and average deposit balances by major category for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Deposit Balances
Total deposits at December 31, 2020 increased by $280.3 million when compared with deposits at December 31, 2019. During 2020, non-interest-bearing deposits increased by $125.8 million. This growth was driven by our retail and commercial account growth as well as deposits from PPP loans. Traditional savings accounts increased by $37.1 million, as we continued to see significant growth in our Prime Saver product. Total demand deposits increased by $42.0 million and total money market accounts increased by $101.1 million, due primarily to growth in our variable rate Value Money Market account. Time deposits less than $100,000 decreased by $7.5 million and time deposits greater than $100,000 decreased by $18.2 million. The decline in time deposits greater than $100,000 was due to a local municipality utilizing a maturing certificate of deposit for cash needs during this unprecedented economic environment as well as our repayment of the full outstanding balance of $10.0 million in a brokered CD that matured in May 2020.
‎
The following table sets forth the maturities of time deposits of $100,000 or more:
Maturity of Time Deposits of $100,000 or More
Borrowed Funds
The following shows the composition of our borrowings at December 31:
The following is a summary of short-term borrowings at December 31 with original maturities of less than one year:
Total borrowings increased slightly by $0.4 million, or 0.29%, in 2020 when compared to 2019 due to increased balances in our existing accounts in our Treasury Management product.
Management will continue to closely monitor interest rates within the context of its overall asset-liability management process. See the discussion under the heading “Interest Rate Sensitivity” in this Item 7 for further information on this topic.
At December 31, 2020, we had additional borrowing capacity with the FHLB totaling $134.4 million, an additional $130.0 million of unused lines of credit with various financial institutions, $1.1 million of an unused secured line of credit with the Federal Reserve Bank and approximately $142.3 million available through wholesale money market funds. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented elsewhere in this annual report for further details about our borrowings and additional borrowing capacity, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, to meet the financing needs of its customers, the Bank is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, lines of credit, and standby letters of credit. Our exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to these financial instruments is represented by the contractual amount of the instruments. The credit risks inherent in loan commitments and letters of credit are essentially the same as those involved in extending loans to customers, and these arrangements are subject to our normal credit policies. We use the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. We generally require collateral or other security to support the financial instruments with credit risk. The amount of collateral or other security is determined based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis.
Loan commitments and letters of credit totaled $201.4 million and $17.7 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020. Management does not believe that any of the foregoing arrangements have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors. We are not a party to any other off-balance sheet arrangements. See Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented elsewhere in this annual report for additional information on these arrangements.
Capital Resources
We require capital to fund loans, satisfy our obligations under the Bank’s letters of credit, meet the deposit withdraw demands of the Bank’s customers, and satisfy our other monetary obligations. To the extent that deposits are not adequate to fund our capital requirements, we can rely on the funding sources identified below under the heading “Liquidity Management”. At December 31, 2020, the Bank had $130.0 million available through unsecured lines of credit with correspondent banks, $1.1 million available through a secured line of credit with the Fed Discount Window and approximately $134.4 million available through the FHLB. Management is not aware of any demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that are likely to materially affect our ability to meet our future capital requirements.
In addition to operational requirements, the Bank and the Corporation are subject to risk-based capital regulations, which were adopted and are monitored by federal banking regulators. These regulations are used to evaluate capital adequacy and require an analysis of an institution’s asset risk profile and off-balance sheet exposures, such as unused loan commitments and stand-by letters of credit. Detailed information about these capital regulations and their requirements is set forth in the “Supervision and Regulation” section of Item 1 of Part I of this annual report under the heading “Capital Requirements”.
At December 31, 2020, the Corporation’s total risk-based capital ratio was 16.08% and the Bank’s total risk-based capital ratio was 15.50%, both of which were well above the regulatory minimum of 8%. The total risk-based capital ratios of the Corporation and the Bank at December 31, 2019 were 16.29% and 15.60%, respectively. The decreases for the Corporation and the Bank in 2020 were due to increased earnings offset by the dividend funding and the stock repurchase of approximately $2.8 million.
At December 31, 2020, the most recent notification from the regulators categorizes the Corporation and the Bank as “well capitalized” under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented elsewhere in this annual report for additional information regarding regulatory capital ratios.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity is a financial institution’s capability to meet customer demands for deposit withdrawals while funding all credit-worthy loans. The factors that determine the institution’s liquidity are:
Reliability and stability of core deposits;
Cash flow structure and pledging status of investments; and
Potential for unexpected loan demand.
We actively manage our liquidity position through meetings of a sub-committee of executive management, which looks forward 12 months at 30-day intervals. The measurement is based upon the projection of funds sold or purchased position, along with ratios and trends developed to measure dependence on purchased funds and core growth. Monthly reviews by management and quarterly reviews by the Asset and Liability Committee under prescribed policies and procedures are designed to ensure that we will maintain adequate levels of available funds.
It is our policy to manage our affairs so that liquidity needs are fully satisfied through normal Bank operations. That is, the Bank will manage its liquidity to minimize the need to make unplanned sales of assets or to borrow funds under emergency conditions. The Bank will use funding sources where the interest cost is relatively insensitive to market changes in the short run (periods of one year or less) to satisfy operating cash needs. The remaining normal funding will come from interest-sensitive liabilities, either deposits or borrowed funds. When the marginal cost of needed wholesale funding is lower than the cost of raising this funding in the retail markets, the Corporation may supplement retail funding with external funding sources such as:
Unsecured Fed Funds lines of credit with upstream correspondent banks (M&T Bank, Atlantic Community Bankers Bank, Community Bankers Bank, PNC Financial Services (“PNC”), Pacific Coast Banker’s Bank and Zions Bancorp).
Secured advances with the FHLB of Atlanta, which are collateralized by eligible one to four family residential mortgage loans, home equity lines of credit, commercial real estate loans. Cash and various securities may also be pledged as collateral.
Secured line of credit with the Fed Discount Window for use in borrowing funds up to 90 days, using municipal securities as collateral.
Brokered deposits, including CDs and money market funds, provide a method to generate deposits quickly. These deposits are strictly rate driven but often provide the most cost effective means of funding growth.
One Way Buy CDARS/ICS funding - a form of brokered deposits that has become a viable supplement to brokered deposits obtained directly.
Secured Federal Reserve Bank PPPLF - an eligible line of credit secured by PPP loans.
Management believes that we have adequate liquidity available to respond to current and anticipated liquidity demands and is not aware of any trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that are likely to materially affect our ability to maintain liquidity at satisfactory levels.
Market Risk and Interest Sensitivity
Our primary market risk is interest rate fluctuation. Interest rate risk results primarily from the traditional banking activities that we engage in, such as gathering deposits and extending loans. Many factors, including economic and financial conditions, movements in interest rates and consumer preferences affect the difference between the interest earned on our assets and the interest paid on our liabilities. Interest rate sensitivity refers to the degree that earnings will be impacted by changes in the prevailing level of interest rates. Interest rate risk arises from mismatches in the repricing or maturity characteristics between interest-bearing assets and liabilities. Management seeks to minimize fluctuating net interest margins, and to enhance consistent growth of net interest income through periods of changing interest rates. Management uses interest sensitivity gap analysis and simulation models to measure and manage these risks. The interest rate sensitivity gap analysis assigns each interest-earning asset and interest-bearing liability to a time frame reflecting its next repricing or maturity date. The differences between total interest-sensitive assets and liabilities at each time interval represent the interest sensitivity gap for that interval. A positive gap generally indicates that rising interest rates during a given interval will increase net interest income, as more assets than liabilities will reprice. A negative gap position would benefit us during a period of declining interest rates.
At December 31, 2020, we were asset sensitive.
Our interest rate risk management goals are:
Ensure that the Board of Directors and senior management will provide effective oversight and ensure that risks are adequately identified, measured, monitored and controlled;
Enable dynamic measurement and management of interest rate risk;
Select strategies that optimize our ability to meet our long-range financial goals while maintaining interest rate risk within policy limits established by the Board of Directors;
Use both income and market value oriented techniques to select strategies that optimize the relationship between risk and return; and
Establish interest rate risk exposure limits for fluctuation in net interest income (“NII”), net income and economic value of equity.
In order to manage interest sensitivity risk, management formulates guidelines regarding asset generation and pricing, funding sources and pricing, and off-balance sheet commitments. These guidelines are based on management’s outlook regarding future interest rate movements, the state of the regional and national economy, and other financial and business risk factors. Management uses computer simulations to measure the effect on net interest income of various interest rate scenarios. Key assumptions used in the computer simulations include cash flows and maturities of interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities, changes in asset volumes and pricing, and management’s capital plans. This modeling reflects interest rate changes and the related impact on net interest income over specified periods.
We evaluate the effect of a change in interest rates of +/-100 basis points to +/-400 basis points on both NII and Net Portfolio Value (“NPV”) / Economic Value of Equity (“EVE”). We concentrate on NII rather than net income as long as NII remains the significant contributor to net income.
NII modeling allows management to view how changes in interest rates will affect the spread between the yield earned on assets and the cost of deposits and borrowed funds. Unlike traditional Gap modeling, NII modeling takes into account the different degree to which installments in the same repricing period will adjust to a change in interest rates. It also allows the use of different assumptions in a falling versus a rising rate environment. The period considered by the NII modeling is the next eight quarters.
NPV / EVE modeling focuses on the change in the market value of equity. NPV / EVE is defined as the market value of assets less the market value of liabilities plus/minus the market value of any off-balance sheet positions. By effectively looking at the present
value of all future cash flows on or off the balance sheet, NPV / EVE modeling takes a longer-term view of interest rate risk. This complements the shorter-term view of the NII modeling.
Measures of NII at risk produced by simulation analysis are indicators of an institution’s short-term performance in alternative rate environments. These measures are typically based upon a relatively brief period, usually one year. They do not necessarily indicate the long-term prospects or economic value of the institution.
Based on the simulation analysis performed at December 31, 2020 and 2019, management estimated the following changes in net interest income, assuming the indicated rate changes:
This estimate is based on assumptions that may be affected by unforeseeable changes in the general interest rate environment and any number of unforeseeable factors. Rates on different assets and liabilities within a single maturity category adjust to changes in interest rates to varying degrees and over varying periods of time. The relationships between lending rates and rates paid on purchased funds are not constant over time. Management can respond to current or anticipated market conditions by lengthening or shortening the Bank’s sensitivity through loan repricings or changing its funding mix. The rate of growth in interest-free sources of funds will influence the level of interest-sensitive funding sources. In addition, the absolute level of interest rates will affect the volume of earning assets and funding sources. As a result of these limitations, the interest-sensitive gap is only one factor to be considered in estimating the net interest margin.
Impact of Inflation - Our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature, and as such, future changes in prices do not affect the obligations to pay or receive fixed and determinable amounts of money. During inflationary periods, monetary assets lose value in terms of purchasing power and monetary liabilities have corresponding purchasing power gains. The concept of purchasing power is not an adequate indicator of the impact of inflation on financial institutions because it does not incorporate changes in our earnings.
‎