Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that are not historical facts are forward-looking statements (as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995). In addition, First US Bancshares, Inc. (“Bancshares” and, together with its subsidiaries, the “Company”), through its senior management, from time to time makes forward-looking statements concerning its expected future operations and performance and other developments. The words “estimate,” “project,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “believe,” “continues” and similar expressions are indicative of forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are necessarily estimates reflecting the Company’s best judgment based on current information and involve a number of risks and uncertainties, and various factors could cause results to differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements. Such factors could include those identified from time to time in the Company’s Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings and other public announcements, including the risk factors described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 discussed under Item 1A herein entitled “Risk Factors.” Specifically, with respect to statements relating to the sufficiency of the allowance for loan and lease losses, loan demand, cash flows, interest costs, growth and earnings potential, expansion and the Company’s positioning to handle the challenges presented by COVID-19, these factors include, but are not limited to, the rate of growth (or lack thereof) in the economy generally and in the Company’s service areas; market conditions and investment returns; changes in interest rates; the impact of the current COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, the Company’s customers, the communities that the Company serves and the United States economy, including the impact of actions taken by governmental authorities to try to contain the virus or address the impact of the virus on the United States economy (including, without limitation, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act and subsequent federal legislation) and the resulting effect on the Company’s operations, liquidity and capital position and on the financial condition of the Company’s borrowers and other customers; the pending discontinuation of LIBOR as an interest rate benchmark; the availability of quality loans in the Company’s service areas; the relative strength and weakness in the consumer and commercial credit sectors and in the real estate markets; collateral values; cybersecurity threats; and risks related to the Paycheck Protection Program. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to revise forward-looking statements to reflect circumstances or events that occur after the dates on which the forward-looking statements are made, except as required by law.
DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS
First US Bancshares, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Bancshares” and, together with its subsidiaries, the “Company”), is a bank holding company with its principal offices in Birmingham, Alabama. Bancshares operates one commercial banking subsidiary, First US Bank (the “Bank”). As of December 31, 2020, the Bank operated and served its customers through 19 banking offices located in Birmingham, Bucksville, Butler, Calera, Centreville, Columbiana, Gilbertown, Grove Hill, Harpersville, Jackson, Thomasville, Tuscaloosa and Woodstock, Alabama; Knoxville and Powell, Tennessee; and Rose Hill and Ewing, Virginia. In addition, the Bank operates loan production offices in Mobile, Alabama and the Chattanooga, Tennessee area. The Bank provides a wide range of commercial banking services to small- and medium-sized businesses, property managers, business executives, professionals and other individuals. In July 2020, the Bank permanently closed one banking office in Thomasville, Alabama.
The Bank owns all of the stock of Acceptance Loan Company, Inc., an Alabama corporation (“ALC”). ALC is a finance company headquartered in Mobile, Alabama that performs both indirect lending and conventional consumer finance lending through a branch network. ALC’s branch network serves customers through 20 offices located in Alabama and southeast Mississippi. The Bank serves as the primary funding source for ALC’s operations. ALC sold its branch in Scottsboro, Alabama during the third quarter of 2020.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company transferred a total of $45.5 million of its indirect loan portfolio from ALC to the Bank. The loans transferred include indirect sales lending relationships originated through prominent national or regional retailers that are managed by the Company on a centralized basis. The Company currently conducts this lending in 11 states, including Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.
FUSB Reinsurance, Inc., an Arizona corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Bank (“FUSB Reinsurance”), reinsures or “underwrites” credit life and credit accident and health insurance policies sold to the Bank’s and ALC’s consumer loan customers. FUSB Reinsurance is responsible for the first level of risk on these policies up to a specified maximum amount, and a primary third-party insurer retains the remaining risk. A third-party administrator is also responsible for performing most of the administrative functions of FUSB Reinsurance on a contract basis.
Delivery of the best possible financial services to customers remains an overall operational focus of the Company. The Company recognizes that attention to detail and responsiveness to customers’ desires are critical to customer satisfaction. The Company continues to upgrade technology, both in its financial services and in the training of its 270 full-time equivalent employees (as of December 31, 2020), to ensure customer satisfaction and convenience.
The following discussion and financial information are presented to aid in an understanding of the Company’s consolidated financial position, changes in financial position, results of operations and cash flows and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Audited Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included herein. The emphasis of the discussion is on the years 2020 and 2019. All yields and ratios presented and discussed herein are recorded and presented on the accrual basis and not on the tax-equivalent basis, unless otherwise indicated.
RECENT MARKET CONDITIONS: COVID-19 PANDEMIC
During the first quarter of 2020, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) spread to a number of countries around the world, including the United States. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, and the United States declared a National Public Health Emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic has severely restricted the level of economic activity in the Company’s markets. In response to the pandemic, the governments of the states in which both the Bank and ALC have retail offices and lending operations have taken preventive or protective actions, including imposing restrictions on business operations and travel, advising or requiring individuals to limit or forego time outside of their homes, and ordering temporary closures of businesses that have been determined to be non-essential.
See “Risk Factors - Risks Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic” for additional discussion of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations.
Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic and the CARES Act
Loan Deferments and Credit Risk Identification
In accordance with section 4013 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act and interpretive guidance from banking regulatory agencies, the Company implemented initiatives to provide short-term payment relief to borrowers who have been negatively impacted by COVID-19. During 2020, over 1,900 of the Company’s borrowers requested and were granted pandemic-related deferments by the Company. Although the interpretive guidance generally defined short-term as six months, most deferments granted by the Company were for terms of 90 days or less. As of December 31, 2020, 110 of the Company’s borrowers with an aggregate principal balance totaling approximately $8.1 million continued to have active loan payment deferments.
With respect to credit risk, at the onset of the pandemic, management identified certain categories of loans that it believed to be “at-risk” of potential default or credit loss. Initially, these “at-risk” categories were divided into those deemed to be of “high-risk” and those deemed to be of “moderate-risk.” As of December 31, 2020, management has refined its evaluation of those categories that continue to be at-risk in the current environment. In general, the categories that remain include those that were previously identified as “high-risk” as a result of the pandemic. The “high-risk” category, which totaled $13.5 million, or 2.1% of the loan portfolio, as of December 31, 2020, includes loans collateralized by hotels/motels and dine-in restaurants.
Refer to Note 4 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein under the heading “COVID-19 Loan Deferments and Risk Identification” for additional details related to COVID-19 deferred loan payments and loans considered to be “at-risk.”
The spread of COVID-19 has created a global public health crisis that has resulted in widespread volatility and deterioration in household, business, economic and market conditions. Although the Company has not experienced an increase in charge-offs, management expects that some loans may experience credit deterioration and that there may be defaults in certain industries.
In accordance with the Company’s uniform framework for establishing and monitoring credit risk, management will continue to closely evaluate all loans that request and receive COVID-19 deferments or that are considered to be “at-risk” with respect to the pandemic. However, there continues to be a significant level of uncertainty as to the ultimate impact that the pandemic will have on these borrowers.
Paycheck Protection Program
Sections 1102 and 1106 of the CARES Act added a new loan program administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) entitled the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP is intended to provide economic relief to small businesses throughout the United States that have been adversely impacted by COVID-19. An Interim Final Rule related to the PPP was issued on April 2, 2020, and additional clarifications to the Interim Final Rule have been provided subsequently by the SBA. In July 2020, additional legislation was passed that allowed small businesses to apply for loans through August 8, 2020. PPP loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and are forgivable in whole, or in part, if the proceeds are used by the borrower for payroll and other permitted purposes in accordance with the requirements of the PPP. If not forgiven in whole or in part, the loans carry a fixed interest rate of 1.00% per annum with payments deferred for 24 weeks from the date of the loan, plus another 10 months after the 24-week period. As compensation for originating a PPP loan, the Company receives lender processing fees from the SBA ranging from 1% to 5% of the original loan balance, depending on the size of the loan. Processing fees, net of origination costs, are deferred and amortized over the
contractual life of the loan as interest income. Upon forgiveness of a loan by the SBA, any unrecognized net deferred fees will be recognized as interest income in that period.
PPP loans were initially originated for a term of two years; however, a June 5, 2020 amendment to the CARES Act (i) provided for a five-year minimum loan term for loans originated beginning on that date and (ii) permitted lenders and borrowers to amend loans previously issued under two-year terms to terms of five to ten years if mutually agreed upon by both the lender and the borrower. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had originated 167 PPP loans with an aggregate principal balance of $14.0 million. Of this amount, $13.8 million of the loans were originated under two-year terms, while $0.2 million of the loans were originated under five-year terms. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining balance of the PPP loans totaled $11.9 million. In January 2021, the Bank began processing new applications for PPP loans.
A borrower is eligible for forgiveness of principal and accrued interest on its PPP loan to the extent that the proceeds were used to cover eligible payroll costs, interest costs, rent and utility costs over a period of between eight and twenty-four weeks after the loan is made, as long as the borrower retains its employees and their compensation levels. The SBA began processing forgiveness payments during the fourth quarter of 2020. Amortized PPP loan fees, which are recognized in interest and fees on loans, totaled approximately $161 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $204 thousand in remaining net deferred SBA PPP loan fees.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements requires management to make subjective judgments associated with estimates. These estimates are necessary to comply with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and general banking practices. The estimates include accounting for the allowance for loan losses, goodwill and other intangible assets, other real estate owned, valuation of deferred tax assets and fair value measurements.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
The Company maintains the allowance for loan and lease losses at a level deemed adequate by management to absorb probable losses from loans and leases in the portfolio at the balance sheet date. In determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan and lease losses, management considers numerous factors, including, but not limited to, management’s estimate of: (a) loan and lease loss experience; (b) the financial condition and liquidity of certain loan customers; and (c) collateral values of property securing certain loans and leases. Because these factors and others involve the use of management’s estimation and judgment, the allowance for loan and lease losses is inherently subject to adjustment at future dates. Unfavorable changes in the factors used by management to determine the adequacy of the allowance, including increased loan or lease delinquencies and subsequent charge-offs, or the availability of new information could require additional provisions in excess of normal provisions to the allowance for loan and lease losses in future periods. No allowance for loan and lease losses is carried over or established at acquisition for purchased loans acquired in business combinations. Loans acquired in business combinations that are deemed impaired at acquisition, purchased credit impaired (“PCI”) loans, are grouped into pools and evaluated separately from the non-PCI portfolio. The estimated cash flows to be collected on PCI loans are discounted at a market rate of interest. Subsequent to the acquisition of PCI loans, estimates of cash flows expected to be collected are updated each reporting period based on updated assumptions regarding default rates, loss severities and other factors that are reflective of current market conditions. Subsequent decreases in expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses. Subsequent increases in expected cash flows will generally result in a reversal of the provision for loan losses to the extent of prior charges. There can be no assurance that loan and lease losses in future periods will not exceed the allowance for loan and lease losses or that additions to the allowances will not be required.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill arises from business combinations and is generally determined as the excess of cost over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill is determined to have an indefinite useful life and is not amortized, but is tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or circumstances exist that indicate that a goodwill impairment test should be performed. The Company performs its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1. Impairment exists when a reporting unit’s carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. In testing goodwill for impairment, U.S. GAAP permits the Company to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. In this qualitative assessment, the Company evaluates events and circumstances that may include, but are not limited to, the general economic environment, banking industry and market conditions, the overall financial performance of the Company, the performance of the Company’s common stock, the key financial performance metrics of the Company’s reporting units and events affecting the reporting units to determine if it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the quantitative impairment test is required or the decision to bypass the qualitative assessment is elected, the Company performs the goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. A recognized impairment loss cannot be reversed in future periods even if the fair value of the reporting unit subsequently recovers. The Company recorded $7.4 million of goodwill as a result of its acquisition of TPB in 2018. Goodwill impairment was neither indicated nor recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Other intangible assets consist of core deposit intangible assets arising from acquisitions. Core deposit intangibles have definite useful lives and are amortized on an accelerated basis over their estimated useful lives. The Company’s core deposit intangibles have estimated useful lives of 7 years. In addition, these intangibles are evaluated for impairment whenever events or circumstances exist that indicate that the carrying amount should be reevaluated.
Other Real Estate Owned
Other real estate owned (“OREO”) consists of properties obtained through foreclosure or in satisfaction of loans and is reported at the net realizable value of the property, less estimated costs to sell. Estimates of fair value are generally based on third-party appraisals of the property and are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The appraisals are sometimes discounted based on management’s knowledge of the property and/or changes in market conditions from the date of the most recent appraisal. Such discounts are typically unobservable inputs for determining fair value.
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation
Income tax expense and current and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Deferred tax assets may also arise from the carryforward of operating loss or tax credit carryforwards as allowed by applicable federal or state tax jurisdictions. In addition, there may be transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax outcomes are uncertain and the Company’s tax returns are subject to audit by various tax authorities. Although we believe that estimates related to income taxes are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome will not be materially different than that which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets in the tax jurisdictions from which they arise, management considers all available positive and negative evidence, including the Company’s historical earnings and, in particular, the results of recent operations, expected reversals of temporary differences, the ability to utilize tax planning strategies and the expiration dates of any operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. A valuation allowance is recognized for a deferred tax asset if, based on the weight of all available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion of or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. The assumptions about the amount of future taxable income require the use of significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates that management uses in the underlying business. At this time, management considers it to be more likely than not that the Company will have sufficient taxable income in the future to allow all deferred tax assets to be realized. Accordingly, a valuation allowance was not established for deferred tax assets as of either December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Fair Value Measurements
Portions of the Company’s assets and liabilities are carried at fair value, with changes in fair value recorded either in earnings or accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). These include securities available-for-sale, impaired loans and derivatives. Additionally, other real estate and certain other assets acquired in foreclosure are reported at the lower of the recorded investment or fair value of the property, less estimated cost to sell. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between willing market participants at the measurement date. While management uses judgment when determining the price at which willing market participants would transact when there has been a significant decrease in the volume or level of activity for the asset or liability in relation to “normal” market activity, management’s objective is to determine the point within the range of fair value estimates that is most representative of a sale to a third party under current market conditions. The value to the Company if the asset or liability were held to maturity is not included in the fair value estimates.
A fair value measure should reflect the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including the assumptions about the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique, the effect of a restriction on the sale or use of an asset and the risk of nonperformance. Fair value is measured based on a variety of inputs that the Company utilizes. Fair value may be based on quoted market prices for identical assets or liabilities traded in active markets (Level 1 valuations). If market prices are not available, we may use quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active and model-based valuation techniques for which all significant assumptions are observable in the market (Level 2 valuations). Where observable market data is not available, the valuation is generated from model-based techniques that use significant assumptions not observable in the market, but that are observable based on Company-specific data (Level 3 valuations). These unobservable assumptions reflect the Company’s own estimates for assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Other Significant Accounting Policies
Other significant accounting policies, not involving the same level of measurable uncertainties as those discussed above, are nevertheless important to an understanding of the consolidated financial statements. Policies related to the right of use asset and lease liability, revenue recognition, investment securities and long-lived assets require difficult judgments on complex matters that are often subject to multiple and recent changes in the authoritative guidance. Certain of these matters are among topics currently under re-examination by accounting standard setters and regulators. Specific conclusions have not been reached by these standard setters, and outcomes cannot be predicted with confidence. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discusses accounting policies that we have selected from acceptable alternatives.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company earned net income of $2.7 million, or $0.40 per diluted common share, compared to net income of $4.6 million, or $0.67 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Summarized condensed consolidated statements of operations are included below for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Significant Impacts on Earnings
The following discussion summarizes the most significant activity that impacted changes in the Company’s net income during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income decreased $1.2 million comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to margin compression, as interest-earning assets repriced more quickly than interest-bearing liabilities following the 150-basis point reduction in the federal funds rate in March. Net interest margin decreased 49 basis points comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019.
This interest rate environment precipitated by the pandemic put significant pressure on net interest margin in the first and second quarters of 2020 as yields on interest-earning assets generally shifted downward more rapidly than rates on interest-bearing liabilities. Since March 2020, management has continued efforts to reprice deposit products in a manner consistent with the interest rate environment. Annualized total funding costs (including both interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposits and borrowings) decreased to 0.62% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 0.96% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Due to continued reduction in funding costs, as well as loan growth, net interest income improved in both the third and fourth quarters of 2020. We expect the current low interest rate environment to continue to put pressure on net interest margin, and therefore expect growth in net interest income to remain challenging. Accordingly, management continues to remain focused on reducing interest expense through liability repricing and improving interest income through growth in loans that meet the Company’s established credit standards.
Provision for Loan and Lease Losses
The provision for loan and lease losses was $2.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase comparing 2020 to 2019 is reflective of the significant uncertainty that was introduced into the economic environment following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of this uncertainty, the Company increased qualitative factors associated with the calculation of loan loss reserves beginning in the first quarter of 2020, and, due to continued economic uncertainty, these qualitative factors remained at heightened levels as of December 31, 2020. However, the Company continued to see improvement as of the end of the year in certain metrics related to the credit quality of the loan portfolio, including reductions in COVID-19-related deferments. The allowance as a percentage of total loans increased to 1.18% (excluding PPP loans, which are guaranteed by the SBA) as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1.05% as of December 31, 2019. In addition, the
ratio of net charge-offs to average loans decreased to 0.21% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 0.38% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
In accordance with relevant accounting guidance for smaller reporting companies, the Company has not yet adopted the Current Expected Credit Loss (CECL) accounting model for the calculation of credit losses. Management believes that the allowance for loan and lease losses as of December 31, 2020, which was calculated under an incurred loss model, was sufficient to absorb losses in the Company’s loan portfolio based on circumstances existing as of the balance sheet date. However, the economic environment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain, and accordingly, management will continue to closely monitor the impact of changing economic circumstances on the Company’s loan portfolio.
Non-interest Income
Non-interest income totaled $5.0 million and $5.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease resulted from reductions in service charges and related fees on the Bank’s deposit accounts, as well as reduced credit insurance income that is derived primarily from ALC’s lending activities. These decreases were attributable to reduced economic activity and changes in deposit customer and consumer borrower behaviors during the pandemic. The reductions were partially offset by increased non-interest income associated with gains on the sale of securities, secondary mortgage fees and other income. In addition, effective in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Bank discontinued its secondary mortgage marketing efforts. Although the discontinuation of secondary mortgage marketing efforts is expected to result in reductions of non-interest income, it is also expected to reduce non-interest expense commensurately.
Non-interest Expense
Non-interest expense increased by $0.5 million comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. In response to the pandemic and the resulting economic uncertainty, management has continued efforts to monitor expenses. These efforts have included elimination of merit raises for executive management in 2020, which has assisted in holding salary and benefits expenses to an increase of 0.9% comparing 2020 to 2019. In addition, the Company experienced reductions in occupancy, foreclosure and certain other expenses, while experiencing increases in computer, insurance and professional services expenses.
Balance Sheet Management
The Company’s asset base increased during 2020. As of December 31, 2020, assets totaled $890.5 million, compared to $788.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The discussion below presents significant balance sheet components comparing December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019.
Loans and Credit Quality
Total loans increased by $94.1 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was most pronounced in indirect sales lending and commercial real estate lending, which grew by $96.0 million and $31.4 million, respectively. The Company’s indirect sales portfolio is comprised of loans secured by collateral that generally includes recreational vehicles, campers, boats and horse trailers. Effective January 1, 2020, the portfolio was transferred from ALC to the Bank, and, during the pandemic, demand for this financing grew substantially as consumers sought alternatives to more traditional travel and leisure activities. The Company currently operates this lending in 11 states located in the southeastern United States. Management believes that the movement of this portfolio under the Bank’s brand has afforded and will continue to afford greater opportunity for growth and diversification of the portfolio over time. The growth in commercial real estate lending was focused on borrowers that management determined to be of appropriate credit quality and structure in the current environment under the Bank’s established underwriting criteria.
Loan growth during the year was partially offset by decreases in 1-4 family residential real estate loans totaling $15.7 million, in the Bank’s commercial and industrial portfolio totaling $9.2 million and in direct consumer lending, primarily through ALC’s branch system, totaling $8.4 million.
Nonperforming assets, including loans in non-accrual status and other real estate owned (OREO), decreased to $4.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $4.8 million as of December 31, 2019. As a percentage of total assets, non-performing assets improved to 0.45% as of December 31, 2020, compared to 0.61% as of December 31, 2019.
Investment Securities
The investment securities portfolio continues to provide the Company with additional liquidity and allows management to fund a portion of loan growth from the maturity and payoff of securities within the portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, the investment securities portfolio totaled $91.4 million, compared to $108.4 million as of December 31, 2019. Management monitors its liquidity
position, including forecasted expectations related to loan growth, when making determinations about whether to re-invest in the securities portfolio.
Deposits and Borrowings
Deposits totaled $782.2 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $683.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The deposit growth during 2020 reflected the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on both business and consumer deposit holders, including preferences for liquidity, loan payment deferments, tax payment deferments, stimulus checks and lower consumer spending. Of the total increase in deposits, $39.2 million represented non-interest-bearing deposits, while $59.4 million were interest-bearing deposits.
Liquidity and Capital
The Company continues to maintain excess funding capacity to provide adequate liquidity for loan growth, capital expenditures and ongoing operations. The Company benefits from a strong deposit base, a liquid investment securities portfolio and access to funding from a variety of sources, including federal funds lines, Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances and brokered deposits.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Bank maintained capital ratios at higher levels than the ratios required to be considered a “well-capitalized” institution under applicable banking regulations. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank’s common equity Tier 1 capital and Tier 1 risk-based capital ratios were each 11.78%. Its total capital ratio was 12.92%, and its Tier 1 leverage ratio was 8.98%.
Cash Dividend
The Company declared a cash dividend of $0.03 per share on its common stock in each quarter of 2020, resulting in a dividend of $0.12 per share for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.09 per share for the year ended December 31, 2019.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is calculated as the difference between interest and fee income generated from earning assets and the interest expense paid on deposits and borrowed funds. Fluctuations in interest rates, as well as volume and mix changes in earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, can materially impact net interest income. The Company’s earning assets consist of loans, taxable and tax-exempt investments, Federal Home Loan Bank stock, federal funds sold by the Bank and interest-bearing deposits in banks. Interest-bearing liabilities consist of interest-bearing demand deposits and savings and time deposits, as well as short-term borrowings.
The following table shows the average balances of each principal category of assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Additionally, the table provides an analysis of interest revenue or expense associated with each category, along with the accompanying yield or rate percentage. Net interest margin is calculated for each period presented as net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Note A - For the purpose of these computations, non-accruing loans are included in the average loan amounts outstanding. The loans averaged $3.3 million and $1.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Note B - The annualized rate on total average funding costs, including total average interest-bearing liabilities and average non-interest-bearing demand deposits, was 0.62% and 0.96% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Note C - Loan fees are included in the interest amounts presented. Loan fees totaled $2.0 million and $1.9 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table summarizes the impact of variances in volume and rate of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities on components of net interest income.
Net interest margin was reduced by 49 basis points to 4.69% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 5.18% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction in net interest margin resulted from the prevailing low interest rate environment and our asset-sensitive balance sheet. Since August 2019, the federal funds rate has been reduced by 225 basis points, including decreases totaling 150 basis points in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company’s average loan balance increased by $62.9 million comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019. However, as a result of declining yields, interest earned on loans decreased $1.4 million comparing 2020 to 2019. The growth in average loans over the course of 2020 was funded through growth in deposits combined with maturities, sales and pay-downs in the Company’s investment portfolio. The average balance of the investment portfolio (taxable and tax-exempt combined) was reduced by $30.6 million comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Based on this volume reduction, coupled with the reduced interest rate environment, interest earned on the investment portfolio declined by $0.9 million comparing 2020 to 2019.
The COVID-19 pandemic has reduced economic activity and increased liquidity for deposit customers, consequently increasing the Company’s cash balances during 2020. In the current environment, the excess cash balances earn low yields, which has put downward pressure on net interest margin. Interest earned on excess cash balances (including federal funds sold and interest-bearing deposits in banks) decreased by $0.9 million comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, due primarily to the decrease in the federal funds rate.
Since March 2020, management has continued efforts to reprice deposit products in a manner consistent with the declining interest rate environment. The weighted average annualized rate paid for interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 0.77% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.14% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Including non-interest-bearing demand deposits and borrowings, the Company’s aggregate funding costs totaled 0.62% for 2020, compared to 0.96% for 2019. Due to continued reduction in funding costs, as well as loan growth, net interest income improved in both the third and fourth quarters of 2020.
In the current interest rate environment, management expects to further reduce interest costs as interest-bearing liabilities continue to reprice; however, significant economic uncertainty remains due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that growth in net loan volume with loans of sufficient credit quality will enhance net income, particularly as resources are shifted from lower earning excess cash balances and federal funds sold into loan assets. However, there continues to be competitive pressure to generate loans of sufficient credit quality. Management is maintaining vigilance in the deployment of strategies to effectively manage risks associated with interest rate fluctuations. However, net interest income could continue to experience downward pressure as a result of the interest rate environment, as well as increased competition for quality loan and deposit funding opportunities.
Provision for Loan and Lease Losses
The provision for loan and lease losses was $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net charge-offs during 2020 decreased to $1.2 million, compared to $2.0 million during 2019. Although net charge-off experience improved, due to uncertainty related to the ultimate economic impact of the pandemic, the Company continued to increase qualitative factors in the calculation of the allowance for loan and lease losses. The increased qualitative factors in response to the pandemic, as well as significant loan growth during 2020, resulted in increased loan loss provisioning during the year ended December 31, 2020. Continued growth in the indirect lending portfolio may drive continued additions to the loan loss provision in future periods, which tends to partially offset the improvement to our net interest margin created by such growth. The allowance as a percentage of total loans increased to 1.18% (excluding PPP loans, which are guaranteed by the SBA) as of December 31, 2020, compared to 1.05% as of December 31, 2019.
Management believes that the allowance for loan and lease losses as of December 31, 2020, which was calculated under an incurred loss model, was sufficient to absorb losses in the Company’s loan portfolio based on circumstances existing as of the balance sheet date. However, the economic environment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to contain a significant level of uncertainty. Management will continue to monitor circumstances associated with the loan portfolio, particularly those loans for which payment deferments have been provided and those portfolio categories characterized as “at-risk.” Should economic circumstances continue to deteriorate, additional loan loss provisioning may be required.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income represents fees and income derived from sources other than interest-earning assets. The following table presents the major components of non-interest income for the periods indicated:
NM: Not Meaningful
Non-interest income at the Bank consists of service charges and other fees on deposit accounts; bank-owned life insurance; net gains on the sale and prepayment of investment securities; gains on the sale of premises and equipment and other assets; fees from the secondary market mortgage activities; lease income; and other non-interest income, which includes fee income generated by the Bank, such as ATM fees and real estate rental income. Non-interest income at ALC consists of credit insurance commissions and fees and other non-interest income generated for ancillary services, such as ALC’s auto club membership program. Non-interest income decreased by $0.4 million comparing 2020 to 2019. The decrease resulted from reductions in service charges and related fees on the Bank’s deposit accounts, as well as reduced credit insurance income that is derived primarily from ALC’s lending activities. These decreases were attributable to reduced economic activity and changes in deposit customer and consumer borrower behaviors during the pandemic. Certain categories of non-interest income are expected to provide a relatively stable source of revenues, while others may fluctuate significantly based on changes in economic conditions, regulation or other factors. Non-interest income is expected to remain below historic levels in the near-term due to the decline in economic activities resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, effective in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company discontinued secondary mortgage marketing efforts. Accordingly, the Company expects to realize reductions in this non-interest income category in the future. However, the reductions in non-interest income will be substantially offset by reductions in salary and benefits and other expenses that were previously dedicated to these marketing efforts.
Non-Interest Expense
Non-interest expense represents expenses incurred from sources other than interest-bearing liabilities. The following table presents the major components of non-interest expense for the periods indicated:
Non-interest expense increased by $0.5 million, or 1.5%, comparing 2020 to 2019. In general, non-interest expense is expected to increase over time due to inflationary pressures; however, management continues to maintain vigilance in efforts to reduce these costs where opportunities to do so exist. In the near-term, non-interest expense may increase due to expenditures incurred by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Such expenses could include salary and employee benefits payments for increased work levels in response to the pandemic, costs to modify office space and retail banking centers to protect the safety of employees and customers, and expenses incurred to upgrade the Company’s technological systems to enhance remote interactions between employees and customers, as well as to respond to emerging threats associated with cybersecurity.
In addition to potential increases in expenditures required to operate, as a result of deteriorating economic circumstances in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company could also experience increases in non-interest expenses associated with the valuation of certain assets. Such expenditures could include, but are not limited to, impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets, write downs of assets taken out of operations, or impairments of available-for-sale investment securities for losses that are considered to be other-than-temporary.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $0.8 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s effective tax rate was 23.4% and 21.4%, respectively, for the same periods.
The effective tax rate is impacted by recurring items, such as changes in tax-exempt interest income earned from bank-qualified municipal bonds and loans and the cash surrender value of bank-owned life insurance. Management makes decisions about whether to invest in tax-exempt instruments on a case-by-case basis after considering a number of factors, including investment return, credit quality and the consistency of such investments with the Company’s overall strategy. The Company’s effective tax rate is expected to fluctuate commensurate with the level of these investments as compared to total pre-tax income.
BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS
Investment Securities
The investment securities portfolio is used by management to provide liquidity, to generate interest income and for use as collateral for public deposits and wholesale funding. Risk and return can be adjusted by altering the duration, composition and/or balance of the portfolio. The expected average life of securities in the investment portfolio was 2.2 years and 2.6 years as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Available-for-sale securities are recorded at estimated fair value, with unrealized gains or losses recognized, net of taxes, in accumulated other comprehensive income, a separate component of shareholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2020, available-for-sale securities totaled $85.0 million, or 93.0% of the total investment portfolio, compared to $94.0 million, or 86.8% of the total investment portfolio, as of December 31, 2019. Available-for-sale securities consisted of residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities, U.S. Treasury securities, corporate bonds and obligations of state and political subdivisions.
Held-to-maturity securities are recorded at amortized cost and represent securities that the Company both intends and has the ability to hold to maturity. As of December 31, 2020, held-to-maturity securities totaled $6.4 million, or 7.0% of the total investment portfolio, compared to $14.3 million, or 13.2% of the total investment portfolio, as of December 31, 2019. Held-to-maturity securities consisted of commercial mortgage-backed securities, obligations of U.S. government-sponsored agencies and obligations of states and political subdivisions.
Investment Securities Maturity Schedule
The following tables summarize the carrying values and weighted average yield of the available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities portfolios as of December 31, 2020, according to contractual maturity. Available-for-sale securities are stated at fair value. Held-to-maturity securities are stated at amortized cost.
Condensed Portfolio Maturity Schedule
Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses
The tables below summarize loan balances by portfolio category at the end of each of the most recent five years as of December 31, 2020:
The tables below summarize changes in the allowance for loan and lease losses for each of the most recent five years as of December 31, 2020:
(1) The allowance for loan and lease losses as a percentage of loans excluding PPP loans, which are guaranteed by the SBA, was 1.18% as of December 31, 2020.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets at the end of the five most recent years as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Summarized below is information concerning income on those loans with deferred interest or principal payments resulting from deterioration in the financial condition of the borrower.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses
While no portion of the allowance is in any way restricted to any individual loan or group of loans and the entire allowance is available to absorb losses from any and all loans, the following table shows an allocation of the allowance for loan and lease losses as of the end of the five years indicated.
Summary of Loan Loss Experience
The following table summarizes the Company’s loan loss experience for each of the two years indicated.
Net charge-offs improved for the Company to 0.21% of average loans outstanding in 2020, compared to 0.38% of average loans outstanding in 2019. The improvement resulted primarily from improved charge-off experience in the consumer lending portfolio in 2020 compared to 2019. Net charge-offs in the consumer portfolio were reduced by $0.4 million comparing 2020 to 2019.
Deposits
Total deposits increased by 14.4% to $782.2 million as of December 31, 2020, from $683.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Core deposits, which exclude time deposits of $250 thousand or more, provide a relatively stable funding source that supports earning assets. Core deposits totaled $726.9 million, or 92.9% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2020, compared to $635.5 million, or 93.0% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2019. The deposit growth during the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on both business and consumer deposit holders, including preferences for liquidity, loan payment deferrals, tax payment deferrals, stimulus checks and lower consumer spending. Of the total increase in deposits, $39.2 million represented non-interest-bearing deposits, while $59.3 million were interest-bearing deposits.
Deposits, in particular core deposits, have historically been the Company’s primary source of funding and have enabled the Company to successfully meet both short-term and long-term liquidity needs. Management anticipates that such deposits will continue to be the Company’s primary source of funding in the future. We will continue to monitor deposit levels closely to help ensure an adequate level of funding for the Company’s activities. However, various economic and competitive factors could affect this funding source in the future, including increased competition from other financial institutions in deposit gathering, national and local economic conditions and interest rate policies adopted by the Federal Reserve and other central banks.
Average Daily Amount of Deposits and Rates
The average daily amount of deposits and rates paid on such deposits are summarized for the periods indicated in the following table:
Maturities of time certificates of deposit of greater than $250 thousand outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized as follows:
Maturities of time certificates of deposit of greater than $100 thousand and less than $250 thousand outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized as follows:
Other Interest-Bearing Liabilities
Other interest-bearing liabilities consist of federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and FHLB advances. This category continues to be utilized as an alternative source of funds. As of December 31, 2020, these borrowings represented 1.7% of average interest-bearing liabilities, compared to 0.9% as of December 31, 2019.
Shareholders’ Equity
The Company has historically placed significant emphasis on maintaining its strong capital base and continues to do so. As of December 31, 2020, shareholders’ equity totaled $86.7 million, or 9.7% of total assets, compared to $84.7 million, or 10.7% of total assets, as of December 31, 2019. Management believes that this level of equity is an indicator of the financial soundness of the Company and the Company’s ability to sustain future growth and profitability. Growth in retained earnings during the year ended December 31, 2020 was offset by a decrease in additional paid-in capital, as well as an increase in accumulated other comprehensive loss associated with decreases in the fair value of cash flow hedges during the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the cash flow hedges fluctuates based on changes in interest rates. Accordingly, the negative fair value of the hedges during the year ended December 31, 2020 is not necessarily indicative of future performance of the portfolio.
Bancshares’ Board of Directors evaluates dividend payments based on the Company’s level of earnings and the desire to maintain a strong capital base, as well as regulatory requirements relating to the payment of dividends. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Bancshares declared dividends of $0.12 and $0.09 per common share, respectively, or approximately $0.7 million and $0.6 million, respectively, in aggregate amount.
As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company retained approximately $21.9 million in treasury stock. The Company initiated a share repurchase program in January 2006, under which the Company was authorized to repurchase up to 642,785 shares of Bancshares’ common stock before December 31, 2007. In December 2007, and in each year since, the Board of Directors has extended the expiration date of the share repurchase program for an additional year. Currently, the share repurchase program is set to expire on December 31, 2021. There were 54,961 shares available for repurchase under this program as of December 31, 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, 38,604 shares were repurchased under this program at a weighted average price of $11.70 per share, or $0.5 million in total. No additional repurchases were made under the program for the remainder of the year. During the year ended December 31, 2019, 148,738 shares were repurchased under this program at a weighted average price of $9.94 per share, or $1.5 million in total.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, a total of 111,419 and 124,392 shares of stock, respectively, were deferred in connection with Bancshares’ Non-Employee Directors’ Deferred Compensation Plan. The plan permits non-employee directors to invest their directors’ fees and to receive the adjusted value of the deferred amounts in cash or shares of Bancshares common stock. All deferred fees, whether in the form of cash or shares of Bancshares common stock, are reflected as compensation expense in the period earned. The Company classifies all deferred directors’ fees allocated to be paid in shares of stock as equity additional paid-in capital. The Company may use issued shares or shares of treasury stock to satisfy these obligations when due.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The asset portion of the balance sheet provides liquidity primarily from the following sources: (1) excess cash and interest-bearing deposits in banks, (2) federal funds sold, (3) principal payments and maturities of loans and (4) principal payments and maturities from the investment portfolio. Loans maturing or repricing in one year or less amounted to $105.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and $125.9 million as of December 31, 2019. Investment securities forecasted to mature or reprice in one year or less were estimated to be $11.3 million and $6.9 million of the investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Although some securities in the investment portfolio have legal final maturities exceeding 10 years, a substantial percentage of the portfolio provides monthly principal and interest payments and consists of securities that are readily marketable and easily convertible into cash on short notice. As of December 31, 2020, the investment securities portfolio had an estimated average life of 2.2 years. However, management does not rely solely upon the investment portfolio to generate cash flows to fund loans, capital expenditures, dividends, debt repayment and other cash requirements. These activities are also funded by cash flows from loan payments, as well as increases in deposits and short-term borrowings.
The liability portion of the balance sheet provides liquidity through interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing deposit accounts, which represent the Company’s primary sources of funds. In addition, federal funds purchased, FHLB advances, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and short-term and long-term borrowings are additional sources of available liquidity. Liquidity management involves the continual monitoring of the sources and uses of funds to maintain an acceptable cash position. Long-term liquidity management focuses on considerations related to the total balance sheet structure. The Bank manages the pricing of its deposits to maintain a desired deposit balance. In addition, the Bank invests in short-term interest-earning assets, which provide liquidity to meet lending requirements.
As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $10.0 million of outstanding borrowings under FHLB advances. The Company had up to $225.8 million and $211.5 million in remaining unused credit from the FHLB (subject to available collateral) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, the Company had $51.4 million and $61.7 million in unused established federal funds lines as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company believes that these potential funding sources will continue to be available.
Management believes that the Company has adequate sources of liquidity to cover its contractual obligations and commitments over the next twelve months.
Regulatory Capital
The Bank is subject to the revised capital requirements as described in the section captioned “Supervision and Regulation - Capital Adequacy” included in Part I, Item I of this report. Under these requirements, the Bank is subject to minimum risk-based capital and leverage capital requirements, which are administered by the federal banking regulatory agencies. These capital requirements, as defined by federal regulations, involve quantitative and qualitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet instruments. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the financial statements of Bancshares and the Bank, and could impact Bancshares’ ability to pay dividends. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank exceeded all applicable minimum capital standards. In addition, the Bank met applicable regulatory guidelines to be considered well-capitalized as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019. No significant conditions or events have occurred since December 31, 2020 that management believes would affect the Bank’s classification as “well-capitalized” for regulatory purposes.
Refer to the section captioned “Regulatory Capital” included in Note 14, “Shareholders’ Equity,” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for an illustration of the Bank’s actual regulatory capital amounts and ratios under regulatory capital standards in effect at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Additionally, refer to the section captioned “Dividend Restrictions” included in Note 14 for a discussion regarding restrictions that could materially influence the Bank’s, and therefore Bancshares’, ability to pay dividends.
Asset/Liability Management
Market risk reflects the potential risk of loss arising from adverse changes in interest rates and market prices. The Company has risk management policies and procedures in place to monitor and limit exposure to market risk. The Company’s primary market risk is interest rate risk created by core banking activities. Interest rate risk is the potential variability of the Company’s income that results from changes in various market interest rates. The Bank’s Asset/Liability Committee routinely reassesses the Company’s strategies to manage interest rate risk in accordance with policies established by the Company’s Board of Directors. A key objective of the asset/liability management program is to quantify, monitor and manage interest rate risk and to assist management in maintaining stability in net interest margin under varying interest rate environments.
As part of interest rate risk management, the Company may use derivative instruments in accordance with policies established by the Board of Directors. The Asset/Liability Committee, in its oversight role, approves the use of derivatives, which include interest rate swaps, caps and floors. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank held five forward interest rate swap contracts. The interest rate swap contracts, which are designated as either cash flow hedges or fair value hedges, are intended to mitigate risk associated with rising interest rates by converting floating interest rate payments to a fixed rate or by converting a pool of fixed rate loans to a variable rate. See Note 16, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to these derivative instruments.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has contractual obligations to make future payments under debt and lease agreements. Long-term debt and operating lease obligations are reflected on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company has not entered into any unconditional purchase obligations or other long-term obligations, other than as included below. These types of obligations are further discussed in Note 9, “Borrowings,” and Note 15, “Leases,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Many of the Bank’s lending relationships, including those with commercial and consumer customers, contain both funded and unfunded elements. The unfunded component of these commitments is not recorded in the consolidated balance sheets. These commitments are further discussed in Note 19, “Guarantees, Commitments and Contingencies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table summarizes the Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Obligations
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on its consolidated financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources other than as described in Note 15 “Leases,” Note 16 “Derivative Financial Instruments” and Note 19 “Guarantees, Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.