ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto contained in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of certain factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors Associated with Our Business” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are engaged in the research and development of targeted, non-systemic therapies for the treatment of patients with gastrointestinal (“GI”) diseases. Non-systemic therapies are non-absorbable drugs that act locally, i.e. in the intestinal lumen, skin or mucosa, without reaching an individual’s systemic circulation.
We are currently focused on developing our pipeline of gut-restricted GI clinical drug candidates. Our lead drug candidate is MS1819, a recombinant lipase for the treatment of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (“EPI”) in patients with cystic fibrosis (“CF”) and chronic pancreatitis (“CP”), currently in two Phase 2 CF clinical trials. In 2021, we plan to launch two clinical programs using proprietary formulations of niclosamide, a pro-inflammatory pathway inhibitor; FW-420, for Grade 1 Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-Associated Colitis (“ICI-AC”) and diarrhea in oncology patients, and FW-1022, for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (“COVID-19”) GI infections.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the WHO declared the novel coronavirus disease, or COVID-19, outbreak a global pandemic. To limit the spread of COVID-19, governments have taken various actions including the issuance of stay-at-home orders and physical distancing guidelines. Accordingly, businesses have adjusted, reduced or suspended operating activities. Beginning in March 2020, the majority of our workforce began working from home. Disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the effects of the stay-at-home orders and work-from-home policies, have impacted productivity, including delayed enrollment of new patients at certain of our clinical trial sites, and may further disrupt our business and delay our development programs and regulatory timelines, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct business in the ordinary course. As a result, our expenses may vary significantly if there is an increased impact from COVID-19 on the costs and timing associated with the conduct of our clinical trials and other related business activities.
We have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. We continue to operate normally with the exception of enabling all of our employees to work productively at home and abiding by travel restrictions issued by federal, state and local governments. Our current plans to return to the office remain fluid as federal, state and local guidelines, rules and regulations continue to evolve.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of our drug candidates or otherwise. In the future, we expect that we will seek to generate revenue primarily from product sales, but we may also generate non-product revenue from sources including, but not limited to, research funding, development and milestone payments, and royalties on future product sales in connection with any out-license or other strategic relationships and/or government grants we may establish. Our drug candidates are at an early stage of development and may never be successfully developed or commercialized.
Research and Development Expense
Conducting research and development is central to our business. Historically, the majority of our research and development expenses have been focused on the development of our lead drug candidate, MS1819.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of internal and external costs incurred for our development activities, which include, among other things:
●
personnel-related costs, which include salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense;
●
fees paid to third parties for services directly related to our drug development and regulatory efforts;
●
Expenses incurred under agreements with clinical research organizations (CROs), investigative sites and consultants and contractors that conduct or provide other services relating to our clinical trials and research activities;
●
the cost of acquiring drug product, drug supply and clinical trial materials from contract development and manufacturing organization (CDMOs) and third-party contractors;
●
costs associated with preclinical and non-clinical activities;
●
payments and other costs in connection with the acquisition our drug candidates under licensing agreements; and
●
amortization of intangible assets, including patents, in-process research and development and license agreements.
Costs incurred in connection with research and development activities are expensed as incurred.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we focus our efforts on the clinical development of our drug candidates, including MS1819, and niclosamide through late-stage clinical trials, as well as chemistry, manufacturing and controls (“CMC”) efforts. The process of conducting non-clinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. It is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and costs of any non-clinical study or clinical trial that we may conduct. In addition, if our product development efforts are successful, we expect to incur substantial costs to prepare for potential commercialization of any late-stage drug candidates and, in the event any of our drug candidates receives regulatory approval, to potentially fund the launch and sales and marketing efforts of the product.
The probability of success for any of our current or future drug candidates will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each drug candidate, as well as an assessment of each drug candidate’s commercial potential.
We do not record or maintain information regarding costs incurred in research and development on a program or project specific basis. Our research and development staff, outside consultants, contractors, CROs, and CDMOs are deployed across several programs and/or indications. Additionally, many of our costs are not attributable to individual programs and/or indications. Therefore, we believe that allocating costs on the basis of time incurred by our personnel does not accurately reflect the actual costs of a project.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, related to our executive, finance, business development and support functions, legal fees relating to both intellectual property and corporate matters, insurance, costs associated with operating as a public company, including corporate communications and investor relations expense, information technology, professional fees for accounting, auditing and other professional services, and facility-related costs.
We anticipate our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future to support of our expanded research and development activities, intellectual property, patent and corporate legal expense, insurance, and costs associated with operating as a public company, including corporate communications and investor relations expense. Additional increases in general and administrative expenses are expected in connection with increased business development efforts, including potential partnership and/or collaboration agreements and financing activities, expanding infrastructure, including information technology administration, and the hiring of additional personnel and consultants, among other expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have not generated any revenues and have experienced net losses and negative cash flows from our activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $6.1 million, negative working capital of approximately $7.7 million, and had sustained cumulative losses attributable to common stockholders of approximately $95.4 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we have raised aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $18.0 from the sale of preferred stock and Common Stock in public offerings and private placement transactions, and we have received gross cash proceeds of approximately $4.6 million from the exercise of warrants. We have not yet achieved profitability and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our expenses will continue to grow and, as a result, we will need to generate significant product revenues to achieve profitability. We may never achieve profitability. As such, we are dependent on obtaining, and are continuing to pursue, the necessary funding from outside sources, including obtaining additional funding from the sale of securities in order to continue our operations. Without adequate funding, we may not be able to meet our obligations. We believe these conditions may raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our primary sources of liquidity come from capital raises through additional equity and/or debt financings. This may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which is evolving and could negatively impact our ability to raise additional capital in the future.
We have funded our operations to date primarily through the issuance of debt, convertible debt securities, preferred stock, as well as the issuance of Common Stock in various public offerings and private placement transactions. We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development of MS1819, niclosamide and any other drug candidates. We will require additional financing to develop our drug candidates, run clinical trials, prepare regulatory filings and obtain regulatory approvals, fund operating losses, and, if deemed appropriate, establish manufacturing, sales and marketing capabilities. Our current financial condition raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a material adverse impact on our financial condition, our ability to meet our obligations, and our ability to pursue our business strategies. We will seek funds through additional equity and/or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing.
On December 31, 2020, to finance our entry into the First Wave License Agreement with First Wave, we entered into a purchase agreement to raise aggregate gross proceeds of $8.0 million from the sale of shares of Series C Preferred Stock and warrants, in a combined private placement and registered direct offering, which closed in January 2021. On March 7, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement to raise aggregate gross proceeds of $10.0 million in a registered direct offering priced at the market under Nasdaq rules. Additionally, between January and March 2021, we received gross cash proceeds of approximately $4.6 million from the exercise of warrants.
Although, we are primarily focused on the development of our drug candidates, including MS1819 and niclosamide, we are also opportunely focused on expanding our product pipeline of clinical assets through collaborations, and also through acquisitions of products and companies. We are continually evaluating potential asset acquisitions business combinations, and other partnership opportunities. To finance such acquisitions, we might raise additional equity capital, incur additional debt, or both.
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues
We have not yet achieved revenue-generating status from any of our drug candidates. Since inception, we have devoted substantially all of our time and efforts to developing our lead drug candidate, MS1819. As a result, we did not have any revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses include cash and non-cash expenses primarily relating to the development of our lead drug candidate, MS1819 and the acquisition of our licensed niclosamide drug candidates.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $19.1 million, an increase of approximately $10.5 million, or 121% over the approximately $8.7 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash expenses, including stock-based compensation, stock expense and depreciation and amortization totaled approximately $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and approximately $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $5.4 million, a decrease of approximately $1.9 million, or 26% over the approximately $7.3 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in total research and development expenses was primarily attributable to the $13.3 million of expense related to the acquisition of our niclosamide drug candidates through the First Wave License Agreement entered into on December 31, 2020, and increases of approximately $1.1 million in CMC related costs, offset by decreases of approximately $2.9 million in clinical related expenses in connection with reduced clinical activity in 2020 as compared to 2019 partly due to COVID-19, and approximately $0.9 million in non-cash expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses include cash and non-cash expenses primarily consisting of costs associated with our overall operations and being a public company. These costs include personnel, legal and financial professional services, insurance, corporate communication and investor relations, compliance related fees, and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining intellectual property and patents, among others.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $7.3 million, an increase of approximately $1.6 million, or 27% over the approximately $5.7 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash expenses, including stock-based compensation, stock expense and depreciation and amortization totaled approximately $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and approximately $0.7 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $6.6 million, an increase of approximately $1.6 million, or 32% over the approximately $5.0 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in total general and administrative expenses was due primarily to increases in legal expenses of approximately $0.7 million, personnel costs of approximately $0.4 million, business development related expense of approximately $0.3 million, directors and officer’s insurance of approximately $0.3 million, and costs associated with being a publicly reporting company of approximately $0.1 million offset by decreases in travel and entertainment of $0.1 million, accounting and auditing of $0.1 million, and directors fees of approximately $0.1 million.
Other Expense
Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $6.3 million, an increase of approximately $5.5 million, or 686% over the approximately $0.8 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense was approximately $5.8 million and $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increased interest expense is due to amortization of debt discount and accrued interest related to the convertible debt issued in December 2019 and January 2020.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors above, our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $32.7 million, an increase of approximately $17.5 million, or 115% over the approximately $15.2 million recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $11.2 million was primarily attributable to our net loss of approximately $32.7 million adjusted for addbacks of non-cash expenses of approximately $7.3 million, which includes accretion of debt discount of approximately $4.6 million, loss on debt extinguishment of approximately $0.6 million, amortization of approximately $0.5 million, and stock-based compensation of approximately $0.5 million and a net increase of working capital of approximately $14.2 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of approximately $14.0 million was primarily attributable to our net loss of approximately $15.2 million adjusted for addbacks of non-cash expenses of approximately $2.8 million, which includes amortization of approximately $1.0 million, stock expense of approximately $0.6 million, and stock-based compensation of approximately $0.6 million and a net decrease of working capital of approximately $1.7 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately 87,000 was primarily attributable to the and sale of equipment related to the closure of our laboratory in France.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of approximately $24,000 was primarily attributable to the net purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the net proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt of approximately $3.2 million in January 2020 and the issuance of the preferred stock of approximately $13.2 million in the Series B Private Placement in July 2020 offset by repayments of approximately $0.5 million related to the ADEC Notes and approximately $0.7 million related to the note payable.
Net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the net proceeds from our public offerings in April, May, and July 2019 of approximately $9.5 million, and issuance of the convertible debt of approximately $5.0 million from the ADEC Note Offering, and the December 2019 Promissory Note Offering offset by repayments of approximately $1.6 million related to the ADEC Notes and approximately $0.3 million related to the note payable.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expense during the reporting period. In our consolidated financial statements, estimates are used for, but not limited to, valuation of financial instruments and intangible assets, fair value of long-lived assets and contingent consideration, deferred taxes and valuation allowance, and the depreciable lives of long-lived assets.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and assumptions, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Due to the estimation processes involved, the following summarized accounting policies and their application are considered to be critical to understanding our business operations, financial condition and operating results.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based payment awards issued to employees and members of our Board by measuring the fair value of the award on the date of grant and recognizing this fair value as stock-based compensation using a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, generally the vesting period. For awards issued to non-employees, the measurement date is the date when the performance is complete or when the award vests, whichever is the earliest. Accordingly, non-employee awards are remeasured at each reporting period until the final measurement date. The fair value of the award is recognized as stock-based compensation over the requisite service period, generally the vesting period.
Debt and Equity Instruments
We analyze debt and equity instruments for various features that would generally require either bifurcation and derivative accounting, or recognition of a debt discount or premium under authoritative guidance.
Detachable warrants issued in conjunction with debt are measured at their relative fair value, if they are determined to be equity instrument, or their fair value, if they are determined to be liability instruments, and recorded as a debt discount.
Conversion features that are in the money at the commitment date constitute a beneficial conversion feature that is measured at its intrinsic value and recognized as debt discount or deemed dividend. Debt discount is amortized as interest expense over the maturity period of the debt using the effective interest method.
Intangible Assets
Our definite-lived intangible assets had a carrying value of approximately $2.9 million and $3.4 million at December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. These assets include patents, in-process research and development and license agreements. These intangible assets were recorded at historical cost and are stated net of accumulated amortization.
The patents, in-process research and development and licenses are amortized over their remaining estimated useful lives, ranging from 5 to 12 years, based on the straight-line method. The estimated useful lives directly impact the amount of amortization expense recorded for these assets on a quarterly and annual basis.
In addition, we test for impairment of definite-lived intangible assets when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. Judgment is used in determining when these events and circumstances arise. If we determine that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable, judgment and estimates are used to assess the fair value of the assets and to determine the amount of any impairment loss. No events or circumstances arose in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 that would indicate that the carrying value of any of our definite-lived intangible assets may not be recoverable.
Goodwill
Goodwill relates to the acquisition of ProteaBio Europe SAS during 2014 and represents the excess of the total purchase consideration over the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities, using the purchase method of accounting. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to periodic review for impairment. As a result, the amount of goodwill is directly impacted by the estimates of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
In addition, goodwill will be reviewed annually, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the goodwill might not be recoverable. Judgment is used in determining when these events and circumstances arise. We perform our review of goodwill on our one reporting unit. If we determine that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable, judgment and estimates are used to assess the fair value of the assets and to determine the amount of any impairment loss.
The carrying value of goodwill was approximately $2.1 million and $1.9 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, and may remain an emerging growth company until December 31, 2022. For so long as we remain an emerging growth company, we are permitted and intend to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. These exemptions include:
●
reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements ;
●
no non-binding stockholder advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements; and
●
exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting.
We have taken advantage of reduced reporting requirements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and may continue to do so until such time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (a) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (b) December 31, 2021, the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (c) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (d) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
In addition, we are also a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as (i) our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
We had the following contractual obligations over the periods indicated:
(1)
Only includes basic rent payments for our properties. Additional monthly payments under the lease agreements shall include tax payments and operational costs.