ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULT OF OPERATIONS
The Company has no operations or revenue as of the date of this Report. We are currently in the process of developing a business plan. Management intends to explore and identify viable business opportunities within the U.S. including seeking to acquire a business in a reverse merger. Our ability to effectively identify, develop and implement a viable plan for our business may be hindered by risks and uncertainties which are beyond our control, including without limitation, the continued negative effects of the coronavirus pandemic on the U.S. and global economies. For more information about the risk of Covid-19 on our business, see Item 1.A. - “Risk Factors”.
Plan of Operation
The Company has no operations from a continuing business other than the expenditures related to running the Company, and has no revenue from continuing operations as of the date of this Report.
Management intends to explore and identify business opportunities worldwide, including a potential acquisition of an operating entity through a reverse merger, asset purchase or similar transaction. Our Chief Executive Officer has experience in business consulting, although no assurances can be given that he can identify and implement a viable business strategy or that any such strategy will result in profits. Our ability to effectively identify, develop and implement a viable plan for our business may be hindered by risks and uncertainties which are beyond our control, including without limitation, the continued negative effects of the coronavirus pandemic on the U.S. and global economies. For more information about the risk of coronavirus on our business, see Item 1A “Risk Factors.”
We do not currently engage in any business activities that provide revenue or cash flow. During the next 12 month period we anticipate incurring costs in connection with investigating, evaluating, and negotiating potential business combinations, filing SEC reports, and consummating an acquisition of an operating business.
Given our limited capital resources, we may consider a business combination with an entity which has recently commenced operations, is a developing company or is otherwise in need of additional funds for the development of new products or services or expansion into new markets, or is an established business experiencing financial or operating difficulties and is in need of additional capital. Alternatively, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, an entity which desires access to the U.S. capital markets.
As of the date of this Report, our management has not had any discussions with any representative of any other entity regarding a potential business combination. Any target business that is selected may be financially unstable or in the early stages of development. In such event, we expect to be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of a financially unstable or early stage entity. In addition, we may effect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk or in which our management has limited experience, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
We anticipate that the selection of a business combination will be a complex and risk-prone process. Because of general economic conditions, including unfavorable conditions caused by the coronavirus pandemic, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, management believes that there are a number of firms seeking business opportunities at this time at discounted rates with which we will compete. We expect that any potentially available business combinations may appear in a variety of different industries or regions and at various stages of development, all of which will likely render the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complicated. Once we have developed and begun to implement our business plan, management intends to fund our working capital requirements through a combination of our existing funds and future issuances of debt or equity securities. Our working capital requirements are expected to increase in line with the implementation of a business plan and commencement of operations.
Based upon our current operations, we do not have sufficient working capital to fund our operations over the next 12 months. If we are able to close a reverse merger, it is likely we will need capital as a condition of closing that acquisition. Because of the uncertainties, we cannot be certain as to how much capital we need to raise or the type of securities we will be required to issue. In connection with a reverse merger, we will be required to issue a controlling block of our securities to the target’s shareholders which will be very dilutive.
Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current shareholders. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to our Common Stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.
We anticipate that we will incur operating losses in the next 12 months, principally costs related to our being obligated to file reports with the SEC. Our prospects must be considered in light of the risks, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stage of development. Such risks for us include, but are not limited to, an evolving and unpredictable business model, recognition of revenue sources, and the management of growth. To address these risks, we must, among other things, develop, implement, and successfully execute our business and marketing strategy, respond to competitive developments, and attract, retain, and motivate qualified personnel. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in addressing such risks, and the failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition, and results of operations.
COVID-19 Update
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material impact on the Company, particularly due to our current lack of operations. The pandemic may, however, have an impact on our ability to evaluate and acquire an operating entity through a reverse merger or otherwise. See Item 1A “Risk Factors” for more information.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of the date of this Report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Going Concern
The independent registered public accounting firm auditors’ report accompanying our September 30, 2021 financial statements contained an explanatory paragraph expressing substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements have been prepared “assuming that we will continue as a going concern,” which contemplates that we will realize our assets and satisfy our liabilities and commitments in the ordinary course of business.