Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
The Company
First National Corporation (the Company) is the bank holding company of:
•
First Bank (the Bank). The Bank owns:
•
First Bank Financial Services, Inc.
•
Shen-Valley Land Holdings, LLC
•
First National (VA) Statutory Trust II (Trust II)
•
First National (VA) Statutory Trust III (Trust III and, together with Trust II, the Trusts)
First Bank Financial Services, Inc. invests in entities that provide title insurance and investment services. Shen-Valley Land Holdings, LLC was formed to hold other real estate owned and future office sites. The Trusts were formed for the purpose of issuing redeemable capital securities, commonly known as trust preferred securities and are not included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with authoritative accounting guidance because management has determined that the Trusts qualify as variable interest entities.
Products, Services, Customers and Locations
The Bank offers loan, deposit, and wealth management products and services. Loan products and services include consumer loans, residential mortgages, home equity loans, and commercial loans. Deposit products and services include checking accounts, treasury management solutions, savings accounts, money market accounts, certificates of deposit, and individual retirement accounts. Wealth management services include estate planning, investment management of assets, trustee under an agreement, trustee under a will, individual retirement accounts, and estate settlement. Customers include small and medium-sized businesses, individuals, estates, local governmental entities, and non-profit organizations. The Bank’s office locations are well-positioned in attractive markets along the Interstate 81, Interstate 66, and Interstate 64 corridors in the Shenandoah Valley, central regions of Virginia, and the city of Richmond. Within this market area, there are diverse types of industry including medical and professional services, manufacturing, retail, warehousing, Federal government, hospitality, and higher education.
The Bank’s products and services are delivered through 14 bank branch offices located throughout the Shenandoah Valley and central regions of Virginia, a loan production office, and a customer service center in a retirement village. The branch offices are comprised of 13 full service retail banking offices and one drive-through express banking office. For the location and general character of each of these offices, see Item 2 of this Form 10-K. Many of the Bank’s services are also delivered through the Bank’s mobile banking platform, its website, www.fbvirginia.com, and a network of ATMs located throughout its market area.
Revenue Sources and Expense Factors
The primary source of revenue is from net interest income earned by the Bank. Net interest income is the difference between interest income and interest expense and typically represents between 70% and 80% of the Company’s total revenue. Interest income is determined by the amount of interest-earning assets outstanding during the period and the interest rates earned on those assets. The Bank’s interest expense is a function of the amount of interest-bearing liabilities outstanding during the period and the interest rates paid. In addition to net interest income, noninterest income is the other source of revenue for the Company. Noninterest income is derived primarily from service charges on deposits, fee income from wealth management services, and ATM and check card fees.
Primary expense categories are salaries and employee benefits, which comprised 56% of noninterest expenses during 2020, followed by occupancy and equipment expense, which comprised 14% of noninterest expenses. The provision for loan losses is also a primary expense of the Bank. The provision is determined by factors that include net charge-offs, asset quality, economic conditions, and loan growth. Changing economic conditions caused by inflation, recession, unemployment, or other factors beyond the Company’s control have a direct correlation with asset quality, net charge-offs, and ultimately the required provision for loan losses.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
Operations
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Bank continued to follow its Pandemic Plan that strives to protect the health of its employees and customers, while continuing to deliver essential banking services. In response to an increasing number of COVID-19 cases in our communities during the fourth quarter, the Bank re-entered phase one of its plan on December 9, 2020 after operating under phase two of its plan since July 1, 2020. Phase one of the plan limits access to banking offices while delivering a majority of its banking services through branch drive throughs, ATMs, and mobile and internet banking platforms.
Paycheck Protection Program
The Bank participated as a lender in the U.S. Small Business Administration’s (SBA) Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to support local small businesses and non-profit organizations during 2020. During the second and third quarters, the Bank originated $76.6 million of PPP loans, received $2.5 million of loan fees, and incurred $535 thousand of loan origination costs. The original PPP provided forgivable loans over a five-month period before it stopped accepting applications in August of 2020. The loan fees are being accreted into earnings evenly over the life of the loans, net of the loan costs, through interest and fees on loans. At December 31, 2020, PPP loan balances totaled $64.7 million with approximately 99% of the loan balances maturing in the second quarter of 2022 and approximately 1% of loan balances maturing in the second quarter of 2025. PPP loans to customers who had requested debt forgiveness and were waiting to be notified of forgiveness decisions from the SBA totaled $2.0 million at December 31, 2020.
Congress revived the PPP (new PPP) as part of the COVID-19 relief bill that was signed into law on December 27, 2020. The Bank began participating as a lender in the new PPP in January of 2021. As of February 28, 2021, the Bank had originated $18.9 million of new PPP loans. Loan fees received on new PPP loans will also be accreted into earnings evenly over the life of the loans, net of the loan costs, through interest and fees on loans. These new PPP loans will mature in the first quarter of 2026.
Asset Quality Impact
The pandemic has negatively impacted the financial condition of certain loan customers. The Bank expects certain sectors of its commercial real estate loan portfolio, including retail shopping, lodging and leisure, may experience elevated financial pressure in future periods. Those sectors comprised 5%, 5% and 2% of the loan portfolio, respectively, excluding PPP loans, at December 31, 2020. The Bank also expects that loans in those same sectors of its commercial and industrial loan portfolio may experience financial pressure in future periods. The magnitude of the potential decline in the Bank’s loan quality in future periods will likely depend on the duration of the pandemic and the extent that the Bank’s customers experience business interruptions.
Loan Modifications
In response to the unknown impact of the pandemic on the economy and its customers, the Bank created and implemented a loan payment deferral program for individual and business customers beginning in the first quarter of 2020, which provided them the opportunity to defer monthly payments for 90 days. At June 30, 2020, loans participating in the program totaled $182.6 million. More than 99% of these loans resumed regular payments during the second half of the year after their deferral periods ended. Loans that remained in the program totaled $1.2 million at December 31, 2020. These loans were not considered troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) because they were modified in accordance with relief provisions of the CARES Act and recent interagency regulatory guidance.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Bank modified terms of certain loans for customers that continued to be negatively impacted by the pandemic. The loan modifications lowered borrower loan payments by allowing interest only payments for periods ranging between 6 and 24 months. All loans modified were in the Bank’s commercial real estate loan portfolio and totaled $14.3 million at December 31, 2020. The loans were comprised of $12.8 million in the lodging sector and $1.5 million in the leisure sector. These loans were not considered TDRs because they were modified in accordance with relief provisions of the CARES Act.
Capital
The Company issued $5.0 million of subordinated debt in June 2020 as a result of its enterprise risk management and capital planning. The purpose of the issuance was primarily to further strengthen holding company liquidity and to remain a source of strength for the Bank in the event of a severe economic downturn. The Company may also use the proceeds of the issuance for general corporate purposes, including the potential repayment of the Company’s existing subordinated debt issued in 2015, which became callable on a quarterly basis beginning January 1, 2021. The subordinated debt issued in 2020 consists of a 5.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated note due 2030 issued to an institutional investor and was structured to qualify as Tier 2 capital under bank regulatory guidelines.
The Company’s stock repurchase plan remained suspended during the fourth quarter of 2020 and ended on December 31, 2020. The Company has not authorized another stock repurchase plan due to the potential impact of the pandemic on the economy and the Bank’s customers. The Company continued to pay cash dividends on common stock of $0.11 per share during each quarter of 2020.
Overview of Financial Performance and Condition
Net income decreased by $698 thousand to $8.9 million, or $1.82 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.6 million, or $1.92 per diluted share, for the same period in 2019. Return on average assets was 0.98% and return on average equity was 10.92% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 1.23% and 13.19%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The $698 thousand decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from a $2.6 million increase in provision for loan losses and a $327 thousand, or 4%, decrease in noninterest income, compared to the same period of 2019. These unfavorable variances were partially offset by a $1.5 million, or 5%, increase in net interest income and a $532 thousand, or 2%, decrease in noninterest expenses.
Net interest income increased primarily from a decrease in interest expense on deposits, which was attributable to reductions in interest rates paid. Average earning asset balances increased 16%, while the net interest margin decreased 38 basis points to 3.50% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.88% for the same period in 2019. Noninterest income decreased primarily from lower service charges on deposit accounts, which was partially offset by higher amounts of wealth management fees and fees for other customer services. Noninterest expense decreased primarily from lower salaries and employee benefits expense, marketing expense, and other operating expense, which were partially offset by higher FDIC assessment.
Based on management’s analysis and the supporting allowance for loan loss calculation, a provision for loan losses of $3.0 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a provision for loan losses of $450 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in provision for loan losses was attributable to increases in both the general and specific reserve components of the allowance for loan losses.
For a more detailed discussion of the Company's performance, see "Net Interest Income," "Provision for Loan Losses," "Noninterest Income," "Noninterest Expense" and "Income Taxes" below.
Acquisition of The Bank of Fincastle
On February 18, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire Fincastle for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $31.6 million of cash and stock. The Company expects to complete the acquisition in the third quarter of 2021. With the addition of Fincastle, the Company would have had approximately $1.2 billion in assets, $868.0 million in total gross loans outstanding and $1.0 billion in total deposits on a combined basis at December 31, 2020. After the acquisition is completed, the former Fincastle branches will continue to operate as The Bank of Fincastle, a division of First Bank, until the systems conversion is expected to be completed in the fourth quarter of 2021. The Company did not incur any merger related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 in connection with its acquisition of Fincastle. The Company estimates that it will incur aggregate pre-tax merger related costs of approximately $4.2 million during 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This report refers to the efficiency ratio, which is computed by dividing noninterest expense, excluding OREO expense, amortization of intangibles, and gains/(losses) on disposal of premises and equipment, by the sum of net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis and noninterest income, excluding securities gains. This is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company believes provides investors with important information regarding operational efficiency. Such information is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be construed as such. Management believes, however, such financial information is meaningful to the reader in understanding operating performance, but cautions that such information not be viewed as a substitute for GAAP. The Company, in referring to its net income, is referring to income under GAAP. The components of the efficiency ratio calculation are summarized in the following table (dollars in thousands).
This report also refers to net interest margin, which is calculated by dividing tax equivalent net interest income by total average earning assets. Because a portion of interest income earned by the Company is nontaxable, the tax equivalent net interest income is considered in the calculation of this ratio. Tax equivalent net interest income is calculated by adding the tax benefit realized from interest income that is nontaxable to total interest income then subtracting total interest expense. The tax rate utilized in calculating the tax benefit for both 2020 and 2019 is 21%. The reconciliation of tax equivalent net interest income, which is not a measurement under GAAP, to net interest income, is reflected in the table below (in thousands).
Critical Accounting Policies
General
The Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The financial information contained within the statements is, to a significant extent, financial information that is based on measures of the financial effects of transactions and events that have already occurred. A variety of factors could affect the ultimate value that is obtained either when earning income, recognizing an expense, recovering an asset, or relieving a liability. The Bank uses historical losses as one factor in determining the inherent loss that may be present in the loan portfolio. Actual losses could differ significantly from the historical factors used. In addition, GAAP itself may change from one previously acceptable method to another. Although the economics of transactions would be the same, the timing of events that would impact transactions could change.
Presented below is a discussion of those accounting policies that management believes are the most important (Critical Accounting Policies) to the portrayal and understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. The Critical Accounting Policies require management’s most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. In the event that different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending upon the severity of such changes, the possibility of materially different financial condition or results of operations is a reasonable likelihood.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged to earnings. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management determines that the loan balance is uncollectible. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. For further information about the Company’s loans and the allowance for loan losses, see Notes 1, 3, and 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a quarterly basis by management and is based upon management’s periodic review of the collectability of the loans in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral, and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
The Company performs regular credit reviews of the loan portfolio to review credit quality and adherence to underwriting standards. The credit reviews consist of reviews by its internal credit administration department and reviews performed by an independent third party. Upon origination, each loan is assigned a risk rating ranging from one to nine, with loans closer to one having less risk. This risk rating scale is the Company's primary credit quality indicator. The Company has various committees that review and ensure that the allowance for loans losses methodology is in accordance with GAAP and loss factors used appropriately reflect the risk characteristics of the loan portfolio.
The allowance represents an amount that, in management’s judgment, will be adequate to absorb any losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible. Management’s judgment in determining the level of the allowance is based on evaluations of the collectability of loans while taking into consideration such factors as trends in delinquencies and charge-offs, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay and the value of the collateral, overall portfolio quality, and review of specific potential losses. The evaluation also considers the following risk characteristics of each loan portfolio class:
•
1-4 family residential mortgage loans carry risks associated with the continued creditworthiness of the borrower and changes in the value of the collateral.
•
Real estate construction and land development loans carry risks that the project may not be finished according to schedule, the project may not be finished according to budget, and the value of the collateral may, at any point in time, be less than the principal amount of the loan. Construction loans also bear the risk that the general contractor, who may or may not be a loan customer, may be unable to finish the construction project as planned because of financial pressure or other factors unrelated to the project.
•
Other real estate loans carry risks associated with the successful operation of a business or a real estate project, in addition to other risks associated with the ownership of real estate, because repayment of these loans may be dependent upon the profitability and cash flows of the business or project.
•
Commercial and industrial loans carry risks associated with the successful operation of a business because repayment of these loans may be dependent upon the profitability and cash flows of the business. In addition, there is risk associated with the value of collateral other than real estate which may depreciate over time and cannot be appraised with as much reliability.
•
Consumer and other loans carry risk associated with the continued creditworthiness of the borrower and the value of the collateral, if any. Consumer loans are typically either unsecured or secured by rapidly depreciating assets such as automobiles. These loans are also likely to be immediately and adversely affected by job loss, divorce, illness, personal bankruptcy, or other changes in circumstances. Other loans included in this category include loans to states and political subdivisions.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as impaired, and is established when the discounted cash flows, fair value of collateral less estimated costs to sell, or observable market price of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. For collateral dependent loans, an updated appraisal is ordered if a current one is not on file. Appraisals are typically performed by independent third-party appraisers with relevant industry experience. Adjustments to the appraised value may be made based on recent sales of like properties or general market conditions among other considerations.
The general component covers loans that are not considered impaired and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. The historical loss experience is calculated by loan type and uses an average loss rate during the preceding twelve quarters. The qualitative factors are assigned by management based on delinquencies and asset quality, national and local economic trends, effects of the changes in the value of underlying collateral, trends in volume and nature of loans, effects of changes in the lending policy, the experience and depth of management, concentrations of credit, quality of the loan review system, and the effect of external factors such as competition and regulatory requirements. The factors assigned differ by loan type. The general allowance estimates losses whose impact on the portfolio has yet to be recognized by a specific allowance. Allowance factors and the overall size of the allowance may change from period to period based on management’s assessment of the above described factors and the relative weights given to each factor. For further information regarding the allowance for loan losses, see Notes 1 and 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Lending Policies
General
In an effort to manage risk, the Bank’s loan policy gives loan amount approval limits to individual loan officers based on their position within the Bank and level of experience. The Management Loan Committee can approve new loans up to their authority. The Board Loan Committee approves all loans which exceed the authority of the Management Loan Committee. The full Board of Directors must approve loans which exceed the authority of the Board Loan Committee, up to the Bank’s legal lending limit. The Board Loan Committee currently consists of five directors, four of which are non-management directors. The Board Loan Committee approves the Bank’s Loan Policy and reviews risk management reports, including watch list reports and concentrations of credit. The Board Loan Committee meets on a monthly basis and the Chairman of the Committee then reports to the Board of Directors.
Residential loan originations are primarily generated by mortgage loan officer solicitations and referrals by employees, real estate professionals, and customers. Commercial real estate loan originations and commercial and industrial loan originations are primarily obtained through direct solicitation and additional business from existing customers. All completed loan applications are reviewed by the Bank’s loan officers. As part of the application process, information is obtained concerning the income, financial condition, employment, and credit history of the applicant. The Bank also participates in commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loans originated by other financial institutions that are typically outside its market area. In addition, the Bank has purchased consumer loans originated by other financial institutions that are typically outside its market area. Loan quality is analyzed based on the Bank’s experience and credit underwriting guidelines depending on the type of loan involved. Except for loan participations with other financial institutions, real estate collateral is valued by independent appraisers who have been pre-approved by the Board Loan Committee.
As part of the ongoing monitoring of the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio, certain appraisals are analyzed by management or by an outsourced appraisal review specialist throughout the year in order to ensure standards of quality are met. The Company also obtains an independent review of loans within the portfolio on an annual basis to analyze loan risk ratings and validate specific reserves on impaired loans.
In the normal course of business, the Bank makes various commitments and incurs certain contingent liabilities which are disclosed but not reflected in its financial statements, including commitments to extend credit. At December 31, 2020, commitments to extend credit, stand-by letters of credit, and rate lock commitments totaled $136.0 million.
Construction and Land Development Lending
The Bank makes local construction loans, including residential and land acquisition and development loans. These loans are secured by the property under construction and the underlying land for which the loan was obtained. The majority of these loans mature in one year. Construction lending entails significant additional risks, compared with residential mortgage lending. Construction and land development loans sometimes involve larger loan balances concentrated with single borrowers or groups of related borrowers. Another risk involved in construction and land development lending is the fact that loan funds are advanced upon the security of the land or property under construction, which value is estimated based on the completion of construction. Thus, there is risk associated with failure to complete construction and potential cost overruns. To mitigate the risks associated with this type of lending, the Bank generally limits loan amounts relative to the appraised value and/or cost of the collateral, analyzes the cost of the project and the creditworthiness of its borrowers, and monitors construction progress. The Bank typically obtains a first lien on the property as security for its construction loans, typically requires personal guarantees from the borrower’s principal owners, and typically monitors the progress of the construction project during the draw period.
1-4 Family Residential Real Estate Lending
1-4 family residential lending activity may be generated by Bank loan officer solicitations and referrals by real estate professionals and existing or new bank customers. Loan applications are taken by a Bank loan officer. As part of the application process, information is gathered concerning income, employment, and credit history of the applicant. Residential mortgage loans generally are made on the basis of the borrower’s ability to make payments from employment and other income and are secured by real estate whose value tends to be readily ascertainable. In addition to the Bank’s underwriting standards, loan quality may be analyzed based on guidelines issued by a secondary market investor. The valuation of residential collateral is generally provided by independent fee appraisers who have been approved by the Board Loan Committee. In addition to originating mortgage loans with the intent to sell to correspondent lenders or broker to wholesale lenders, the Bank also originates and retains certain mortgage loans in its loan portfolio.
Commercial Real Estate Lending
Commercial real estate loans are secured by various types of commercial real estate typically in the Bank’s market area, including multi-family residential buildings, office and retail buildings, hotels, industrial buildings, and religious facilities. Commercial real estate loan originations are primarily obtained through direct solicitation of customers and potential customers. The valuation of commercial real estate collateral is provided by independent appraisers who have been approved by the Board Loan Committee. Commercial real estate lending entails significant additional risk, compared with residential mortgage lending. Commercial real estate loans typically involve larger loan balances concentrated with single borrowers or groups of related borrowers. Additionally, the payment experience on loans secured by income producing properties is typically dependent on the successful operation of a business or a real estate project and thus may be subject, to a greater extent, to adverse conditions in the real estate market or in the economy in general. The Bank’s commercial real estate loan underwriting criteria require an examination of debt service coverage ratios, the borrower’s creditworthiness, prior credit history, and reputation. The Bank typically requires personal guarantees of the borrowers’ principal owners and considers the valuation of the real estate collateral.
Commercial and Industrial Lending
Commercial and industrial loans generally have a higher degree of risk than loans secured by real estate, but typically have higher yields. Commercial and industrial loans typically are made on the basis of the borrower’s ability to make repayment from cash flow from its business. The loans may be unsecured or secured by business assets, such as accounts receivable, equipment, and inventory. As a result, the availability of funds for the repayment of commercial business loans is substantially dependent on the success of the business itself. Furthermore, any collateral for commercial business loans may depreciate over time and generally cannot be appraised with as much reliability as real estate.
Also included in this category are loans originated under the SBA's PPP. PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA, and in some cases borrowers may be eligible to obtain forgiveness of the loans, in which case loans would be repaid by the SBA.
Consumer Lending
Loans to individual borrowers may be secured or unsecured, and include unsecured consumer loans and lines of credit, automobile loans, deposit account loans, and installment and demand loans. These consumer loans may entail greater risk than residential mortgage loans, particularly in the case of consumer loans which are unsecured or secured by rapidly depreciating assets such as automobiles. In such cases, any repossessed collateral for a defaulted consumer loan may not provide an adequate source of repayment of the outstanding loan balance as a result of the greater likelihood of damage, loss, or depreciation. Consumer loan collections are dependent on the borrower’s continuing financial stability, and thus are more likely to be adversely affected by job loss, divorce, illness, or personal bankruptcy. Furthermore, the application of various federal and state laws, including federal and state bankruptcy and insolvency laws, may limit the amount which can be recovered on such loans.
The underwriting standards employed by the Bank for consumer loans include a determination of the applicant’s payment history on other debts and an assessment of ability to meet existing obligations and payments on a proposed loan. The stability of the applicant’s monthly income may be determined by verification of gross monthly income from primary employment, and additionally from any verifiable secondary income.
Also included in this category are loans purchased through a third-party lending program. These portfolios include consumer loans and carry risks associated with the borrower, changes in the economic environment, and the vendor itself. The Company manages these risks through policies that require minimum credit scores and other underwriting requirements, robust analysis of actual performance versus expected performance, as well as ensuring compliance with the Company's vendor management program.
Results of Operations
General
Net interest income represents the primary source of earnings for the Company. Net interest income equals the amount by which interest income on interest-earning assets, predominantly loans and securities, exceeds interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, including deposits, other borrowings, subordinated debt, and junior subordinated debt. Changes in the volume and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as their respective yields and rates, are the components that impact the level of net interest income. The net interest margin is calculated by dividing tax-equivalent net interest income by average earning assets. The provision for loan losses, noninterest income, and noninterest expense are the other components that determine net income. Noninterest income and expense primarily consists of income from service charges on deposit accounts, revenue from wealth management services, ATM and check card income, revenue from other customer services, income from bank owned life insurance, general and administrative expenses, amortization expense, and other real estate owned expense.
Net Interest Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest income increased $1.5 million, or 5%, to $29.5 million, compared to $28.0 million for the same period in 2019. The increase resulted from a $1.5 million, or 31%, decrease in total interest expense. Total interest and dividend income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, decreased $55 thousand to $33.0 million, compared to $33.1 million for 2019. The net interest margin decreased 38 basis points to 3.50% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.88% for the same period in 2019. Growth in average earning assets of $118.8 million, or 16%, was partially offset by the decrease in the net interest margin.
The decrease in total interest expense resulted primarily from a $1.5 million, or 37%, decrease in interest expense on deposits, which was attributable to reduced interest rates paid on deposits. A 36 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing deposits was partially offset by the impact of a $63.4 million, or 13%, increase in average interest-bearing deposits. A 49 basis point reduction in the cost of interest-bearing checking accounts and a 77 basis point reduction in the cost of money market accounts made the largest contributions to the decrease in interest expense.
The decrease in total interest and dividend income, on a taxable-equivalent basis, resulted primarily from a 65 basis point decrease in the yield on earning assets, which was mostly offset by a $118.8 million, or 16%, increase in average earning assets. The decrease in the yield on earning assets resulted from a 25 basis point decrease in the yield on securities, a 41 basis point decrease in the yield on loans, and a 175 basis point decrease in the yield on interest-bearing deposits in banks. The loan yield was negatively impacted by PPP loans earning a 1.00% interest rate. Additionally, the mix of earning assets had an unfavorable impact on the yield on average earning assets as lower yielding interest-bearing deposits in banks increased from 3% to 10% of average earning assets.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Net Interest Income
Net interest income was negatively impacted by higher levels of nonaccrual loans. Loans to customers who are not able to make their loan payments to the Bank are placed on nonaccrual status, which causes a reversal of accrued interest receivable and interest income on loans. Recognition of interest on the loans will not resume until the borrowers can once again demonstrate their ability to repay.
Net interest income may be negatively impacted in future periods by unfavorable changes in the earning asset composition and the impact of recent decreases in market rates on earning asset yields in future periods. An unfavorable change in the Company’s earning asset composition could occur if a decrease in loan demand causes a reduction in loan balances, the Bank’s highest yielding asset category, while balances of securities and interest-bearing deposits in banks, the Bank’s lower yielding asset categories, increase.
The ability of loan customers to make loan payments and the potential of decreasing loan demand may depend on the length of time and extent the Bank’s loan customers experience business interruptions from the pandemic. During 2020, the Bank modified certain loan agreements to provide payment relief to its customers by providing interest only payments for periods ranging between 6 and 24 months. The extent of asset quality deterioration that could result from the modified loans may be impacted by the continuation of customers' business interruptions beyond the modification periods.
The following table provides information on average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, as well as amounts and rates of tax equivalent interest earned and interest paid (dollars in thousands). The volume and rate analysis table analyzes the changes in net interest income for the periods broken down by their rate and volume components (in thousands).
(1)
Income and yields are reported on a taxable-equivalent basis assuming a federal tax rate of 21%. The tax-equivalent adjustment was $198 thousand for 2020, and $207 thousand for 2019 and 2018.
(2)
Loans placed on a non-accrual status are reflected in the balances.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses represents management’s analysis of the existing loan portfolio and related credit risks. The provision for loan losses is based upon management’s estimate of the amount required to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses reflective of the risks in the loan portfolio.
The Bank recorded a provision for loan losses of $3.0 million for 2020, which resulted in a total allowance for loan losses of $7.5 million, or 1.19% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. This compared to a provision for loan losses of $450 thousand for 2019, which resulted in an allowance for loan losses of $4.9 million, or 0.86% of total loans, at the prior year end.
The provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from net charge-offs on loans and increases in both the general and specific reserve components of the allowance for loan losses. Net charge-offs totaled $449 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $525 thousand of net charge-offs for the same period of 2019. The general reserve component of the allowance for loan losses increased primarily from adjustments to qualitative factors, which resulted from the Bank's observation of unfavorable changes in economic indicators impacted by the pandemic, consideration of risks associated with loans modified for interest-only payments in accordance with the CARES Act, and an increase in substandard loan amounts. The increase in the specific reserve component of the allowance for loan losses included reserves placed on newly identified impaired loans during the year.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the provision for loan losses resulted from net charge-offs on loans and an increase in the general reserve component of the allowance for loan losses that were partially offset by a decrease in the specific reserve component. The general reserve increased during the period, primarily from the impact of loan growth during the year and changes in qualitative adjustments. The specific reserve decreased from improvements in collateral positions on impaired loans, principal payments received, and the resolution of certain impaired loans.
The Company has consistently applied its allowance for loan loss methodology and regularly reviews the three year historical charge-off look back period to ensure it is indicative of the risk that remains in the loan portfolio. The Company does not believe that net charge-offs experienced in 2021 will be significantly different from the prior three year look back period. For more detail of net charge-offs, see the allowance for loan losses table in "Asset Quality" below.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Provision for Loan Losses
The Bank may experience higher provision for loan losses in future periods from factors including higher specific reserves on newly identified impaired loans, higher levels of net charge-offs, and additional adjustments to qualitative factors in the general reserve component of the allowance for loan losses. The Bank believes the length of time and extent that the Bank’s customers experience business interruptions from the pandemic will impact the amount of provision for loan losses in future periods.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income decreased $327 thousand, or 4%, to $8.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.6 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in noninterest income was primarily attributable to an $898 thousand, or 31%, decrease in service charges on deposit accounts from lower deposit overdraft fees. This decrease was partially offset by a $340 thousand, or 18%, increase in wealth management fees and a $297 thousand, or 43%, increase in fees for other customer services. Wealth management fees increased primarily from higher balances of assets under management during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period one year ago. Assets under management increased as a result of new business relationships and from growth in the market values of existing accounts. The increase in fees for other customer services was primarily a result of fee income from brokered residential mortgage loans.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Noninterest Income
The number of customer overdrafts and resulting income from service charges on deposits decreased significantly during 2020. The Bank believes this may have resulted from a reduction in consumer spending due to government stay at home orders, social distancing and an increase in unemployment. The lower amount of overdrafts may have also been impacted by receipt of government stimulus checks and an increase in the average balances of customer deposit accounts. The Bank also suspended certain overdraft fees at the beginning of the second quarter in an effort to provide relief to its customers who may have experienced financial difficulties related to the pandemic. The suspension of the overdraft fees ended on September 30, 2020. Service charges on deposits may continue to remain at recent levels, or decrease, depending on factors that include customer spending behaviors and the balance of deposit accounts.
ATM and check card fee revenue may also be lower in future periods as customers may spend and visit ATM machines less during periods of uncertainty. Wealth management revenue may decrease in future periods if the market values of investments decline and mortgage fee income may decrease if the number of home purchases and refinancing activity slows in the Bank's market area.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense decreased $532 thousand, or 2%, to $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $24.3 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in noninterest expense was primarily attributable to a $246 thousand, or 2%, decrease in salaries and employee benefits, a $296 thousand, or 45%, decrease in marketing expense, and a $431 thousand, or 15%, decrease in other operating expense. The decrease in salaries and employee benefits resulted primarily from the deferral of $535 thousand of salary costs to originate PPP loans during the second and third quarters of 2020. Marketing expense decreased from a combination of reduced spending on marketing campaigns during the year and elevated expenses during 2019 from the timing of marketing initiatives. Other operating expense decreased primarily from lower dues and subscription costs, education and training costs, registration and licensing fees, travel costs, debit card losses, employee recruiting fees, and loan servicing costs for purchased loans. These decreases were partially offset by a $202 thousand increase in FDIC assessment from the use of small bank assessment credits during 2019.
The $535 thousand of deferred salary costs described above were netted against $2.5 million of loan fee income, and are being accreted into earnings evenly over the life of the loans through interest and fees on loans. Approximately 99% of the PPP loans originated in 2020 will mature in the second quarter of 2022 and approximately 1% of the loans will mature in the quarter of 2025. If loans are paid off or forgiven prior to maturity dates, the remaining balance of net deferred loan fees would be recognized during the same period.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Noninterest Expense
If asset quality deteriorates as a result of the pandemic, the Bank may incur an increase in expenses related to the resolution of problem loans including appraisal costs, legal and professional fees, OREO expenses and losses on the sale of OREO. The Bank believes the length of time and extent that the Bank’s customers experience business interruptions from the pandemic will impact the amount of noninterest expense in future periods.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense decreased by $189 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period of 2019. The Company’s income tax expense differed from the amount of income tax determined by applying the U.S. federal income tax rate to pretax income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The difference was a result of net permanent tax deductions, primarily comprised of tax-exempt interest income and income from bank owned life insurance. For a more detailed discussion of the Company’s income tax expense, see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Financial Condition
General
Total assets increased $150.9 million to $950.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $800.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $53.0 million increase in net loans, a $15.9 million increase in securities, and a $78.0 million increase in interest-bearing deposits in banks. The increase in net loans included $64.7 million of PPP loans at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, total liabilities increased $143.2 million to $866.0 million compared to $722.8 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $136.0 million increase in total deposits. Proceeds from PPP loan originations and the receipt of government stimulus checks by customers during the year contributed to the increase in deposits. Noninterest-bearing demand deposits and savings and interest-bearing deposits increased $73.6 million and $79.8 million, respectively, while time deposits decreased $17.4 million. Subordinated debt also increased during 2020 as the Company issued a 5.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated note with a principal amount of $5.0 million to an institutional investor.
Total shareholders' equity increased $7.7 million to $84.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $77.2 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $6.7 million increase in retained earnings and a $2.7 million increase in accumulated other comprehensive income. These increases were partially offset by a $1.7 million decrease in common stock and surplus, which resulted primarily from stock repurchases in the first quarter of 2020 under the Company's stock repurchase plan. Tangible common equity totaled $84.9 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of 10% compared to $77.0 million at December 31, 2019. The Company's capital ratios continued to exceed the minimum capital requirements for regulatory purposes.
Loans
The Bank is an active lender with a loan portfolio that includes commercial and residential real estate loans, commercial loans, consumer loans, construction and land development loans, and home equity loans. The Bank’s lending activity is concentrated on individuals, small and medium-sized businesses, and local governmental entities primarily in its market areas. As a provider of community-oriented financial services, the Bank does not attempt to further geographically diversify its loan portfolio by undertaking significant lending activity outside its market areas.
Loans, net of allowance for loan losses, increased $53.0 million to $622.4 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $569.4 million at December 31, 2019. Commercial and industrial loans increased by $59.7 million during 2020, followed by commercial real estate loans and residential real estate loans that increased by $10.3 million and $6.4 million, respectively. These increases were partially offset by construction loans, consumer loans, and other loans that decreased by $15.8 million, $4.2 million, and $812 thousand, respectively. The increase in commercial and industrial loans included $64.7 million of PPP loans at December 31, 2020.
The Bank’s loan portfolio is summarized in the table below for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands).
There was no category of loans that exceeded 10% of outstanding loans at December 31, 2020 that were not disclosed in the above table.
The following table sets forth the maturities of the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Asset Quality
Management classifies non-performing assets as non-accrual loans and OREO. OREO represents real property taken by the Bank when its customers do not meet the contractual obligation of their loans, either through foreclosure or through a deed in lieu thereof from the borrower and properties originally acquired for branch operations or expansion but no longer intended to be used for that purpose. OREO is recorded at the lower of cost or fair value, less estimated selling costs, and is marketed by the Bank through brokerage channels. The Bank did not have any assets classified as OREO at December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Non-performing assets totaled $6.7 million and $1.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, representing 0.71% and 0.18% of total assets, respectively. Non-performing assets consisted only of non-accrual loans at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, 66% of non-performing assets were commercial real estate loans, 23% were commercial and industrial loans, 7% were residential real estate loans, and 4% were construction and land development loans. Non-performing assets could increase due to other loans identified by management as potential problem loans. Other potential problem loans are defined as performing loans that possess certain risks, including the borrower’s ability to pay and the collateral value securing the loan, that management has identified that may result in the loans not being repaid in accordance with their terms. Other potential problem loans totaled $1.4 million and $3.4 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The amount of other potential problem loans in future periods may be dependent on economic conditions and other factors influencing a customers’ ability to meet their debt requirements.
Loans greater than 90 days past due and still accruing totaled $302 thousand at December 31, 2020, which was comprised of two loans expected to pay all principal and interest amounts contractually due to the Bank and one purchased consumer loan. Consumer loans purchased at origination are charged-off when they are greater than 120 days past due. There were $97 thousand of loans greater than 90 days past due and still accruing at December 31, 2019.
The allowance for loan losses represents management’s analysis of the existing loan portfolio and related credit risks. The provision for loan losses is based upon management’s current estimate of the amount required to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses reflective of the risks in the loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses totaled $7.5 million at December 31, 2020 and $4.9 million at December 31, 2019, representing 1.19% and 0.86% of total loans, respectively. After analyzing the composition of the loan portfolio, related credit risks, and changes in asset quality during recent years, the Company determined that the three year loss period and the qualitative adjustment factors that established the general reserve component of the allowance for loan losses were appropriate at December 31, 2020. For further discussion regarding the allowance for loan losses, see “Provision for Loan Losses” above.
Recoveries of loan losses of $160 thousand and $9 thousand were recorded in the construction and land development and consumer and other loan classes, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2020. The recovery of loan losses in the construction and land development loan class resulted primarily from a decrease in the general reserve. The decrease in the general reserve for the construction and land development loan class resulted primarily from the impact of a decrease in loans. The recovery of loan losses in the consumer and other loan class resulted from a decrease in the general reserve, which was partially offset by net charge offs on loans. The decrease in the general reserve for the consumer and other loan class resulted from the impact of a decrease in loans and improvements in the historical loss rate. These recoveries were offset by provision for loan losses totaling $3.2 million in the 1-4 family residential, other real estate, and commercial and industrial loan classes. For more detailed information regarding the provision for loan losses, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Impaired loans totaled $6.7 million and $1.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The related allowance for loan losses required for these loans totaled $2.2 million and $33 thousand at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The average recorded investment in impaired loans during 2020 and 2019 was $3.9 million and $1.9 million, respectively. Included in the impaired loans total are loans classified as TDRs totaling $6.0 million and $360 thousand at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Loans classified as TDRs represent situations in which a modification to the contractual interest rate or repayment structure has been granted to address a financial hardship. As of December 31, 2020, none of these TDRs were performing under the restructured terms and all were considered non-performing assets.
Management believes, based upon its review and analysis, that the Bank has sufficient reserves to cover losses inherent within the loan portfolio. For each period presented, the provision for loan losses charged to expense was based on management’s judgment after taking into consideration all factors connected with the collectability of the existing portfolio. Management considers economic conditions, historical loss factors, past due percentages, internally generated loan quality reports, and other relevant factors when evaluating the loan portfolio. There can be no assurance, however, that an additional provision for loan losses will not be required in the future, including as a result of changes in the qualitative factors underlying management’s estimates and judgments, changes in accounting standards, adverse developments in the economy, on a national basis or in the Company’s market area, loan growth, or changes in the circumstances of particular borrowers. For further discussion regarding the allowance for loan losses, see “Critical Accounting Policies” above. The following table shows a detail of loans charged-off, recovered, and the changes in the allowance for loan losses (dollars in thousands).
The following table shows the balance of the Bank’s allowance for loan losses allocated to each major category of loans and the ratio of related outstanding loan balances to total loans (dollars in thousands).
The following table provides information on the Bank’s non-performing assets at the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Asset Quality
The Bank anticipates the pandemic to have an unfavorable impact on the financial condition of many of its customers, and as a result, identified the related credit risk within its loan portfolio throughout 2020 with the goal of mitigating the risk and minimizing potential loan charge-offs. Management expects significant pressure on several sectors of the loan portfolio may continue, including those listed in the following table (dollars in thousands).
The Bank's asset quality was negatively impacted by higher levels of nonaccrual loans in 2020 compared to 2019. The magnitude of the potential decline in the Bank’s asset quality will likely depend on the severity and length of time and extent that the Bank’s customers experience business interruptions from the pandemic. The Bank modified loan agreements during the fourth quarter of 2020 for certain business customers to provide payment relief for periods that ranged between 6 and 24 months. These loans were not considered TDRs because they were modified in accordance with relief provisions of the CARES Act. The extent of asset quality deterioration that could result from these modified loans will be impacted by the continuation of customers' business interruptions beyond the modification periods.
Securities
Securities at December 31, 2020 totaled $156.3 million, an increase of $15.9 million, or 11%, from $140.4 million at the end of 2019. Investment securities are comprised of U.S. agency and mortgage-backed securities, obligations of state and political subdivisions, corporate debt securities, and restricted securities. As of December 31, 2020, neither the Company nor the Bank held any derivative financial instruments in their respective investment security portfolios. Gross unrealized gains in the available for sale portfolio totaled $4.0 million and $1.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross unrealized losses in the available for sale portfolio totaled $82 thousand and $339 thousand at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross unrealized gains in the held to maturity portfolio totaled $509 thousand and $99 thousand at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. There were no gross unrealized losses in the held to maturity portfolio at December 31, 2020. Gross unrealized losses in the held to maturity portfolio totaled $80 thousand at December 31, 2019. Investments in an unrealized loss position were considered temporarily impaired at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The change in the unrealized gains and losses of investment securities from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was related to changes in market interest rates and was not related to credit concerns of the issuers.
The following table summarizes the Company’s securities portfolio on the dates indicated (in thousands).
The following table shows the maturities of debt and restricted securities at amortized cost and market value at December 31, 2020 and approximate weighted average yields of such securities (dollars in thousands). Yields on state and political subdivision securities are shown on a tax equivalent basis, assuming a 21% federal income tax rate. The Company attempts to maintain diversity in its portfolio and maintain credit quality and re-pricing terms that are consistent with its asset/liability management and investment practices and policies. For further information on securities, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
(1)
Yields on tax-exempt securities have been calculated on a tax-equivalent basis.
The above table was prepared using the contractual maturities for all securities with the exception of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO). Both MBS and CMO securities were recorded using the yield book prepayment model that incorporates four causes of prepayments including home sales, refinancing, defaults, and curtailments/full payoffs.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not own securities of any issuer for which the aggregate book value of the securities of such issuer exceeded ten percent of shareholders’ equity.
Deposits
At December 31, 2020, deposits totaled $842.5 million, an increase of $136.0 million, from $706.4 million at December 31, 2019. There was a change in the deposit mix when comparing the periods. At December 31, 2020, noninterest-bearing demand deposits, savings and interest-bearing demand deposits, and time deposits composed 31%, 57%, and 12% of total deposits, respectively, compared to 27%, 56%, and 17% at December 31, 2019.
The following tables include a summary of average deposits and average rates paid and maturities of CD’s greater than $100,000 (dollars in thousands).
The table above includes brokered deposits greater than $100 thousand.
Liquidity
Liquidity represents the ability to meet present and future financial obligations through either the sale or maturity of existing assets or with borrowings from correspondent banks or other deposit markets. The Company classifies cash, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing deposits with banks, federal funds sold, investment securities, and loans maturing within one year as liquid assets. As part of the Bank’s liquidity risk management, stress tests and cash flow modeling are performed quarterly.
As a result of the Bank’s management of liquid assets and the ability to generate liquidity through liability funding, management believes that the Bank maintains overall liquidity sufficient to satisfy its depositors’ requirements and to meet its customers’ borrowing needs.
At December 31, 2020, cash, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing deposits with banks, securities, and loans maturing within one year totaled $177.0 million. At December 31, 2020, 8% or $49.1 million of the loan portfolio matured within one year. Non-deposit sources of available funds totaled $237.7 million at December 31, 2020, which included $160.3 million of secured funds available from Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta (FHLB), $51.0 million of unsecured federal funds lines of credit with other correspondent banks, and $26.4 million available through the Federal Reserve Discount Window.
On February 18, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire Fincastle for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $31.6 million of cash and stock. Cash consideration will total 20% and remaining 80% of the consideration will be from the issuance of Company common stock. The Company estimates that it will incur aggregate pre-tax merger related costs of approximately $4.2 million during 2021.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Liquidity
Although the Bank’s liquidity has not been negatively impacted by the pandemic during 2020, it could be reduced in future periods. Factors that could reduce the Bank’s liquidity include a reduction in cash inflows from loan customers if they would experience financial difficulties and are not able to make contractual payments. Other factors that could reduce liquidity include decreasing customer deposit balances, increasing customer draws on their lines of credit with the Bank, and a reduction in the available lines of credit from correspondent banks. The Bank actively manages and monitors liquidity risk in order to maintain sufficient liquidity to meet the demand from its customers.
Subordinated Debt
See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K, for discussion of subordinated debt.
Junior Subordinated Debt
See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K, for discussion of junior subordinated debt.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company, through the Bank, is a party to credit related financial instruments with risk not reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit, and commercial letters of credit. Such commitments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. The Bank’s exposure to credit loss is represented by the contractual amount of these commitments. The Bank follows the same credit policies in making commitments as it does for on-balance sheet instruments.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the following financial instruments were outstanding whose contract amounts represent credit risk (in thousands):
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. The commitments for lines of credit may expire without being drawn upon. Therefore, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The amount of collateral obtained, if it is deemed necessary by the Bank, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the customer.
Unfunded commitments under commercial lines of credit, revolving credit lines, and overdraft protection agreements are commitments for possible future extensions of credit to existing customers. These lines of credit are collateralized as deemed necessary and may or may not be drawn upon to the total extent to which the Bank is committed.
Commercial and standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by the Bank to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. Those letters of credit are primarily issued to support public and private borrowing arrangements. Essentially all letters of credit issued have expiration dates within one year. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loan facilities to customers. The Bank generally holds collateral supporting those commitments if deemed necessary.
At December 31, 2020, the Bank had $10.4 million in locked-rate commitments to originate mortgage loans. Risks arise from the possible inability of counterparties to meet the terms of their contracts. The Bank does not expect any counterparty to fail to meet its obligations.
On April 21, 2020, the Company entered into interest rate swap agreements related to its outstanding junior subordinated debt. The Company uses derivatives to manage exposure to interest rate risk through the use of interest rate swaps. Interest rate swaps involve the exchange of fixed and variable rate interest payments between two parties, based on a common notional principal amount and maturity date with no exchange of underlying principal amounts.
The interest rate swaps qualified and are designated as cash flow hedges. The Company’s cash flow hedges effectively modify the Company’s exposure to interest rate risk by converting variable rates of interest on $9.0 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debt to fixed rates of interest for periods that end between June 2034 and October 2036. The cash flow hedges’ total notional amount is $9.0 million. At December 31, 2020, the cash flow hedges had a fair value of $431 thousand, which is recorded in other assets. The net gain/loss on the cash flow hedges is recognized as a component of other comprehensive income and reclassified into earnings in the same period(s) during which the hedged transactions affect earnings. The Company’s derivative financial instruments are described more fully in Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Capital Resources
The adequacy of the Company’s capital is reviewed by management on an ongoing basis with reference to the size, composition, and quality of the Company’s asset and liability levels and consistent with regulatory requirements and industry standards. Management seeks to maintain a capital structure that will assure an adequate level of capital to support anticipated asset growth and absorb potential losses. The Company meets eligibility criteria of a small bank holding company in accordance with the Federal Reserve Board’s Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement issued in February 2015 and is no longer obligated to report consolidated regulatory capital.
Effective January 1, 2015, the Bank became subject to capital rules adopted by federal bank regulators implementing the Basel III regulatory capital reforms adopted by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (the Basel Committee), and certain changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act.
The minimum capital level requirements applicable to the Bank under the final rules are as follows: a new common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 4.5%; a Tier 1 capital ratio of 6%; a total capital ratio of 8%; and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4% for all institutions. The final rules also established a “capital conservation buffer” above the new regulatory minimum capital requirements. The capital conservation buffer was phased-in over four years and, as fully implemented effective January 1, 2019, requires a buffer of 2.5% of risk-weighted assets. This results in the following minimum capital ratios beginning in 2019: a common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 7.0%, a Tier 1 capital ratio of 8.5%, and a total capital ratio of 10.5%. Under the final rules, institutions are subject to limitations on paying dividends, engaging in share repurchases, and paying discretionary bonuses if its capital level falls below the buffer amount. These limitations establish a maximum percentage of eligible retained income that could be utilized for such actions. Management believes, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, that the Bank met all capital adequacy requirements to which it is subject, including the capital conservation buffer.
The following table summarizes the Bank’s regulatory capital and related ratios at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 (dollars in thousands).
(1)
Calculated by subtracting the regulatory minimum capital ratio requirements from the Company’s actual ratio for Common equity Tier 1, Tier 1, and Total risk based capital. The lowest of the three measures represents the Bank’s capital conservation buffer ratio.
The prompt corrective action framework is designed to place restrictions on insured depository institutions if their capital levels begin to show signs of weakness. Under the prompt corrective action requirements, which are designed to complement the capital conservation buffer, insured depository institutions are required to meet the following capital level requirements in order to qualify as “well capitalized:” a common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 6.5%; a Tier 1 capital ratio of 8%; a total capital ratio of 10%; and a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 5%. The Bank met the requirements to qualify as "well capitalized" as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
On September 17, 2019 the FDIC finalized a rule that introduces an optional simplified measure of capital adequacy for qualifying community banking organizations (i.e., the community bank leverage ratio (CBLR) framework), as required by the Economic Growth Act. The CBLR framework is designed to reduce burden by removing the requirements for calculating and reporting risk-based capital ratios for qualifying community banking organizations that opt into the framework.
In order to qualify for the CBLR framework, a community banking organization must have a tier 1 leverage ratio greater than 9%, less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets, and limited amounts of off-balance sheet exposures and trading assets and liabilities. The CARES Act temporarily lowered the tier 1 leverage ratio requirement to 8% until December 31, 2020. A qualifying community banking organization that opts into the CBLR framework and meets all requirements under the framework will be considered to have met the "well-capitalized" ratio requirements under the prompt corrective action regulations and will not be required to report or calculate risk-based capital. Although the Bank did not opt into the CBLR framework at December 31, 2020, it may opt into the CBLR framework in a future quarterly period. For further discussion regarding the CARES Act, see "Supervision and Regulation" included in Item 1 of this Form 10-K.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized a stock repurchase plan pursuant to which the Company may have repurchased up to $5.0 million of its outstanding common stock. The stock repurchase plan was authorized to run through December 31, 2020, unless the entire amount authorized to be repurchased had been acquired before that date. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had repurchased and retired 129,035 shares at an average price paid per share of $16.05, for a total of $2.1 million. The Company did not repurchase any shares of its common stock during 2019.
The Company’s capital resources may be affected by the Company’s acquisition of Fincastle, which is expected to be completed in the third quarter of 2021. Fincastle shareholders are expected to receive aggregate merger consideration of $6.7 million in cash and approximately 1.3 million shares of the Company’s common stock. First Bank is not expected to pay a significant dividend to the Company prior to the completion of the merger to fund the cash portion of the purchase price and the Company’s merger related expenses. Although First Bank’s capital is not expected to be impacted by a significant dividend, the acquisition of Fincastle is expected to generate goodwill and other intangible assets that will be excluded from the regulatory capital of First Bank, which may result in a decrease in First Bank’s regulatory capital ratios. Additionally, the Company expects to incur aggregate pre-tax merger related expenses of approximately $4.2 million during 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not incur any merger related expenses. First Bank expects that it will remain well-capitalized following the completion of the Company’s acquisition of Fincastle.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on Capital Resources
The Company will continue to update its enterprise risk assessment and capital plan as the operating environment develops. As a result of its risk assessments and capital planning, the Company issued $5.0 million of subordinated debt in June 2020, primarily to further strengthen holding company liquidity and remain a source of strength for the Bank in the event of a severe economic downturn. The Company may also use the proceeds of the issuance for general corporate purposes, including the potential repayment of the Company’s existing subordinated debt, which became callable on a quarterly basis beginning in January 2021. The Company’s stock repurchase plan remained suspended during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 and ended on December 31, 2020. The Company has not authorized another stock repurchase plan due to the potential impact of the pandemic on the economy and the Bank’s customers. The capital planning process also included consideration of whether to continue the Company’s cash dividend payments to common shareholders during 2020. The Company declared and paid an $0.11 per share during each quarter of 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K, for discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Quarterly Results
The table below lists the Company’s quarterly performance for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except per share data).