ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-looking Statements
Statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation, as well as in certain other parts of this Annual report on Form 10-K (as well as information included in oral statements or other written statements made or to be made by the Company) that look forward in time, are forward-looking statements made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include statements concerning plans, objectives, goals, strategies, future events or performance, expectations, predictions, and assumptions and other statements that are other than statements of historical facts. Although the Company believes such forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no assurance that any forward-looking statements will prove to be correct. Such forward-looking statements are subject to, and are qualified by, known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from those expressed or implied by those statements. These risks, uncertainties and other factors include, but are not limited to the Company’s ability to estimate the impact of competition and of industry consolidation and risks, uncertainties and other factors set forth in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including without limitation to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company undertakes no obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management's applications of accounting policies. Critical accounting policies for the Company include revenue recognition, valuation of convertible promissory notes and related warrants, stock and stock option compensation, estimates, and derivative financial instruments.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and include the accounts of GAHI and its wholly-owned and majority owned subsidiaries, GES and GAHI Acquisition Corp. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenue recognition policies comply with SEC revenue recognition rules and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 605-10-S99. The Company earns revenues through various services it provides to its clients. GES’s income is recognized at the presentation
date of the certification of the election results. The payments received in advance are recorded as deferred revenue on the balance sheet. Should an election not proceed, all non-refundable deferred revenue will be recognized as revenue.
Convertible Debt
Convertible debt is accounted for under FASB ASC 470, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options. The Company records a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”) related to the issuance of convertible debt that has conversion features at fixed or adjustable rates that are in-the-money when issued and records the relative fair value of any warrants issued with those instruments. The BCF for the convertible instruments is recognized and measured by allocating a portion of the proceeds to the warrants and as a reduction to the carrying amount of the convertible instrument equal to the intrinsic value of the conversion features, both of which are credited to additional paid-in capital. The Company calculates the fair value of warrants issued with the convertible instruments using the Black-Scholes valuation method, using the same assumptions used for valuing stock options, except that the contractual life of the warrant is used.
Under these guidelines, the Company allocates the value of the proceeds received from a convertible debt transaction between the conversion feature and any other detachable instruments (such as warrants) on a relative fair value basis. The allocated fair value of the BCF and warrants are recorded as a debt discount and is accreted over the expected term of the convertible debt as interest expense.
The Company accounts for modifications of its embedded conversion features in accordance with the ASC which requires the modification of a convertible debt instrument that changes the fair value of an embedded conversion feature and the subsequent recognition of interest expense or the associated debt instrument when the modification does not result in a debt extinguishment.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. The Company uses the Black-Scholes-Merton model to value the derivative instruments. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company periodically issues stock options and warrants to employees and non-employees in capital raising transactions, for services and for financing costs. The Company accounts for share-based payments under the guidance as set forth in the Share-Based Payment Topic of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees, officers, directors, and consultants, including employee stock options, based on estimated fair values. The Company estimates the fair value of share-based payment awards to employees and directors on the date of grant using an option-pricing model, and the value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the required service period in the Company's Statements of Operations. The Company accounts for stock option and warrant grants issued and vesting to non-employees in accordance with the authoritative guidance where the value of the stock compensation is based upon the measurement date as determined at either a) the date at which a performance commitment is reached, or b) the date at which the necessary performance to earn the equity instruments is complete. Stock-based compensation is based on awards ultimately expected to vest and is reduced for estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, as necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB and the SEC did not have, are not believed by management to have, a material impact, or are currently evaluating the potential impact of updated authoritative guidance on the Company’s present or future consolidated financial statements.
Trends and Uncertainties
The Company currently has minimal revenues and operations and is investigating potential businesses and companies for acquisition to create and/or acquire a sustainable business. Our ability to acquire or create a sustainable business may be adversely affected by our current financial conditions, availability of capital and/ or loans, general economic conditions which can be cyclical in nature along with prolonged recessionary periods, and other economic and political situations.
The Company has generated recurring losses and cash flow deficits from its operations since inception and has had to continually borrow to continue operations. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The continued operations of the Company are dependent upon its ability to raise additional capital, obtain additional financing and/or generate positive cash flows from operations. As further described in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”, management believes that it will be successful in obtaining additional financing, from which the proceeds will be primarily used to execute its new operating plans. The Company plans to use its available cash and new financing to develop and execute its new business plan and hopefully create and maintain a self-sustaining business. However, the Company can give no assurances that it will be successful in achieving its plans or if financing will be available or, if available, on terms acceptable to the Company, or at all. Should the Company not be successful in obtaining the necessary financing to fund its operations, and ultimately achieve adequate profitability and cash flows from operations, the Company would need to curtail certain or all of its operating activities.
There are no trends, events or uncertainties that have had or are reasonably expected to have a material impact on the net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations. There are no significant elements of income or loss that do not arise from our continuing operations except for the fair value change on derivative financial instruments and settlement on arbitration.
The rapid advances in computing and telecommunications technology over the past several decades have brought with them increasingly sophisticated methods of delivering administrating elections. Along with these advances, though, have come risks regarding the integrity and privacy of data, and these risks apply to election companies, falling into the general classification of cybersecurity. While it is not possible for anyone to give an absolute guarantee that data will not be compromised, when applicable, the Company shall utilize third-party service providers to secure the Company’s financial and personal data; the Company believes that third-party service providers provide reasonable assurance that the financial and personal data that they hold are secure.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $(28,684,689) and a working capital deficiency of $8,417,037. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends upon whether we can ultimately attain profitable operations, generate sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations, and obtain additional financing as needed.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a net loss of $(1,746,125). We recorded an amortization of debt discount of $397,965, a change in fair value of derivative liability of $343,076. We recorded the following changes in current assets and liabilities: a change in deferred revenue of $267,723, a change in accounts payable of $(12,986), and a change of accrued expenses of $779,221. As a result, we recorded net cash used in operating activities of $(327,580) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we made a payment of $5,000 as a deposit for acquisition resulting in net cash used in investing activities of $(5,000) for the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $445,000 as proceeds from convertible promissory notes payable. We repaid convertible promissory notes payable of $72,500. As a result, we had net cash provided by financing activities of $372,500 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $26,961,606 and a working capital deficiency of $7,997,314. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends upon whether we can ultimately attain profitable operations, generate sufficient cash flow to meet our obligations, and obtain additional financing as needed.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a net loss of $1,939,673. We recorded an amortization of debt discount of $576,568, a change in fair value of derivative liability of $(526,958), and impairment of investment of $284,270. We recorded convertible promissory notes payable issued for penalty interest of $8,223. We recorded the following changes in current assets and liabilities: a change in deferred revenue of $28,500, a change in accounts payable of $(35,745), and a change of accrued expenses of $667,897. As a result, we recorded net cash used in operating activities of $(933,572) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we made a payment of $5,000 as a deposit for acquisition and a payment for equity investment, resulting in net cash used in investing activities of $(45,000) for the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $1,027,500 as proceeds from convertible promissory notes payable. We repaid convertible promissory notes payable of $75,000. As a result, we had net cash provided by financing activities of $952,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Management believes that it will be able to continue its operations and further advance its business plans. However, management cannot give assurances that such plans will materialize and be successful in the near term or on terms advantageous to the Company, or at all. Should the Company not be successful in its business plans or obtain additional financing, the Company would need to curtail certain or all of its operating activities.
The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to ultimately attain profitable operations, generate sufficient cash flow to meet its obligations, and obtain additional financing as may be required. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our auditors have included a “going concern” modification in their auditors’ reports. A “going concern” modification may make it more difficult for us to raise funds when needed. The outcome of this uncertainty cannot presently be determined.
The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. There can be no assurance that management will be successful in implementing its business plan or that the successful implementation of such business plan will actually improve our operating results
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $641,629 compared to $477,773 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $163,856. The majority of our clients hold elections on a three year cycle. This increase in revenues is due primarily to increased elections held during this year.
Salaries and benefits totaled $748,571 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $571,840 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $176,731. This increase was due primarily to an increase in compensation paid to management.
Professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $351,367 compared to $312,987 for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $38,380. This increase is primarily due to the increased legal activities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid marketing and advertising expenses of $3,703 compared to the $6,596 paid in the year ended December 31, 2019. We paid software development expenses of $120,554 in 2020 compared to $89,819 in 2019, we paid printing costs of $220,043 in 2020 compared to $146,695 in 2019, and we paid general and administrative expenses of $303,336 in 2020 compared to $453,593 in 2019. The overall decrease was due to continued efforts to reduce overhead during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,747,574 compared to $1,581,530 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $166,044 principally due to reasons discussed above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not maintain any off-balance sheet arrangements, transactions, obligations or other relationships with unconsolidated entities that would be expected to have a material current or future effect upon our financial condition or results of operations.