ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” sections for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are an award-winning provider of enterprise software solutions designed to accelerate the casino industry’s digital transformation towards Internet casino gambling and online sports betting.
We began our operations in Europe and have since deployed our solutions in the United States, U.K., Italy, and Australia. However, over the past several years we have had an emphasis on supporting land-based commercial and tribal casinos in the United States with their online sports betting and real money gambling operating in the United States. On May 14, 2018, the Supreme Court of the United Sates overturned the PASPA, which since 1992 had prevented U.S. states, aside from Nevada, Delaware and Oregon, from engaging in the regulation and taxation of sports betting activities at the intrastate level. The ruling paved the way for states to elect individually whether to allow for regulated sports betting and, by extension, real money iGaming within their borders. Between May 14, 2018 and November 20, 2020, 21 U.S. states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico enacted laws legalizing some form of retail and/or online sports betting. Four of these states also legalized real money iGaming, joining Nevada and Delaware, which were the only states with full scale online gambling regulations in place prior to May 2018. We are actively targeting expansion into additional states as they adopt regulations around legalized sports betting and real money iGaming.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 our revenues derived from customers in the United States was $29.4 million, increasing by $8.5 million, or 40.7% from our prior year revenues of $20.9 million. These increased revenues, in part, are directly related to the legalization of real money iGaming and sports betting in the United States, with $3.8 million, or 14.8% of our total RMiG revenues coming from expansions during the year into new jurisdictions with our existing customers. We simultaneously launched three operator customers live in the state of Michigan in January 2021, and we anticipate additional states such as Louisiana, Maryland, North Carolina, South Dakota, and Washington will allow for the operation of real money iGaming during 2021, which will further increase our total addressable market in the United States, along with other states that may regulate real money iGaming in the future.
As regulation continues to advance in the United States, we have proven to be well-positioned to capitalize on the expanding group of states regulating real money iGaming within their borders. Our software platform enables our customers to rapidly setup and launch an Internet gaming and/or sports betting business by publishing websites and mobile apps to end user residents in these highly regulated markets, each of which have their own technology requirements driven by state specific regulation. Importantly, our GameSTACK platform, adheres to stringent regulatory mandates, giving our customers peace of mind when deploying RMiG products. In August 2020, we delivered two major client launches only days apart, with Cordish Group’s RMiG website at playlive.com in Pennsylvania launched in just 72 days following the execution of a definitive agreement, underscoring the time-to-market advantage gained by our casino operator customers who use our platform for Internet gambling.
In September 2020, we substantially augmented our SIM deployment by adding a ‘simulated sports betting’ capability, launched on PlayJACK.com for JACK Entertainment, a leading casino operator in Ohio. With real money regulated Internet sports betting anticipated in 2021, this added product experience of sports betting, offered alongside simulated Internet casino gaming, has enabled JACK Entertainment to engage with sports betting enthusiasts online in Ohio substantially in advance of real money Internet sports betting being made available. Simulated sports betting is relevant to all clients of SIM and will be rolled-out to additional clients in 2021 and beyond, as a demonstrable vehicle for acquiring sports betting enthusiast’s online information substantially in advance of regulation of real money Internet sports betting.
We also sell support, development and maintenance services for software and hardware systems. Support and maintenance service agreements consist of fees for providing software updates, when and if available, and for providing technical support for software products for a specified term. Development services typically consist of fees for the initial deployment of the iGaming solution for our customers, as well as development services provided on an ongoing basis for our customers. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we generated $4.2 million in development revenues, of which $0.6 million was from implementations of RMiG and SIM operations for new customers, with future implementations ongoing for existing RMiG customers such as Churchill Downs Incorporated and new SIM customers such as the Seneca Gaming Corporation and Gila River Gaming Enterprises.
At the end of 2018, we entered into a binding agreement to license our strategic U.S. patent to a major U.S. Internet gambling operator and their affiliated land-based U.S. casino group. This patent governs the linkage of on-property reward cards to their counterpart Internet gambling accounts together with bilateral transmission of reward points between the Internet gambling technology system and the land-based casino management system present in all U.S. casino properties. In February 2021, we reached an agreement to license our U.S. patent to a second major U.S. casino operator group and we may license our patent to other major U.S. Internet gambling operators in the future.
On January 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of all outstanding shares of Vincent Group p.l.c., a Malta public limited company doing business as “Coolbet.” Coolbet, a developer and operator of a legal online sports betting and casino platforms, operates a B2C casino and sports-betting platform that is accessible via its website in eight national markets across Northern Europe (Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden), Latin America (Chile and Peru) and North America (Canada). We acquired Coolbet to take advantage of Coolbet’s user interface and proprietary technical platform, to quickly integrate and offer a proprietary sportsbook offering to our land-based casino operators in the United States. As a result of the acquisition, we expect our revenue footprint to expand into other international locations and become more diversified as Coolbet’s revenues are primarily derived from countries within northern Europe and South America, with additional revenues in North America (Canada).
May 2020 Completion of U.S. IPO and Reorganization with GAN plc
On May 5, 2020, GAN Limited completed a share exchange and reorganization pursuant to a Scheme of Arrangement whereby the shareholders of the previous parent, GAN plc, agreed to exchange their shares, on a basis of four ordinary shares to one ordinary share, for shares in GAN Limited, plus a pro rata portion of an aggregate £2.0 million or 2.32 pence per share in cash. After the reorganization, GAN plc was renamed GAN (UK) Limited and became a wholly-owned subsidiary of GAN Limited.
On May 7, 2020, GAN Limited completed its U.S. initial public offering under which it sold an aggregate of 7,337,000 ordinary shares at a price per share to the public of $8.50 and raised gross proceeds of $62.4 million (net proceeds of $55.3 million).
December 2020 Follow-on Offering of Ordinary Shares
On December 21, 2020, GAN Limited completed a follow-on public offering under which it sold 6,790,956 of ordinary shares at a price per share of $15.50 and raised gross proceeds of $98,541 million (net proceeds of $98.5 million). The net proceeds from the offering were used to fund the cash portion of the purchase price payable to the Coolbet shareholders pursuant to the Share Exchange Agreement with Coolbet.
January 2021 Acquisition of Coolbet
On January 1, 2021, GAN Limited completed its acquisition of Vincent Group p.l.c., a Malta public limited company (“Coolbet”), in accordance with the terms of the Share Exchange Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2020, between GAN Limited and Coolbet.
At the closing, under the Share Exchange Agreement, GAN Limited acquired all of the outstanding equity in Coolbet in exchange for a purchase price of $218.6 million comprised of a cash payment of $111.6 million, the issuance of 5,260,516 ordinary shares (valued at $106.7 million) and the issuance of replacement equity awards (valued at $0.3 million). The purchase price was calculated on a “cash-free, debt-free” basis, subject to adjustment based on the actual “net cash” position to be established within 120 days following the closing.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In connection with preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expense, and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time we prepare our consolidated financial statements. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ materially from our assumptions and estimates.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, share-based compensation, capitalization and impairment of internally generated intangible assets, and taxes. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
For further discussion of accounting policies refer to Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue recognition policies described in Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, require us to make significant judgments and estimates. Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 requires that we apply judgments or estimates to determine the performance obligations, the stand-alone selling prices of our performance obligations to customers, allocation of the transaction price, and the timing of transfer of control of the respective performance obligations. The evaluation of each of these criteria considering contract specific facts and circumstances is naturally judgmental, but certain judgments could significantly affect the amount or timing of revenue recognized if we were to reach a different conclusion than we have including:
Performance Obligations. In our commercial arrangements related to enterprise software platform services for B2B iGaming and sportsbook services, our performance obligation is limited to the provision of our software to our customer - the casino operator. The casino operator controls the URL for the online casino, controls its trademarks and branding, controls the gaming content and maintains ownership of the player database and loyalty programs related to players in the online casino. Accordingly, our revenues are the payments that we receive from our customer for those services, including any amounts owed to us as a share of net gaming revenue generated from the customer’s online casino.
Stand-Alone Selling Price and Allocation of Transaction Price. ASC 606 requires that we determine the stand-alone selling price for our goods and services as a basis for allocating the transaction price to the identified distinct performance obligations in our contracts with customers. Because we often bundle the selling price for hardware or services or we may license systems for which the solutions we provide are highly customized and therefore the prices vary, the determination of a stand-alone selling price requires significant judgment.
For performance obligations that involve multiple products or services, we allocate the transaction price to be applied to each performance obligation based on an estimation of the stand-alone selling price. We typically determine the stand-alone selling price based on the amounts that we charge when sold separately in similar circumstances to similar customers. In instances where the stand-alone selling price cannot be determined using an adjusted market assessment approach, we have used other allocation methods in accordance with ASC 606, including a residual approach to allocate a stand-alone selling price to a patent licensing performance obligation in 2019 as, at the time, we had not yet established a price for our patent licensing. This was a significant management estimate, impacting the revenue allocation to each performance obligation and the period in which the revenue was recognized. With respect to our patent licensing revenues in 2019, we concluded that the license of our patent was at a transaction price of $4.0 million, with the remainder of the transaction price outlined in the contract being related to the other performance obligation of platform development services.
Transfer of Control. ASC 606 requires that we recognize revenue when or as control over a performance obligation transfers to a customer. In 2019, we entered into an arrangement for B2C iGaming enterprise software platform services with a commercial partner customer, whereby our performance obligations included the operation of RMiG sites on behalf of such customer. Management has concluded that, under this arrangement, our commercial partner customer controls the relationship with the end-user players and owns the player database and that we act as an agent for this commercial partner customer in providing services to end-user players. As such, in this instance of B2C RMiG enterprise software platform services, we recognize revenue as we earn the revenue from our commercial partner customer rather than the revenues earned by the customer from its end-user players. This is consistent with our principal revenue recognition for B2B iGaming and sportsbook as described above and with our revenue recognition policy as described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. The arrangement with our commercial partner was subsequently exited and revenues associated with the B2C operations in 2020 were recognized on a principal basis.
Our RMiG and SIM enterprise software platform offerings include iGaming content licensing services. The GameSTACK platform is capable of supporting, and we make available to our customers, both proprietary and third-party licensed gaming content. Our casino operator customers generally control the determination of which gaming content will be offered in their online casinos.
Where a casino operator customer directs us to provide our proprietary gaming content, we act as principal in providing the content licensing services, recording the related revenue as gross. In accordance with ASC 606, where the casino operator customer directs us to procure third party gaming content, we are deemed to be the agent in providing the content licensing services, recording the corresponding revenue net of licensing costs paid to the owners of that content.
We act as principal in a majority of our SIM and Italy-based RMiG content licensing service arrangements and are primarily agent in a majority of our U.S.-based real money iGaming content licensing service arrangements.
Share-Based Compensation
Management measures equity settled share-based awards at fair value at the date of grant and expenses the cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the entire award, generally defined as the vesting period, along with a corresponding increase in equity. Forfeitures are recorded in the period in which they occur with the impact, if any, recognized in the consolidated statements of operation with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
The fair value of share options is determined using a Black-Scholes model, taking into consideration management’s best estimate of the expected life of the option and the estimated number of shares that will eventually vest. Application of the option-pricing model involves the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective and are outlined below as they pertain to grants subsequent to our initial public offering.
Expected Term - represents the period of time that awards granted are expected to be outstanding. In determining the expected term of the award, future exercise and forfeiture patterns are estimated from historical employee exercise behavior. These patterns are also affected by the vesting conditions of the award. Changes in the future exercise behavior of employees or in the vesting period of the award could result in a change in the expected term. An increase in the expected term would result in an increase to our expense.
Volatility - a measure of the amount by which the price of our ordinary shares is expected to fluctuate each year during the expected term of the award. Our expected volatility is determined by reference to volatility of certain identified peer groups, share trading information and stock prices on the Nasdaq. The implied volatilities from traded options are impacted by changes in market conditions. An increase in the volatility would result in an increase in our expense.
Expected Dividend Yield - is based on our historical dividend yield, which is zero - as we have not historically paid dividends. If we were to begin paying dividends, the dividend yield would increase and result in a decrease in our expense.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at time of grant. As the risk-free interest rate increases, the expected term increases, resulting in an increase in our expense.
Where the Company has decided to cover the social taxes and income taxes related to equity settled share-based awards for the option holders, we recognize a tax expense for the future cash payment as a cash settled share-based compensation expense. At each reporting period, management measures tax liabilities associated with our share-based compensation based on the intrinsic value of the options using our share price at each date of measurement. The impact of the revision of the original estimates, if any, is recognized in profit or loss with a corresponding increase or reduction to the corresponding liability. Where the Company does not cover employee social taxes and income taxes, we recognize employer tax expenses in the period when the respective holder exercises their options.
Capitalization and Impairment of Internally Generated Intangible Assets
Management reviews expenditures, including wages and benefits for employees, incurred on development activities and based on their judgment of the costs incurred assesses whether the expenditure meets the capitalization criteria set out in ASC 350 and the intangible assets accounting policy within the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Management specifically considers if additional expenditure on projects relates to maintenance or new development projects. In addition, the useful life of capitalized development costs is determined by management at the time the software is brought into use and is regularly reviewed for appropriateness. For unique software products we control and develop, the life is based on historical experience with similar products as well as anticipation of future events, which may impact their useful economic life, such as changes in technology.
Management reviews intangible assets at each reporting period to determine potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an intangible asset may not be fully recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the intangible asset with the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. Management must make estimates related to future cash flows and discount rates that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted. If such assets are considered impaired, an impairment loss would be measured by comparing the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the intangible asset.
Useful Life of Capitalized Development Costs
The useful life of capitalized development costs is determined by management at the time the software is brought into use and is regularly reviewed for appropriateness. For unique software products controlled and developed by us, the life is based on historical experience with similar products as well as anticipation of future events, which may impact their useful economic life, such as changes in technology.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent that it is probable future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilized. The key area of judgement is our assessment of whether it is probable that there will be sufficient taxable profits against which any deferred tax assets can be utilized. We operate in a number of international tax jurisdictions. Judgement is required in respect of the interpretation of state, federal and international tax law and practices as e-commerce and tax continues to evolve. We file our tax returns and duty calculations and estimate our tax and indirect tax provisions based on current tax rules and practices and our transfer pricing policy, together with advice received from professional advisors and believe that our accruals for tax liabilities are adequate. Further details of our accounting policy in relation to deferred tax assets is discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Research and development tax relief is recognized as an asset once there is sufficient evidence that any amount we may claim will be received. A key judgement arises with respect to the likelihood of a claim being successful when a claim has been quantified but has not been received. In making this judgement, we consider the nature of the claim and in particular the track record of success of previous claims.
We are subject to income taxes in numerous jurisdictions and there are transactions for which the ultimate tax determination cannot be assessed with certainty in the ordinary course of business. We recognize a provision for situations that might arise in the foreseeable future based on an assessment of the probabilities as to whether additional taxes will be due. An uncertain tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. Penalties and interest incurred related to underpayment of income tax are classified as income tax expense in the period incurred.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Excludes depreciation and amortization.
n.m. = not meaningful
Components of Revenue
Real Money iGaming
The increase in RMiG revenue is directly related to the legalization of real money iGaming and sports betting in the United States and our launch of iGaming solutions for new and existing customers in those jurisdictions. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $3.8 million in revenues from RMiG in new jurisdictions for existing customers and $1.5 million in RMiG revenues from new customers. These new customer and jurisdictional launches represented 20.6% of our total RMiG revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect revenue growth from other customers to increase more rapidly, increasing our customer diversity and resulting in FanDuel being a substantially lower portion of our overall revenues moving forward. Such expected revenue growth in our RMiG segment is based on anticipated revenues from new customers such as Cordish Gaming Group as a RMiG client in Pennsylvania and Churchill Downs Incorporated as a RMiG and online sports betting client to be rolled out in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Indiana, Michigan, Colorado, and Tennessee. Additionally, we entered into a 10-year agreement with Wynn Resorts to provide the software platform for RMiG and online sports betting business in Michigan and we simultaneously launched RMiG for FanDuel, Churchill Downs and Wynn Resorts online in Michigan in January 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, FanDuel deployed its own proprietary digital wallet for its sports gaming business, and our sports gaming revenues from FanDuel accordingly ceased on August 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company derived $2.6 million and $3.0 million from FanDuel’s sports gaming operations, respectively. The Company still maintains its RMiG casino business with FanDuel.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, RMiG services and other revenue was $7.6 million, as compared to $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in revenues of $1.2 million was primarily a result of increased hardware sales to customers of $1.6 million, largely in relation to the anticipated regulation of real money gambling in new U.S. states, as well as increased development revenues of $1.7 million recognized as a result of FanDuel’s migration to their own player wallets, $0.6 million in development services associated with new casino launches and $0.3 million in game development revenues. These increased revenues in 2020 were primarily offset by a decrease in patent licensing revenues of $4.0 million, which were recognized in 2019 and did not recur in 2020.
Simulated iGaming
For the year ended December 31, 2020, SIM platform revenue was $8.2 million, as compared to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Of this increase, existing customers were responsible for increases of $1.6 million with new customers contributing $2.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, new SIM customers included companies such as the Snoqualmie Indian Tribe in Washington (May 2020), Penn National Gaming, which operates 41 properties in 19 states (August 2020), and Laguna Development Corporation in New Mexico (August 2020).
Geographic Information
During the year ended December 31, 2020, with the exception of the U.K. and Channel Islands, revenues increased across each of our geographies when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues derived from customers in the United States increased $8.4 million, or 40.2%, driven primary by the legalization of real money iGaming and sports betting in additional U.S. states and our launch of iGaming solutions for new and existing customers in those jurisdictions.
In the U.K., we saw a decrease in revenue in our RMiG segment of $4.1 million. Substantially all of the RMiG revenue we received in the U.K. for 2019 was attributable to the operations of an online B2C gaming website that we operated for WinStar Casino. Effective December 31, 2019, we acquired ownership of the online casino and customer database from WinStar Casino. We entered into a license to continue to operate under the WinStar Casino brand through March 30, 2020, at which time we transitioned the online casino to our proprietary brand and website www.ReelsRoyale.com. Through September 30, 2020, we operated the online casino as a proprietary B2C online casino under our U.K. gaming license without a marketing budget to drive awareness and traffic to the online casino, as we pursued an alternative sponsor or provider of marketing capital. As a sponsor was not identified in the desired timeframe, it was determined to wind down the ReelsRoyale site, as the company does not intend to pursue a B2C product offering in the U.K. As a result of the changes related to the WinStar Casino and ReelsRoyale site, revenues for the U.K. declined substantially from 2019 levels, totaling $0.3 million in 2020.
Revenues derived from customers in other geographies are primarily comprised of game development revenues for games we were contracted to develop on behalf of our customers, which are now hosted natively on our iGaming platform. These revenues are associated with a certain number of games we delivered during the period, with further game development revenues anticipated under our contractual arrangements to be recognized when the remaining games are delivered.
Following the closing of our acquisition of Coolbet in January 2021, we expect our revenue footprint to expand into other international locations and become more diversified as Coolbet’s revenues are primarily derived from countries within northern Europe and South America, with additional revenues in North America (Canada).
Cost of Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of platform and content fees increased $1.2 million compared to the prior year, primarily attributable to increased royalty expenses of $1.3 million. Cost of development services and other increased by $2.2 million compared to the prior year, driven primarily by increased costs of hardware revenue of $1.6 million.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, sales and marketing expenses increased by $1.6 million, or 44.7% compared to the prior year, driven by personnel expenses (including $0.6 million of share-based compensation expense for key personnel during 2020) associated with our marketing and customer service initiatives in line with our customer acquisitions and new jurisdictions served.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, product and technology expenses increased by $7.6 million, or 223.2% compared to the prior year, driven by personnel and related costs (including $3.9 million in share-based compensation expense for key personnel during 2020) as we ramped up our team and invested in our platform to serve our new and existing customers.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $16.4 million, or 194.3% compared to the prior year, primarily attributable to (i) personnel and related costs of increasing from approximately 141 to 241 employees ($6.9 million), (ii) share-based compensation for directors and key personnel ($4.9 million during 2020), and (iii) increased professional services related to capital markets advisory, consulting, accounting advisory, tax advisory and legal expenses incurred in connection with our initial public offering, corporate infrastructure and expansion projects ($5.8 million), (iv) additional compliance requirements as a result of becoming a public company in the United States in May 2020 ($1.3 million), and (v) costs incurred with respect to the acquisition of Coolbet ($1.0 million).
During the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $1.1 million, or 24.5% compared to the prior year, due to the mix of support versus development activities and prior capitalized assets becoming fully amortized during 2019 and 2020, not fully offset by new capitalized development costs to amortize in the future.
Interest Expense, net
During the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense, net increased by $0.4 million, driven by financing costs for the loan facility we entered into with related parties in the second quarter of 2020 in connection with the Share Exchange.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased by $0.2 million, or 38.5%, from $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily the result of a decrease of our accrual in relation to GAN UK’s estimated uncertain tax benefit during the period.
Segment Results
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Real Money iGaming
(1) Excludes depreciation and amortization
Segment results for RMiG, which excludes depreciation and amortization and is a measure of gross profit, was $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (70.8% segment profit margin), as compared to $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 (77.5% segment profit margin). Key factors impacting comparisons between periods were a $4.0 million license of our patent in 2019 (as compared to no patent license fees in 2020) and $4.5 million of revenue in 2019 related to the WinStar Casino and ReelsRoyale site, both of which are not present in 2020.
Simulated iGaming
(1) Excludes depreciation and amortization
Segment results for SIM, which excludes depreciation and amortization and is a measure of gross profit, was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (68.7% segment profit margin), as compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 (60.5% segment profit margin). The increased segment results of $3.1 million was attributable to new customer launches and organic growth.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that is provided as supplemental disclosure, which is defined as net income (loss) before interest expense, net, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairments, share-based compensation expense and related expense, initial public offering related costs and other items which our Board of Directors considers to be infrequent or unusual in nature.
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA to measure its financial performance. Specifically, it uses Adjusted EBITDA (1) as a measure to compare its operating performance from period to period, as it removes the effect of items not directly resulting from core operations and (2) as a means of assessing its core business performance against others in the industry, because it eliminates some of the effects that are generated by differences in capital structure, depreciation, tax effects and unusual and infrequent events. The presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be used in isolation or as a substitute for any measure prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA, as defined, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies in the industry, and Adjusted EBITDA may exclude financial information that some investors may consider important in evaluating the Company’s performance.
Below is a reconciliation to Adjusted EBITDA from net income (loss) as presented in the consolidated statements of operations for the years specified:
(1) Includes $6.8 million and $3.4 million in equity-settled and cash-settled expenses, respectively. Refer to Note 8 - Share-based Compensation for further details.
Key Performance Indicators
Our management uses the following key performance indicators (“KPIs”) as indicators of trends and results of the business. These KPIs give our management an indication of the level of engagement between the player and the Company’s platforms. No estimation is necessary in quantifying these KPIs, nor do they represent U.S. GAAP based measurements. These KPIs are subject to various risks such as customer concentration, competition, licensing and regulation, and macroeconomic conditions. Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for further risks associated with our business which would affect these KPIs.
Gross Operator Revenue
The Company defines Gross Operator Revenue as the sum of its corporate customers’ gross revenue from SIM, gross gaming revenue from RMiG, and gross sports win from real money regulated sports betting. Gross Operator Revenue, which is not comparable to financial information presented in conformity with U.S. GAAP, gives management and users an indication of the extent of transactions processed through the Company’s corporate customers’ platforms and allows management to understand the extent of activity that the Company’s platform is processing.
The increase in gross operator revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily attributable to the continued expansion of existing and new U.S. customers and business, coupled with a shift towards RMiG and SIM, which experienced substantial growth since the COVID-19 outbreak began disrupting retail casino operations and the sports betting calendar.
Expansion of existing and new customers in Pennsylvania combined with an annualized impact of our 2019 expansion into New Jersey contributed towards increases in RMiG gross operator revenues, while new customers and optimization of our platform since the COVID-19 outbreak drove growth in SIM gross operator revenues.
Active Player-Days
The Company defines Active Player-Days as unique individuals who log on and wager each day (either wagering with real money or playing with virtual credits used in simulated gaming), aggregated during the respective period. By way of illustrative example: one (1) unique individual logging in and wagering each day in a single calendar year would, in aggregate, represent 365 Active Player-Days. Active Player-Days provides an indicator of consistent and daily interaction that individuals have with the Company’s platforms. Active Player-Days allows management and users to understand not only total users who interact with the platform but gives an idea of the frequency to which users are interacting with the platform, as someone who logs on and wagers multiple days are weighted heavier during the period than the user who only logs on and wagers one day.
The increase in Active Player-Days for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily attributable to the continued expansion of existing and new U.S. customers and business, coupled with a shift towards RMiG and SIM, which experienced substantial growth since the COVID-19 outbreak began disrupting retail casino operations and the sports betting calendar. As those markets further recover from their COVID-induced interruptions, the major boosts seen in RMiG and SIM has started to subside, though record levels of revenue continue to be achieved.
Average Revenue per Daily Active User
The Company defines Average Revenue per Daily Active User (“ARPDAU”) as Gross Operator Revenue divided by the identified number of Active Player-Days. This measure allows management to measure the value per daily user and track user interaction with the platforms, which helps both management and users of financial statements understand the value per user that is driven by marketing efforts and data analysis obtained from the Company’s platforms.
The increase in ARPDAU in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily the result of higher growth in revenue in our highest-yield segment, which is U.S. RMiG platform, compared to growth in our simulated iGaming platform revenues. Additionally, the increase in ARPDAU in 2020 versus 2019 was primarily the result of improved marketing efforts which increased the amount of money paid by players. Both Active Player-Days and Gross Operator Revenue expanded during the period, but Gross Operator Revenue expanded quicker than Active Player-Days. Based on expanded data obtained from the platform, we were able to adjust our product offerings to provide more popular and in-demand gaming content driving up the average value per player as the players were more satisfied with the product provided.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $152.7 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $45.8 million, as a result of incurred losses from operations and net operating cash outflows in prior years. We believe cash on hand and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs. Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are to finance working capital, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. Our capital expenditure consists primarily of technology development costs, computer equipment, and costs to enter contracts. In the event that we are unable to sustain positive cash flow from operations and/or raise adequate financing, future operations may need to be scaled back by delaying hiring or reducing headcount. Our success will depend in part on our ability to continue to attract new customers, retain existing customers, and market our products and services. There can be no assurance that we will be able to achieve any or all of these success factors.
On January 1, 2021, we acquired Coolbet for a purchase price of $218.6 million comprised of a cash payment of $111.6 million, the issuance of 5,260,516 ordinary shares (valued at $106.7 million) and the issuance of replacement equity awards (valued at $0.3 million). We anticipate a level of increased development costs following the acquisition in order to integrate Coolbet’s sports technology within our B2B offering. Certain of these development costs associated with the integration may qualify for capitalization in accordance with our accounting policies.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of our operating, investing and financing activities is shown in the following table:
n.m. = not meaningful
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased $11.9 million, or 213.6%, from a $5.6 million net inflow during the year ended December 31, 2019 to a $6.3 million net outflow for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities is the result of an increase in net loss of $22.2 million from $2.0 million net income in 2019 to $20.2 million net loss in 2020, due to increased administrative costs as described above.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $2.9 million, or 99.4%, from a $3.0 million net outflow during the year ended December 31, 2019 to a $5.9 million net outflow for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is the result of a $1.6 million increase in capitalized software development costs associated with new customer launches and future launches, a $1.0 million increase in purchases of property and equipment and a $0.3 million increase in the acquisition of licenses to operate in new jurisdictions.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $154.5 million from a $0.2 million net inflow during the year ended December 31, 2019 to a $154.7 million net inflow for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is mainly the result of proceeds from our U.S. initial public offering in May 2020 ($57.4 million), follow-on public offering in December 2020 ($99.4 million) and cash proceeds on the exercise of employee share options ($2.1 million increase compared to the prior period); offset by the payment of offering costs of ($2.0 million) and cash consideration paid to the previous shareholders of the Company plc (£2 million or $2.5 million) pursuant to the May 2020 Scheme of Arrangement.
Capital Resources
We do not currently have any credit facilities or similar capital resources in place. We believe cash on hand and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs. To the extent that we are unable to sustain positive cash flow from operations, we expect to raise additional capital through the sale of debt or equity securities. There are no arrangements in place for any such financing at this time. We cannot provide any assurance as to the availability or terms of any future financing that we may require to support our operations.
Capital Expenditures
We incurred capital expenditures of $5.9 million and $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Of these expenditures, purchases related to intangible assets (including licenses to operate in related jurisdictions) represented $0.2 million and $0, respectively, internally developed capitalized software represented $4.4 million and $2.7 million, respectively, and property and equipment (including licenses for internal use software) represented $1.2 million and $0.2 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.