Item 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes of Global Indemnity included elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to the Company’s plans and strategy, constitutes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Please see "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" at the end of this Item 7 and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A above for more information. You should review “Risk Factors” in Item 1A above for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained herein.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
The global outbreak of COVID-19 presents significant risks to the Company which it continues to evaluate. The COVID-19 pandemic may affect the Company’s operations indefinitely. The Company may experience reductions in premium volume, delays in the collection of premiums, and increases in COVID-19 related claims. Volatility in the global financial markets may negatively impact the market value of the Company’s investment portfolio and may result in net realized investment losses as well as a decline in the liquidity of the investment portfolio. All of these factors may have far reaching impacts on the Company’s business, operations, and financial results and conditions, directly and indirectly, including without limitation impacts on the health of the Company’s management and employees, distribution, marketing, customers and agents, and on the overall economy. The scope and nature of these impacts, most of which are beyond the Company’s control, continue to evolve and such effects could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic ends.
Retirement of Chief Executive Officer
On January 19, 2021, the Company announced that Cynthia Y. Valko, chief executive officer and a member of the Board of Directors of Global Indemnity Group, LLC, informed the Board of Directors that she would retire effective as of January 31, 2021. In connection with her retirement, Ms. Valko resigned from her positions as chief executive officer of the Company and a member of the Board of Directors, in each case, effective as of January 15, 2021, although Ms. Valko will continue to serve the Company in an advisory capacity. The Board of Directors is conducting a search to identify the successor to Ms. Valko for the chief executive officer position of the Company. Effective as of January 19, 2021, the Company named Jonathan E. Oltman as president of the Company’s insurance operations. Until Ms. Valko’s successor as chief executive officer of the Company is duly appointed, Mr. Oltman will act as the Company’s principal executive officer. Mr. Oltman will report directly to the Board of Directors through its chairman on a day-to-day basis. Please see Note 25 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information regarding the retirement of Ms. Valko and the appointment of Mr. Oltman.
Board of Directors
On December 1, 2020, Michele A. Colucci informed the Company that she was resigning from the Board effective at the conclusion of the Board’s meeting held on December 5, 2020 and December 6, 2020.
In connection with the resignation of Ms. Valko and Ms. Colucci, the size of the Board has been reduced from eight to six directors.
Redomestication
On August 28, 2020, the Company completed its plan to redomesticate to the United States. Please see Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information on the redomestication.
As a result of the Company moving its Reinsurance Operations to the United States, Steve Green, President of the Company’s Reinsurance Operations, will depart the Company effective March 31, 2021.
Redemption of Debt
In August 2020, GBLI Holdings and Global Indemnity Limited redeemed the entire outstanding $100 million aggregate principal amount of 7.75% Subordinated Notes due 2045 (the “2045 Notes”).
Dividends / Distributions
During 2020, the Board of Directors approved a dividend payment of $0.25 per common share to all shareholders of record on the close of business on March 24, 2020 and June 23, 2020 and approved a distribution payment of $0.25 per common share to all shareholders of record on the close of business on September 25, 2020 and December 24, 2020. Dividends / distributions paid were $14.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, distributions of $0.1 million were paid to Global Indemnity Group, LLC’s preferred shareholders during the year ended December 31, 2020.
AM Best Rating
AM Best has seven Rating Categories in the AM Best Financial Strength Rating Scale. The categories ranging from best to worst are Superior, Excellent, Good, Fair, Marginal, Weak and Poor. Within each rating category, there are rating notches of plus or minus to show additional gradation of the ratings. On September 23, 2020, AM Best assigned the Company’s insurance subsidiaries a financial strength rating of "A" (Excellent).
Overview
The Company operates and manages its business through four business segments: Commercial Specialty, Specialty Property, Farm, Ranch & Stable, and Reinsurance Operations.
The Company’s Commercial Specialty segment sells its property and casualty insurance products through a group of approximately 185 professional general agencies that have limited quoting and binding authority, as well as a number of wholesale insurance brokers who in turn sell the Company’s insurance products to insureds through retail insurance brokers. Commercial Specialty operates predominantly in the excess and surplus lines marketplace. The Company manages its Commercial Specialty segment via product classifications. These product classifications are: 1) Penn-America, which includes property and general liability products for small commercial businesses sold through a select network of wholesale general agents with specific binding authority; 2) United National, which includes property, general liability, and professional lines products sold through program administrators with specific binding authority; 3) Diamond State, which includes property, casualty, and professional lines products sold through wholesale brokers and program administrators with specific binding authority; and 4) Vacant Express, which primarily insures dwellings which are currently vacant, undergoing renovation, or are under construction and is sold through aggregators, brokers, and retail agents.
The Company’s Specialty Property segment, primarily via American Reliable, offers specialty personal lines property and casualty insurance products through a group of approximately 225 agents, primarily comprised of wholesale general agents, with specific binding authority.
The Company’s Farm, Ranch & Stable segment, primarily via American Reliable, provides specialized property and casualty coverage including Commercial Farm Auto and Excess/Umbrella Coverage for the agriculture industry as well as specialized insurance products for the equine mortality and equine major medical industry. These insurance products are sold through a group of approximately 220 agents, primarily comprised of wholesalers and retail agents, with a selected number having specific binding authority.
The Company’s Reinsurance Operations provides reinsurance solutions through brokers and on a direct basis. It uses its capital capacity to write niche and specialty-focused treaties and business which meet the Company’s risk tolerance and return thresholds. Prior to the redomestication, the Company’s Reinsurance Operations consisted solely of the operations of Global Indemnity Reinsurance. In connection with the redomestication, Global Indemnity Reinsurance merged into Penn-Patriot Insurance Company and all of its business was assumed by the Company’s existing insurance company subsidiaries.
The Company derives its revenues primarily from premiums paid on insurance policies that it writes and from income generated by its investment portfolio, net of fees paid for investment management services. The amount of insurance premiums that the Company receives is a function of the amount and type of policies it writes, as well as prevailing market prices.
The Company’s expenses include losses and loss adjustment expenses, acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses, corporate and other operating expenses, interest, investment expenses, and income taxes. Losses and loss adjustment expenses are estimated by management and reflect the Company’s best estimate of ultimate losses and costs arising during the reporting period and revisions of prior period estimates. The Company records its best estimate of losses and loss adjustment expenses considering both internal and external actuarial analyses of the estimated losses the Company expects to incur on the insurance policies it writes. The ultimate losses and loss adjustment expenses will depend on the actual costs to resolve claims. Acquisition costs consist principally of commissions and premium taxes that are typically a percentage of the premiums on the insurance policies the Company writes, net of ceding commissions earned from reinsurers. Other underwriting expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses and general operating expenses related to underwriting activities. Corporate and other operating expenses are comprised primarily of outside legal fees, other professional and accounting fees, directors’ fees, management fees & advisory fees, and salaries and benefits for company personnel whose services relate to the support of corporate activities. Interest expense is primarily comprised of amounts due on outstanding debt.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which require it to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. See Note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of Part II of this report. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions.
The Company believes that of the Company’s significant accounting policies, the following may involve a higher degree of judgment and estimation.
Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Although variability is inherent in estimates, the Company believes that the liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses reflects Management’s best estimate for future amounts needed to pay losses and related loss adjustment expenses and the impact of its reinsurance coverage with respect to insured events.
In developing losses and loss adjustment expense ("loss" or "losses") reserve estimates for the Company’s Insurance Operations, the Company’s actuaries perform detailed reserve analyses each quarter. To perform the analysis, the data is organized at a "reserve category" level. A reserve category can be a line of business such as commercial automobile liability, or it can be a particular type of claim such as construction defect. The reserves within a reserve category level are characterized as long-tail or short-tail. For long-tail business, it will generally be several years between the time the business is written and the time when all claims are settled. The Company’s long-tail exposures include general liability, professional liability, products liability, commercial automobile liability, and excess and umbrella. Short-tail exposures include property, commercial automobile physical damage, and equine mortality. To manage its insurance operations, the Company differentiates by product classifications, which are Penn-America, United National, Diamond State, American Reliable, Collectibles, and Vacant Express. For further discussion about the Company’s product classifications, see “General - Business Segments - Insurance Operations” in Item 1 of Part I of this report. Each of the Company’s product classifications contain both long-tail and short-tail exposures. Every reserve category is analyzed by the Company’s actuaries each quarter. Management is responsible for the final determination of loss reserve selections.
Loss reserve estimates for the Company’s Reinsurance Operations are developed by independent, external actuaries; at least annually; however, management is responsible for the final determination of loss reserve selections. The data for this analysis is organized by treaty and treaty year. As with the Company’s reserves for its Insurance Operations, reserves for its Reinsurance Operations are characterized as long-tail or short-tail. Long-tail exposures include workers compensation, professional liability, and excess and umbrella liability. Short-tail exposures are primarily catastrophe exposed property and marine accounts.
In addition to the Company’s internal reserve analysis, independent external actuaries perform a full, detailed review of the Insurance and Reinsurance Operations’ reserves annually. The Company reviews both the internal and external actuarial analyses in determining its reserve position.
The actuarial methods used to project ultimate losses for both long-tail and short-tail reserve categories include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
Paid Development method;
•
Incurred Development method;
•
Expected Loss Ratio method;
•
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and paid loss;
•
Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and incurred loss; and
•
Average Loss method.
The Paid Development method estimates ultimate losses by reviewing paid loss patterns and applying them to accident years with further expected changes in paid loss. Selection of the paid loss pattern requires analysis of several factors including the impact of inflation on claims costs, the rate at which claims professionals make claim payments and close claims, the impact of judicial decisions, the impact of underwriting changes, the impact of large claim payments and other factors. Claim cost inflation requires evaluation of changes in the cost of repairing or replacing property, changes in the cost of medical care, changes in the cost of wage replacement, judicial decisions, legislative changes and other factors. Because this method assumes that losses are paid at a consistent rate, changes in any of these factors can impact the results. Since the method does not rely on case reserves, it is not directly influenced by changes in the adequacy of case reserves.
For many reserve categories, paid loss data for recent periods may be too immature or erratic for reliable loss projections. This situation often exists for long-tail exposures. In addition, changes in the factors described above may result in inconsistent payment patterns. Finally, estimating the paid loss pattern subsequent to the most mature point available in the data analyzed often involves considerable uncertainty for long-tail reserve categories.
The Incurred Development method is similar to the Paid Development method, but it uses case incurred losses instead of paid losses. Since this method uses more data (case reserves in addition to paid losses) than the Paid Development method, the incurred development patterns may be less variable than paid development patterns. However, selection of the incurred loss pattern requires analysis of all of the factors listed in the description of the Paid Development method. In addition, the inclusion of case reserves can lead to distortions if changes in case reserving practices have taken place and the use of case incurred losses may not eliminate the issues associated with estimating the incurred loss pattern subsequent to the most mature point available.
The Expected Loss Ratio method multiplies premiums by an expected loss ratio to produce ultimate loss estimates for each accident year. This method may be useful if loss development patterns are inconsistent, losses emerge very slowly, or there is relatively little loss history from which to estimate future losses. The selection of the expected loss ratio requires analysis of loss ratios from earlier accident years or pricing studies and analysis of inflationary trends, frequency trends, rate changes, underwriting changes, and other applicable factors.
The Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and paid losses is a combination of the Paid Development method and the Expected Loss Ratio method. This method normally determines expected loss ratios similar to the method used for the Expected Loss Ratio method and requires analysis of the same factors described above. The method assumes that only future losses will develop at the expected loss ratio level. The percent of paid loss to ultimate loss implied from the Paid Development method is used to determine what percentage of ultimate loss is yet to be paid. The use of the pattern from the Paid Development method requires consideration of all factors listed in the description of the Paid Development method. The estimate of losses yet to be paid is added to current paid losses to estimate the ultimate loss for each accident year. This method will react very slowly if actual ultimate loss ratios are different from expectations due to changes not accounted for by the Expected Loss Ratio calculation.
The Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and incurred losses is similar to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and paid losses except that it uses case incurred losses. The use of case incurred losses instead of paid losses can result in development patterns that are less variable than paid development patterns. However, the inclusion of case reserves can lead to distortions if changes in case reserving practices have taken place. The method requires analysis of all the factors that need to be reviewed for the Expected Loss Ratio and Incurred Development methods.
The Average Loss method multiplies a projected number of ultimate incurred claims by an estimated ultimate average loss for each accident year to produce ultimate loss estimates. Since projections of the ultimate number of claims are often less variable than projections of ultimate loss, this method can provide more reliable results for reserve categories where loss development patterns are inconsistent or too variable to be relied on exclusively. In addition, this method can more directly account for changes in coverage that impact the number and size of claims. However, this method can be difficult to apply to situations where very large claims or a substantial number of unusual claims result in volatile average claim sizes. Projecting the ultimate number of claims requires analysis of several factors including the rate at which policyholders report claims to the Company, the impact of judicial decisions, the impact of underwriting changes and other factors. Estimating the ultimate average loss requires analysis of the impact of large losses and claim cost trends based on changes in the cost of repairing or replacing property, changes in the cost of medical care, changes in the cost of wage replacement, judicial decisions, legislative changes and other factors.
For many reserve categories, especially those that can be considered long-tail, a particular accident year may not have a sufficient volume of paid losses to produce a statistically reliable estimate of ultimate losses. In such a case, the Company’s actuaries typically assign more weight to the Incurred Development method than to the Paid Development method. As claims continue to settle and the volume of paid losses increases, the actuaries may assign additional weight to the Paid Development method. For most of the Company’s reserve categories, even the case incurred losses for accident years that are early in the claim settlement process will not be of sufficient volume to produce a reliable estimate of ultimate losses. In these cases, the Company will not assign any weight to the Paid and Incurred Development methods and will use the Bornhuetter-Ferguson and Expected Loss Ratio methods. For short-tail exposures, the Paid and Incurred Development methods can often be relied on sooner primarily because the Company’s history includes a sufficient number of accident years to cover the entire period over which paid and incurred losses are expected to change. However, the Company may also assign weights to the Expected Loss Ratio, Bornhuetter-Ferguson and Average Loss methods for short-tail exposures when developing estimates of ultimate losses.
Generally, reserves for long-tail lines give more weight to the Expected Loss Ratio method in the more recent immature years. As the accident years mature, weight shifts to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods and eventually to the Incurred and/or Paid Development method. Claims related to umbrella business are usually reported later than claims for other long-tail lines. For umbrella business, the shift from the Expected Loss Ratio method to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods to the Loss Development method may be more protracted than for most long-tailed lines. Reserves for short-tail lines tend to make the shift across methods more quickly than the long-tail lines.
For other more complex reserve categories where the above methods may not produce reliable indications, the Company uses additional methods tailored to the characteristics of the specific situation. Such reserve categories include losses from construction defect and A&E claims.
For construction defect losses, the Company’s actuaries organize losses by the year in which they were reported to develop an IBNR provision for development on known cases. To estimate losses from claims that have occurred but have not yet been reported to the Company (pure IBNR), various extrapolation techniques are applied to the pattern of claims that have been reported to estimate the number of claims yet to be reported. This process requires analysis of several factors including the rate at which policyholders report claims to the Company, the impact of judicial decisions, the impact of underwriting changes and other factors. An average claim size is determined from past experience and applied to the number of unreported claims to estimate reserves for these claims.
Establishing reserves for A&E and other mass tort claims involves considerably more judgment than other types of claims due to, among other things, inconsistent court decisions, bankruptcy filings as a result of asbestos-related liabilities, and judicial interpretations that often expand theories of recovery and broaden the scope of coverage. The insurance industry continues to receive a substantial number of asbestos-related bodily injury claims, with an increasing focus being directed toward other parties, including installers of products containing asbestos rather than against asbestos manufacturers. This shift has resulted in significant insurance coverage litigation implicating applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any, including but not limited to, determinations as to whether or not an asbestos-related bodily injury claim is subject to aggregate limits of liability found in most comprehensive general liability policies. The Company continues to closely monitor its asbestos exposure and make adjustments where they are warranted.
Reserve analyses performed by the Company’s internal and external actuaries result in actuarial point estimates. The results of the detailed reserve reviews were summarized and discussed with the Company’s senior management to determine the best estimate of reserves. This group considered many factors in making this decision. The factors included, but were not limited to, the historical pattern and volatility of the actuarial indications, the sensitivity of the actuarial indications to changes in paid and incurred loss patterns, the consistency of claims handling processes, the consistency of case reserving practices, changes in the Company’s pricing and underwriting, and overall pricing and underwriting trends in the insurance market.
Management’s best estimate at December 31, 2020 was recorded as the loss reserve. Management’s best estimate is as of a particular point in time and is based upon known facts, the Company’s actuarial analyses, current law, and the Company’s judgment. This resulted in carried gross and net reserves of $662.8 million and $580.7 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2020. A breakout of the Company’s gross and net reserves as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(1)
Losses incurred but not reported, including the expected future emergence of case reserves.
(2)
Does not include reinsurance receivables on paid losses.
The Company continually reviews these estimates and, based on new developments and information, includes adjustments of the estimated ultimate liability in the operating results for the periods in which the adjustments are made. The establishment of losses and loss adjustment expense reserves makes no provision for the possible broadening of coverage by legislative action or judicial interpretation, or the emergence of new types of losses not sufficiently represented in the Company’s historical experience or that cannot yet be quantified or estimated. The Company regularly analyzes its reserves and reviews reserving methodologies so that future adjustments to prior accident year reserves can be minimized. However, given the complexity of this process, reserves require continual updates and the ultimate liability may be higher or lower than previously indicated. Changes in estimates for losses and loss adjustment expense reserves are recorded in the period that the change in these estimates is made. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for details concerning the changes in the estimate for incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses related to prior accident years.
The detailed reserve analyses that the Company’s internal and external actuaries complete use a variety of generally accepted actuarial methods and techniques to produce a number of estimates of ultimate loss. The Company determines its best estimate of ultimate loss by reviewing the various estimates provided by its actuaries and other relevant information. The reserve estimate is the difference between the estimated ultimate loss and the losses paid to date. The difference between the estimated ultimate loss and the case incurred loss (paid loss plus case reserve) is considered to be IBNR. IBNR calculated as such includes a provision for development on known cases (supplemental development) as well as a provision for claims that have occurred but have not yet been reported to the Company (pure IBNR).
In light of the many uncertainties associated with establishing the estimates and making the assumptions necessary to establish reserve levels, the Company reviews its reserve estimates on a regular basis and makes adjustments in the period that the need for such adjustments is determined.
The key assumptions fundamental to the reserving process are often different for various reserve categories and accident years. Some of these assumptions are explicit assumptions that are required of a particular method, but most of the assumptions are implicit and cannot be precisely quantified. An example of an explicit assumption is the pattern employed in the Paid Development method. However, the assumed pattern is itself based on several implicit assumptions such as the impact of inflation on medical costs and the rate at which claim professionals close claims. Loss frequency is a measure of the number of claims per unit of insured exposure, and loss severity is a measure of the average size of claims. Each reserve category has an implicit frequency and severity for each accident year as a result of the various assumptions made.
Previous reserve analyses have resulted in the Company’s identification of information and trends that have caused it to increase or decrease frequency and severity assumptions in prior periods and could lead to the identification of a need for additional material changes in losses and loss adjustment expense reserves, which could materially affect results of operations, equity, business and insurer financial strength and debt ratings. Factors affecting loss frequency include, among other things, the effectiveness of loss controls and safety programs and changes in economic activity or weather patterns. Factors affecting loss severity include, among other things, changes in policy limits and deductibles, rate of inflation and judicial interpretations. Another factor affecting estimates of loss frequency and severity is the loss reporting lag, which is the period of time between the occurrence of a loss and the date the loss is reported to the Company. The length of the loss reporting lag affects the Company’s ability to accurately predict loss frequency (loss frequencies are more predictable for short-tail lines) as well as the amount of reserves needed for IBNR.
If the actual levels of loss frequency and severity are higher or lower than expected, the ultimate losses will be different than management’s best estimate. For most of its reserve categories, the Company believes that frequency can be predicted with greater accuracy than severity. Therefore, the Company believes management’s best estimate is more likely influenced by changes in severity than frequency. The following table, which the Company believes reflects a reasonable range of variability around its best estimate based on historical loss experience and management’s judgment, reflects the impact of changes (which could be favorable or unfavorable) in frequency and severity on the Company’s current accident year net loss estimate of $367.7 million for claims occurring during the year ended December 31, 2020:
The Company’s net reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses of $580.7 million as of December 31, 2020 relate to multiple accident years. Therefore, the impact of changes in frequency and severity for more than one accident year could be higher or lower than the amounts reflected above.
Recoverability of Reinsurance Receivables
The Company regularly reviews the collectability of its reinsurance receivables, and includes adjustments resulting from this review in earnings in the period in which the adjustment arises. An allowance for uncollectible reinsurance receivables is recognized based upon the Company’s ongoing review of key aspects of amounts outstanding, including but not limited to, length of collection periods, disputes, applicable coverage defenses, insolvent reinsurers, financial strength of solvent reinsurers based on AM Best Ratings and other relevant factors. Changes in loss reserves can also affect the valuation of reinsurance receivables if the change is related to loss reserves that are ceded to reinsurers. Certain amounts may be uncollectible if the Company’s reinsurers dispute a loss or if the reinsurer is unable to pay. If its reinsurers do not pay, the Company remains legally obligated to pay the loss.
See Note 9 of the notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further information surrounding the Company’s reinsurance receivable balances and collectability as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. For a listing of the ten reinsurers for which the Company has the largest reinsurance asset amounts as of December 31, 2020, see “Reinsurance of Underwriting Risk” in Item 1 of Part I of this report.
Investments
The carrying amount of the Company’s investments approximates their fair value. The Company regularly performs various analytical valuation procedures with respect to investments, including reviewing each fixed maturity security in an unrealized loss position to determine whether the decline in fair value below amortized cost basis has resulted from a credit loss or other factors, such as changes in interest rates. In assessing whether a credit loss exists, the Company compares the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected from the security to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis of the security, a credit loss exists and an allowance for expected credit losses is recorded. Subsequent changes in the allowances are recorded in the period of change as either credit loss expense or reversal of credit loss expense. Any impairments related to factors other than credit losses or the intent to sell are recorded through other comprehensive income, net of taxes. During its review, the Company considers credit rating, market price, and issuer specific financial information, among other factors, to assess the likelihood of collection of all principal and interest as contractually due. See Note 4 of the notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for the specific methodologies and significant assumptions used by asset class as well as an analysis of the Company’s securities with gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company categorizes its invested assets and derivative instruments that are accounted for at fair value in the consolidated statements into a fair value hierarchy. The fair value hierarchy is directly related to the amount of subjectivity associated with the inputs utilized to determine the fair value of these assets. The reported value of financial instruments not carried at fair value, principally cash and cash equivalents and margin borrowing facility approximate fair value. See Note 6 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further information about the fair value hierarchy and the Company’s assets that are accounted for at fair value.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company tests for impairment of goodwill at least annually and more frequently as circumstances warrant in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. Accounting guidance allows for the testing of goodwill for impairment using both qualitative and quantitative factors. Impairment of goodwill is recognized only if the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit. The amount of the impairment loss would be equal to the excess carrying value of the goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill. Based on the qualitative assessment performed, there was no impairment of goodwill as of December 31, 2020.
Impairment of intangible assets with indefinite useful lives is tested at least annually and more frequently as circumstances warrant in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. Accounting guidance allows for the testing of intangible assets for impairment using both qualitative and quantitative factors. Impairment of indefinite lived intangible assets is recognized only if the carrying amount of the intangible assets exceeds the fair value of said assets. The amount of the impairment loss would be equal to the excess carrying value of the assets over the fair value of said assets. Based on the qualitative assessment performed, there were no impairments of indefinite lived intangible assets as of December 31, 2020.
Intangible assets that are not deemed to have an indefinite useful life are amortized over their estimated useful lives. The carrying amounts of definite lived intangible assets are regularly reviewed for indicators of impairment in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. Impairment is recognized only if the carrying amount of the intangible asset is in excess of its undiscounted projected cash flows. The impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying amount and the estimated fair value of the asset. As of December 31, 2020, there were no triggering events that occurred during the year that would result in an impairment of definite lived intangible assets.
See Note 7 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for more details concerning the Company’s goodwill and intangible assets.
Deferred Acquisition Costs
The costs of acquiring new and renewal insurance and reinsurance contracts include commissions, premium taxes and certain other costs that are directly related to the successful acquisition of new and renewal insurance and reinsurance contracts. The excess of the Company’s costs of acquiring new and renewal insurance and reinsurance contracts over the related ceding commissions earned from reinsurers is capitalized as deferred acquisition costs and amortized over the period in which the related premiums are earned.
In accordance with accounting guidance for insurance enterprises, the method followed in computing such amounts limits them to amounts recoverable from premium to be earned, related investment income, losses and loss adjustment expenses, and certain other costs expected to be incurred as the premium is earned. A premium deficiency is recognized if the sum of expected losses and loss adjustment expenses and unamortized acquisition costs exceeds related unearned premium. This evaluation is done at a distribution and product line level in Insurance Operations and at a treaty level in Reinsurance Operations. Any future expected loss on the related unearned premium is recorded first by impairing the unamortized acquisition costs on the related unearned premium followed by an increase to losses and loss adjustment expense reserves on additional expected loss in excess of unamortized acquisition costs. The Company calculates deferred acquisition costs for Insurance Operations separately by distribution lines and for its Reinsurance Operations separately for each treaty.
Taxation
The Company provides for income taxes in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. The Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities primarily result from temporary differences between the amounts recorded in the consolidated financial statements and the tax basis of the Company’s assets and liabilities.
At each balance sheet date, management assesses the need to establish a valuation allowance that reduces deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that all, or some portion, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. A valuation allowance would be based on all available information including the Company’s assessment of uncertain tax positions and projections of future taxable income from each tax-paying component in each jurisdiction, principally derived from business plans and available tax planning strategies. There are no valuation allowances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The deferred tax asset balance is analyzed regularly by management. This assessment requires significant judgment and considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of carryforward periods, and tax planning strategies and/or actions. Based on these analyses, the Company has determined that its deferred tax asset is recoverable. Projections of future taxable income incorporate several assumptions of future business and operations that are apt to differ from actual experience. If, in the future, the Company’s assumptions and estimates that resulted in the forecast of future taxable income for each tax-paying component prove to be incorrect, a valuation allowance may be required. This could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity.
The Company applies a more likely than not recognition threshold for all tax uncertainties, only allowing the recognition of those tax benefits that have a greater than 50% likelihood of being sustained upon examination by relevant taxing authorities. Please see Note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for a discussion of the Company’s tax uncertainties.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the consolidated balance sheets. Lease right-of-use assets (“ROU”) are included in other assets on the consolidated balance sheets and lease liabilities are included in other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
Lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at the commencement date. The Company’s leases do not provide an implicit rate; therefore, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate at the commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. The ROU asset is calculated using the initial lease liability amount, plus any lease payments made at or before the commencement date, minus any lease incentives received, plus any initial direct costs incurred. Lease expenses for minimum lease payments are recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
The Company’s lease agreements may contain both lease and non-lease components which are accounted separately. The Company elected the practical expedient on not separating lease components from non-lease components for its equipment leases.
Business Segments
The Company manages its business through four business segments: Commercial Specialty, Specialty Property, Farm, Ranch & Stable, and Reinsurance Operations. The Commercial Specialty, Specialty Property, and Farm, Ranch & Stable segments comprise the Company’s Insurance Operations, which currently includes the operations of United National Insurance Company, Diamond State Insurance Company, Penn-America Insurance Company, Penn-Star Insurance Company, Penn-Patriot Insurance Company, American Reliable Insurance Company, American Insurance Adjustment Agency, Inc., Collectibles Insurance Services, LLC, Global Indemnity Insurance Agency, LLC, and J.H. Ferguson & Associates, LLC. Prior to the redomestication, the Company’s Reinsurance Operations consisted solely of the operations of Global Indemnity Reinsurance. In connection with the redomestication, Global Indemnity Reinsurance merged into Penn-Patriot Insurance Company and all of its business was assumed by the Company’s existing insurance company subsidiaries.
The Company evaluates the performance of these four segments based on gross and net written premiums, revenues in the form of net earned premiums, and expenses in the form of (1) net losses and loss adjustment expenses, (2) acquisition costs, and (3) other underwriting expenses.
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company re-evaluated its Personal Lines segment and determined that Personal Lines should be bifurcated into two reportable segments: Specialty Property and Farm, Ranch & Stable. This is the result of changing how Specialty Property and Farm, Ranch & Stable are managed and reported. Specialty Property is managed out of the Company’s Scottsdale, Arizona office; whereas, Farm, Ranch & Stable is managed out of the Company’s Omaha, Nebraska office. In the past, Farm, Ranch & Stable reported to the Scottsdale, Arizona office and now it reports directly to the Company’s main headquarters in Bala Cynwyd, Pennsylvania. Results for Specialty Property and Farm, Ranch & Stable are separately measured, resources are separately allocated to each of these lines, and employees in each line are now being rewarded based on each line’s separate results. Accordingly, the Company now reports Specialty Property and Farm, Ranch & Stable as two separate reportable segments. In addition, the Company changed the name of its Commercial Lines segment to Commercial Specialty to better align with its key product offerings. The segment results for the years ended December 31, 2018 have been revised to reflect these changes.
See “Business Segments” in Item 1 of Part I of this report for a description of the Company’s segments.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the Company’s results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
NM - not meaningful
(1)
The loss ratio is a GAAP financial measure that is generally viewed in the insurance industry as an indicator of underwriting profitability and is calculated by dividing net losses and loss adjustment expenses by net earned premiums.
(2)
The expense ratio is a GAAP financial measure that is calculated by dividing the sum of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses by net earned premiums.
(3)
The combined ratio is a GAAP financial measure and is the sum of the Company’s loss and expense ratios.
Premiums
The following table summarizes the change in premium volume by business segment:
(1)
Gross written premiums represent the amount received or to be received for insurance policies written without reduction for reinsurance costs or other deductions.
(2)
Net written premiums equal gross written premiums less ceded premiums written.
(3)
Includes business written by American Reliable that is ceded to insurance companies owned by Assurant under a 100% quota share reinsurance agreement of less than $0.1 million, ($0.3) million, and ($2.1) million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
(4)
Includes business ceded to the Company’s Reinsurance Operations under a quota share agreement. This quota share agreement was cancelled effective January 1, 2018.
(5)
External business only, excluding business assumed from affiliates.
Gross written premiums decreased by 4.8% for year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. Gross written premiums include business written by American Reliable that is ceded to insurance entities owned by Assurant under a 100% quota share reinsurance agreement in the amount of less than $0.1 million and ($0.3) million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Excluding the business that is ceded 100% to insurance entities owned by Assurant, gross written premiums decreased by 4.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease is mainly due to the reduction of catastrophe exposed business within both Specialty Property and Farm, Ranch & Stable, reduction in business not providing an adequate return on capital within Specialty Property, and Reinsurance Operations’ non-renewal of its property catastrophe treaties. In addition, non-renewals of several small business classes was higher and new business growth slowed within Commercial Specialty which was likely the result of Covid-19. These reductions in premiums were partially offset by organic growth from existing agents, increased pricing, and several new programs within Commercial Specialty and growth of the new casualty treaty entered into by Reinsurance Operations in 2019.
Gross written premiums increased by 16.2% for year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2018. Gross written premiums include business written by American Reliable that is ceded to insurance entities owned by Assurant under a 100% quota share reinsurance agreement in the amount of ($0.3) million and ($2.1) million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Excluding the business that is ceded 100% to insurance entities owned by Assurant, gross written premiums increased by 15.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2018. The increase is mainly due to several new programs and increases in excess & surplus lines submissions within Commercial Specialty, rate increases within Specialty Property and Farm, Ranch & Stable, new agent appointments within Farm, Ranch & Stable, and growth in the Reinsurance Operation’s property catastrophe book primarily driven by rate increases as well as a new casualty treaty. This new casualty treaty contributed $26.9 million in gross written premiums during the year ended December 31, 2019. This growth in premiums was partially offset by a continued reduction of catastrophe exposed business within both Commercial Specialty and Specialty Property.
Net Retention
The ratio of net written premiums to gross written premiums is referred to as the Company’s net premium retention. The Company’s net premium retention is summarized by segments as follows:
(1)
Excludes business written by American Reliable that is ceded to insurance companies owned by Assurant under a 100% quota share reinsurance agreement of less than $0.1 million, ($0.3) million, and ($2.1) million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The net premium retention for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 2.2 points as compared to 2019. This increase in retention is driven by the restructuring of the Company’s catastrophe reinsurance treaties as well as a change in the mix of business.
The net premium retention for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by 2.3 points as compared to 2018. This increase in retention is primarily driven by growth of casualty premiums and reinsurance premiums. It is also being driven by the downsizing of catastrophe exposed business within Specialty Property.
Net Earned Premiums
Net earned premiums within the Commercial Specialty segment increased by 20.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in net earned premiums was primarily due to a growth in premiums written as a result of organic growth from existing agents, pricing increases, and several new programs. Property net earned premiums were $131.1 million and $110.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $154.6 million and $127.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net earned premiums within the Commercial Specialty segment increased by 8.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018. The increase in net earned premiums was primarily due to a growth in premiums written as a result of several new programs. Property net earned premiums were $110.7 million and $115.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $127.0 million and $103.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net earned premiums within the Specialty Property segment decreased by 6.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to a continued reduction of catastrophe exposed business and a reduction in business not providing an adequate return on capital. Property net earned premiums were $122.6 million and $129.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $8.6 million and $10.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net earned premiums within the Specialty Property segment increased by 8.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 primarily due to an increase in net written premiums. Property net earned premiums were $129.5 million and $117.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $10.8 million and $11.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net earned premiums within the Farm, Ranch & Stable segment increased by 6.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to a growth in premiums written in prior periods as a result of rate increases and new agent appointments. Property net earned premiums were $55.8 million and $50.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $20.4 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net earned premiums within the Farm, Ranch & Stable segment increased by 3.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 primarily due to a growth of the business as a result of adding new agents. Property net earned premiums were $50.9 million and $49.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $20.4 million and $19.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net earned premiums within the Reinsurance Operations segment decreased by 2.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 due to the non-renewal of its property catastrophe treaties partially offset by the new casualty treaty entered into during 2019. Property net earned premiums were $28.3 million and $56.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $46.1 million and $19.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net earned premiums within the Reinsurance Operations segment increased by 47.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the same period in 2018 primarily due to growth in gross written premiums within the property catastrophe line of business as well as the new casualty treaty entered into during 2019. Property net earned premiums were $56.8 million and $45.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Casualty net earned premiums were $19.2 million and $6.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Underwriting Results
Commercial Specialty
The components of income from the Company’s Commercial Specialty segment and corresponding underwriting ratios are as follows:
(1)
Includes excise tax related to cessions from the Company’s Commercial Specialty segment to its Reinsurance Operations of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, respectively. Due to the termination of the quota share agreement in 2018, there was no excise tax related to cessions from the Company’s Commercial Specialty segment to its Reinsurance Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(2)
Includes business ceded to the Company’s Reinsurance Operations under a quota share agreement. This quota share agreement was cancelled effective January 1, 2018.
Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures and ratios
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP measures or ratios, which excludes the impact of prior accident year adjustments, to its most directly comparable GAAP measure or ratio. The Company believes the non-GAAP measures or ratios are useful to investors when evaluating the Company's underwriting performance as trends in the Company's Commercial Specialty segment may be obscured by prior accident year adjustments. These non-GAAP measures or ratios should not be considered as a substitute for its most directly comparable GAAP measure or ratio and does not reflect the overall underwriting profitability of the Company.
(1)
Non-GAAP measure / ratio
(2)
Most directly comparable GAAP measure / ratio
Premiums
See “Result of Operations” above for a discussion on consolidated premiums.
Loss Ratio
The current accident year losses and loss ratio is summarized as follows:
The current accident year property non-catastrophe loss ratio for 2020 increased by 3.7 points compared to 2019. The increase in the loss ratio primarily reflects a higher claims severity as the claims incurred frequency was up slightly at twelve months of development from last year. The current accident year property non-catastrophe loss ratio for 2019 improved by 1.7 points compared to 2018. The loss ratio improvement reflects a lower claims severity compared to last year as each accident quarter except for the third accident quarter had a lower claims severity compared to the same accident quarters last year. The twelve-month claims incurred frequency was unchanged from last year.
The current accident year property catastrophe loss ratio for 2020 increased by 11.8 points compared to 2019 due to a higher claims frequency and severity. The current accident year property catastrophe loss ratio for 2019 improved by 1.6 points compared to 2018 reflecting a lower claims severity compared to last year. The twelve-month claims incurred frequency was equivalent to last year.
The current accident year casualty loss ratio for 2020 improved by 0.3 points compared to 2019 reflecting a lower claims frequency at twelve months of development. The current accident year casualty loss ratio for 2019 improved by 1.8 points compared to 2018 reflecting lower claims frequency compared to last year. The claims frequency was lower for each accident quarter compared to the same accident quarters last year.
The calendar year loss ratio for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 includes a decrease of $17.6 million, or 6.2% percentage points, a decrease of $18.4 million or 7.7% percentage points, and a decrease of $7.3 million or 3.3% percentage points, respectively, related to reserve development on prior accident years. Please see Note 11 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further discussion on prior accident year development.
Expense Ratios
The expense ratio improved 4.0 points from 40.6% for 2019 to 36.6% for 2020 primarily due to higher earned premiums.
The expense ratio increased 0.6 points from 40.0% for 2018 to 40.6% for 2019 primarily due to an increase in compensation cost related to good results for 2019.
COVID-19
COVID-19 could result in declines in business, non-payment of premiums, and increases in claims that could adversely affect Commercial Specialty’s business, financial condition, and results of operation.
There is risk that legislation could be passed or there could be a court ruling which would require the Company to cover business interruption claims regardless of terms, exclusions including the virus exclusions contained within the Company’s Commercial Specialty policies, or other conditions included in these policies that would otherwise preclude coverage.
Specialty Property
The components of income from the Company’s Specialty Property segment and corresponding underwriting ratios are as follows:
(1)
Includes business written by American Reliable that is ceded to insurance companies owned by Assurant under a 100% quota share reinsurance agreement of less than $0.1 million, ($0.3) million, and ($2.1) million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
(2)
Includes excise tax related to cessions from the Company’s Specialty Property segment to its Reinsurance Operations of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Due to the termination of the quota share agreement in 2018, there was no excise tax related to cessions from the Company’s Specialty Property segment to its Reinsurance Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(3)
Includes business ceded to the Company’s Reinsurance Operations under a quota share agreement. This quota share agreement was cancelled effective January 1, 2018.
Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures and ratios
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP measures or ratios, which excludes the impact of prior accident year adjustments, to its most directly comparable GAAP measure or ratio. The Company believes the non-GAAP measures or ratios are useful to investors when evaluating the Company's underwriting performance as trends in the Company's Specialty Property segment may be obscured by prior accident year adjustments. These non-GAAP measures or ratios should not be considered as a substitute for its most directly comparable GAAP measure or ratio and does not reflect the overall underwriting profitability of the Company.
(1)
Non-GAAP measure / ratio
(2)
Most directly comparable GAAP measure / ratio
Premiums
See “Result of Operations” above for a discussion on consolidated premiums for 2020.
Other Income
Other income was $1.7 million, $1.8 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Other income is primarily comprised of fee income.
Loss Ratio
The current accident year losses and loss ratio is summarized as follows:
NM - not meaningful
The current accident year property non-catastrophe loss ratio for 2020 improved by 10.1 points compared to 2019. The improvement in the loss ratio recognizes a lower claims frequency and severity compared to last year. The current accident year property non-catastrophe loss ratio for 2019 improved by 5.7 points compared to 2018. The decrease in the loss ratio reflects a lower claims frequency compared to last year.
The current accident year property catastrophe loss ratio for 2020 increased by 27.2 points compared to 2019 due to a higher claims frequency and severity at twelve months of development. The impact from Hurricanes Laura and Delta on the loss ratio was 18.8 points which were the two largest events impacting this segment. The current accident year property catastrophe loss ratio for 2019 improved by 37.1 points compared to 2018 reflecting a lower claims frequency and severity for each accident quarter.
The current accident year casualty loss ratio for 2020 improved by 10.5 points compared to 2019. The improvement reflects a lower claims frequency and severity compared to last year. The current accident year casualty loss ratio for 2019 improved by 9.5 points compared to 2018. The improvement reflects a lower claims frequency and severity compared to last year.
The calendar year loss ratio for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 includes a decrease of $6.6 million, or 5.0 percentage points, a decrease of $10.9 million, or 7.7 percentage points, and an decrease of $7.9 million, or 6.1 percentage points, respectively, related to reserve development on prior accident years. Please see Note 11 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further discussion on prior accident year development.
Expense Ratios
The expense ratio increased 0.3 points from 41.9% for 2019 to 42.2% for 2020 primarily due to a reduction in net earned premiums as discussed above.
The expense ratio improved 1.4 points from 43.3% for 2018 to 41.9% for 2019 primarily due to an increase in net earned premiums as discussed above partially offset by an increase in commission expense.
COVID-19
COVID-19 could result in declines in business and non-payment of premiums that could adversely affect Specialty Property’s business, financial condition, and results of operation.
Farm, Ranch & Stable
The components of income from the Company’s Farm, Ranch & Stable segment and corresponding underwriting ratios are as follows:
(1)
Includes excise tax related to cessions from the Company’s Farm, Ranch & Stable segment to its Reinsurance Operations of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Due to the termination of the quota share agreement in 2018, there was no excise tax related to cessions from the Company’s Farm, Ranch & Stable segment to its Reinsurance Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(2)
Includes business ceded to the Company’s Reinsurance Operations under a quota share agreement. This quota share agreement was cancelled effective January 1, 2018.
Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures and ratios
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP measures or ratios, which excludes the impact of prior accident year adjustments, to its most directly comparable GAAP measure or ratio. The Company believes the non-GAAP measures or ratios are useful to investors when evaluating the Company's underwriting performance as trends in the Company's Farm, Ranch & Stable segment may be obscured by prior accident year adjustments. These non-GAAP measures or ratios should not be considered as a substitute for its most directly comparable GAAP measure or ratio and does not reflect the overall underwriting profitability of the Company.
(1)
Non-GAAP measure / ratio
(2)
Most directly comparable GAAP measure / ratio
Premiums
See “Result of Operations” above for a discussion on consolidated premiums for 2020.
Other Income
Other income was $0.1 million, $0.1 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Other income is primarily comprised of fee income.
Loss Ratio
The current accident year losses and loss ratio is summarized as follows:
The current accident year property non-catastrophe loss ratio for 2020 improved by 17.7 points compared to 2019 reflecting a lower claims frequency and severity. The current accident year property non-catastrophe loss ratio for 2019 increased by 14.4 points compared to 2018 reflecting a higher claims frequency and severity compared to last year.
The current accident year property catastrophe loss ratio for 2020 increased by 13.0 points compared to 2019 reflecting a reflecting a higher claims frequency and severity at twelve months of development. The impact from the Midwest derecho on the loss ratio was 7.3 points which was the largest event impacting this segment. The current accident year property catastrophe loss ratio for 2019 improved by 11.3 points compared to 2018 reflecting a lower claims frequency and severity compared to last year.
The current accident year casualty loss ratio for 2020 increased by 1.0 point compared to 2019. The increase in the loss ratio reflects a higher claims severity compared to last year. The current accident year casualty loss ratio for 2019 improved by 2.8 points compared to 2018. The decrease in the loss ratio reflects a lower claims severity compared to last year
The calendar year loss ratio for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 includes a decrease of $2.3 million, or 3.0 percentage points, a decrease of $5.5 million, or 7.8 percentage points, and an decrease of $4.7 million, or 6.9 percentage points, respectively, related to reserve development on prior accident years. Please see Note 11 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further discussion on prior accident year development.
Expense Ratios
The expense ratio improved 2.3 points from 41.4% for 2019 to 39.1% for 2020 primarily due to higher earned premiums.
The expense ratio improved 1.6 points from 43.0% for 2018 to 41.4% for 2019 primarily due to an increase in net earned premiums as discussed above as well as a decrease in commission expense.
COVID-19
There is risk that legislation could be passed or there could be a court ruling which would require the Company to cover business interruption claims regardless of terms, exclusions including the virus exclusions contained within the Company’s Farm, Ranch & Stable policies, or other conditions included in these policies that would otherwise preclude coverage.
COVID-19 could result in declines in business, non-payment of premiums, and increases in claims that could adversely affect Farm, Ranch & Stable’s business, financial condition, and results of operation.
Reinsurance Operations
The components of income from the Company’s Reinsurance Operations segment and corresponding underwriting ratios are as follows:
(1)
External business only, excluding business assumed from affiliates
(2)
Non-GAAP ratio
(3)
Most directly comparable GAAP ratio
Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial ratios
The table above includes a reconciliation of the current accident year loss ratio, which is a non-GAAP ratio, to its calendar year loss ratio, which is its most directly comparable GAAP ratio. The Company believes this non-GAAP ratio is useful to investors when evaluating the Company's underwriting performance as trends in the Company's Reinsurance Operations may be obscured by prior accident year adjustments. This non-GAAP ratio should not be considered as a substitute for its most directly comparable GAAP ratio and does not reflect the overall underwriting profitability of the Company.
Premiums
See “Result of Operations” above for a discussion on consolidated premiums.
Other Income (Loss)
Reinsurance Operations recognized other income of $0.2 million in 2020, other loss of $0.1 million in 2019, and other loss of $0.2 million in 2018. Other income (loss) is comprised of foreign exchange gains and losses.
Loss Ratio
The current accident year loss ratio for 2020 improved by 1.6 points compared to 2019. The property and casualty treaties both performed better than 2019. The current accident year loss ratio for 2019 improved by 65.7 points compared to 2018 primarily due to less catastrophes.
The calendar year loss ratio for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 includes a decrease of $5.0 million, or 6.8 percentage points, an increase of $1.9 million or 2.6 percentage points, and a decrease of $8.9 million or 17.3 percentage points, respectively, related to reserve development on prior accident years. Please see Note 11 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further discussion on prior accident year development.
Expense Ratio
The expense ratio increased 3.4 points from 31.1% for 2019 to 34.5% for 2020. The increase in the expense ratio is primarily due to an increase in commission expense resulting from a change in business mix.
The expense ratio improved 3.6 points from 34.7% for 2018 to 31.1% for 2019. The improvement in the expense ratio is primarily due to an increase in the net earned premiums as discussed above as well as a reduction in contingent commissions due to prior accident year development.
COVID-19
COVID-19 could result in declines in business, non-payment of premiums, and increases in claims that could adversely affect the Reinsurance Operations’ business, financial condition, and results of operation.
Unallocated Corporate Items
The Company’s fixed income portfolio, excluding cash, continues to maintain high quality with an AA- average rating and a duration of 4.2 years.
Net Investment Income
(1)
Excludes realized gains and losses
Gross investment income for 2020 decreased by 30.4% and net investment income for 2020 decreased by 32.5% compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreased returns from alternative investments, a decrease in yield within the fixed maturities portfolio, and a decrease in dividend income related to equity securities. Gross investment income for 2019 decreased by 8.0% and net investment income for 2019 decreased by 9.3% compared to 2018. The decrease was primarily due to decreased returns from alternative investments offset by an increase in dividend income related to equity securities.
At December 31, 2020, the Company held agency mortgage-backed securities with a market value of $250.6 million. Excluding the agency mortgage-backed securities, the average duration of the Company’s fixed maturities portfolio was 4.8 years as of December 31, 2020, compared with 4.4 years as of December 31, 2019. Including cash and short-term investments, the average duration of the Company’s fixed maturities portfolio, excluding agency mortgage-backed securities, was 4.4 years as of December 31, 2020, compared to 4.2 years as of December 31, 2019. Changes in interest rates can cause principal payments on certain investments to extend or shorten which can impact duration. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s embedded book yield on its fixed maturities, not including cash, was 2.3% compared with 3.0% at December 31, 2019. The embedded book yield on the $61.2 million of taxable municipal bonds in the Company’s portfolio was 3.0% at December 31, 2020, compared to an embedded book yield of 3.1% on the Company’s taxable municipal bonds of $63.4 million at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2019, the Company held agency mortgage-backed securities with a market value of $181.5 million. Excluding the agency mortgage-backed securities, the average duration of the Company’s fixed maturities portfolio was 4.4 years as of December 31, 2019, compared with 3.1 years as of December 31, 2018. Including cash and short-term investments, the average duration of the Company’s fixed maturities portfolio, excluding agency mortgage-backed securities, was 4.2 years as of December 31, 2019 compared with 2.9 years as of December 31, 2018. Changes in interest rates can cause principal payments on certain investments to extend or shorten which can impact duration. At December 31, 2019, the Company’s embedded book yield on its fixed maturities, not including cash, was 3.0% compared with 3.1% at December 31, 2018. The embedded book yield on the $63.8 million of municipal bonds in the Company’s portfolio, which includes $63.4 million of taxable municipal bonds, was 3.2% at December 31, 2019, compared to an embedded book yield of 3.2% on the Company’s municipal bond portfolio of $95.6 million at December 31, 2018.
Net Realized Investment Gains (Losses)
The components of net realized investment gains (losses) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 were as follows:
See Note 4 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for an analysis of total investment return on a pre-tax basis for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Corporate and Other Operating Expenses
Corporate and other operating expenses consist of outside legal fees, other professional fees, directors’ fees, management fees & advisory fees, salaries and benefits for holding company personnel, development costs for new products, and taxes incurred which are not directly related to operations. Corporate and other operating expenses were $42.0 million, $18.9 million, and $29.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The increase in 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to incurring $10.0 million in advisory fees related to the redomestication as well as an increase in legal and professional fees due to the redomestication. See Note 15 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information on the redomestication fee. The reduction in 2019 as compared to 2018 is primarily due to incurring an advisory fee related to the Reorganization transaction of $12.5 million during 2018.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $15.8 million, $20.0 million, and $19.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The reduction in 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to a reduction in the Fed Funds effective interest rate in March, 2020 as well as the redemption of the 2045 Notes and repayment of the margin borrowing facility in August, 2020. The increase in 2019 as compared to 2018 is primarily due to increased borrowings on the Margin Borrowing Facility.
See Note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for details on the Company’s debt.
Income Tax Benefit/ Expense
The income tax benefit was $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with income tax expense of $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in income tax benefit was primarily due to higher pre-tax loss for the Company’s U.S. subsidiaries for 2020 as compared to 2019 and the change in tax status which is the income tax benefit recognized on net insurance liabilities that were redomiciled from Bermuda at 0% tax rate to the United States at a 21% tax rate. The income tax expense was $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with income tax benefit of $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in the income tax expense is primarily due to an increase in pretax income in the U.S.
See Note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for a comparison of income tax between periods.
Net Income (Loss)
The factors described above resulted in a net loss of $21.0 million, net income of $70.0 million, and a net loss of $56.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Funds
Global Indemnity Group, LLC is a holding company. Its principal asset is its ownership of the shares of its direct and indirect subsidiaries, including those of its insurance companies: United National Insurance Company, Diamond State Insurance Company, Penn-America Insurance Company, Penn-Star Insurance Company, Penn-Patriot Insurance Company, and American Reliable Insurance Company.
Global Indemnity Group, LLC’s short term and long term liquidity needs include but are not limited to the payment of corporate expenses, debt service payments, dividend payments to shareholders, and share repurchases. In order to meet their short term and long term needs, Global Indemnity Group, LLC’s principal sources of cash includes dividends from subsidiaries, other permitted disbursements from its direct and indirect subsidiaries, reimbursement for equity awards granted to employees and intercompany borrowings. The principal sources of funds at these direct and indirect subsidiaries include underwriting operations, investment income, proceeds from sales and redemptions of investments, capital contributions, intercompany borrowings, and dividends from subsidiaries. Funds are used principally by these operating subsidiaries to pay claims and operating expenses, to make debt payments, fund margin requirements on interest rate swap agreements, to purchase investments, and to make dividend / distribution payments. In addition, the Company periodically reviews opportunities related to business acquisitions and as a result, liquidity may be needed in the future.
GBLI Holdings, LLC is a holding company which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Penn-Patriot Insurance Company. GBLI Holdings, LLC’s principal asset is its ownership of the shares of its direct and indirect subsidiaries which include United National Insurance Company, Diamond State Insurance Company, Penn-America Insurance Company, Penn-Star Insurance Company, and American Reliable Insurance Company. GBLI Holdings, LLC is dependent on dividends from its subsidiaries to meet its debt obligations as well as corporate expense obligations.
The future liquidity of both Global Indemnity and GBLI Holdings, LLC is dependent on the ability of its subsidiaries to pay dividends. Global Indemnity and GBLI Holdings, LLC’s insurance companies are restricted by statute as to the amount of dividends that they may pay without the prior approval of regulatory authorities. The dividend limitations imposed by state laws are based on the statutory financial results of each insurance company within the Insurance Operations that are determined by using statutory accounting practices that differ in various respects from accounting principles used in financial statements prepared in conformity with GAAP. See “Regulation-Statutory Accounting Principles.” Key differences relate to, among other items, deferred acquisition costs, limitations on deferred income taxes, reserve calculation assumptions and surplus notes.
Under Virginia law, Penn-Patriot Insurance Company may not pay any dividend or make any distribution of cash or other property, the fair market value of which, together with that of any other dividends or distributions made within the preceding 12 consecutive months exceeds the lesser of either (1) 10% of its surplus as of the 31st day of December of the last preceding year, or (2) its net income, not including net realized capital gains, for the 12 month period ending on the 31st day of December of the last preceding year, not including pro rata distributions of any class of its securities, unless the commissioner approves the proposed payment or fails to disapprove such payment within 30 days after receiving notice of such payment. In determining whether the dividend must be approved, undistributed net income from the second and third preceding years, not including net realized capital gains, may be carried forward.
Under Pennsylvania law, United National Insurance Company, Penn-America Insurance Company, and Penn-Star Insurance Company may not pay any dividend or make any distribution that, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding 12 consecutive months, exceeds the greater of (1) 10% of its surplus as shown on its last annual statement on file with the commissioner or (2) its net income for the period covered by such statement, not including pro rata distributions of any class of its own securities, unless the commissioner has received notice from the insurer of the declaration of the dividend and the commissioner approves the proposed payment or fails to disapprove such payment within 30 days after receiving notice of such payment. An additional limitation is that Pennsylvania does not permit a domestic insurer to declare or pay a dividend except out of unassigned funds (surplus) unless otherwise approved by the commissioner before the dividend is paid. Furthermore, no dividend or other distribution may be declared or paid by a Pennsylvania insurance company that would reduce its total capital and surplus to an amount that is less than the amount required by the Insurance Department for the kind or kinds of business that it is authorized to transact. Pennsylvania law allows loans to affiliates up to 10% of statutory surplus without prior regulatory approval.
Under Indiana law, Diamond State Insurance Company may not pay any dividend or make any distribution of cash or other property, the fair market value of which, together with that of any other dividends or distributions made within the 12 consecutive months ending on the date on which the proposed dividend or distribution is scheduled to be made, exceeds the greater of (1) 10% of its surplus as of the 31st day of December of the last preceding year, or (2) its net income for the 12 month period ending on the 31st day of December of the last preceding year, unless the commissioner approves the proposed payment or fails to disapprove such payment within 30 days after receiving notice of such payment. An additional limitation is that Indiana does not permit a domestic insurer to declare or pay a dividend except out of unassigned surplus unless otherwise approved by the commissioner before the dividend is paid.
Under Arizona law, American Reliable Insurance Company may not pay any dividend or make any distribution of cash or other property, the fair market value of which, together with that of any other dividends or distributions made within the preceding 12 months exceeds the lesser of either (1) 10% of its surplus as of the 31st day of December of the last preceding year, or (2) its net income for the 12 month period ending on the 31st day of December of the last preceding year, not including pro rata distributions of any class of its securities, unless the commissioner approves the proposed payment or fails to disapprove such payment within 30 days after receiving notice of such payment.
In 2020, the U.S. insurance companies did not declare or pay a dividend. See Note 20 of the notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for the maximum amount of distributions that U.S. insurance companies could pay as dividends in 2021.
Global Indemnity Reinsurance was prohibited, without the approval of the Bermuda Monetary Authority (“BMA”), from reducing by 15% or more its total statutory capital or 25% or more of its total statutory capital and surplus as set out in its previous year’s statutory financial statements, and any application for such approval must include such information as the BMA may require. In June, 2020, the Board of Directors of Global Indemnity Reinsurance declared and paid a dividend of $226 million to its parent company, Global Indemnity Limited. On August 26, 2020, Global Indemnity Reinsurance merged into Penn-Patriot Insurance Company.
Surplus Levels
Global Indemnity’s insurance companies are required by law to maintain a certain minimum level of policyholders' surplus on a statutory basis. Policyholders' surplus is calculated by subtracting total liabilities from total assets. The NAIC has risk-based capital standards that are designed to identify property and casualty insurers that may be inadequately capitalized based on the inherent risks of each insurer's assets and liabilities and mix of net written premiums. Insurers falling below a calculated threshold may be subject to varying degrees of regulatory action. Based on the standards currently adopted, the policyholders’ surplus of each of the insurance companies is in excess of the prescribed minimum company action level risk-based capital requirements.
Sources of operating funds consist primarily of net written premiums and investment income. Funds are used primarily to pay claims and operating expenses and to purchase investments. As a result of the dividend / distribution policy, funds may also be used in the future to pay distributions to shareholders of the Company.
The Company’s reconciliation of net income (loss) to net cash provided by (used for) operations is generally influenced by the following:
•
the fact that the Company collect premiums, net of commission, in advance of losses paid;
•
the timing of the Company’s settlements with its reinsurers; and
•
the timing of the Company’s loss payments.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $32.7 million, $32.4 million and $42.1 million, respectively.
In 2020, the increase in operating cash flows of approximately $0.3 million from the prior year was primarily a net result of the following items:
In 2019, the decrease in operating cash flows of approximately $9.7 million from the prior year was primarily a net result of the following items:
(1)
Excludes a $3.5 million payment related to a purchase price adjustment for American Reliable in 2018. This payment is included in the net cash used in investing activities on the Company’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows in 2018. The recovery on loss indemnification, net of the purchase price adjustment, is $41.5 million in 2018. For additional information on the loss indemnification, please see Note 11 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report.
See the consolidated statements of cash flows in the financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for details concerning the Company’s investing and financing activities.
Liquidity
Currently, the Company believes each company in its Insurance Operations and Reinsurance Operations maintains sufficient liquidity to pay claims through cash generated by operations and liquid investments. The holding companies also maintain sufficient liquidity to meet their obligations. The Company monitors its investment portfolios to assure liability and investment durations are closely matched.
Prospectively, as fixed income investments mature and new cash is obtained, the cash available to invest will be invested in accordance with the Company’s investment policy. The Company’s investment policy allows the Company to invest in taxable and tax-exempt fixed income investments as well as publicly traded and private equity investments. With respect to bonds, the Company’s credit exposure limit for each issuer varies with the issuer’s credit quality. The allocation between taxable and tax-exempt bonds is determined based on market conditions and tax considerations. The fixed income portfolio currently has a duration of 4.2 years.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company also had future funding commitments of $31.2 million related to investments. The timing of commitments related to investments is uncertain.
The Company has access to various capital sources including dividends from insurance subsidiaries, invested assets in its non-U.S. subsidiaries, and access to the debt and equity capital markets. The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity to meet its capital needs. See Note 20 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for a discussion of the Company’s dividend capacity. However, the Company’s future capital requirements depend on many factors, including the amount of premium it writes, the amount of loss reserves by lines of business, and catastrophe exposure. To the extent that the Company needs to raise additional funds, any equity or debt financing for this purpose, if available at all, may be on terms that are not favorable to the Company. If the Company cannot obtain adequate capital, its business, results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
COVID-19
The Company’s liquidity could be negatively impacted by the cancellation, delays, or non-payment of premiums related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. There is risk that legislation could be passed or there could be a court ruling which would require the Company to cover business interruption claims regardless of terms, exclusions including the virus exclusions contained within the Company’s Commercial Specialty and Farm, Ranch & Stable policies, or other conditions included in policies that would otherwise preclude coverage which would negatively impact liquidity. In addition, the liquidity of the Company’s investment portfolio could be negatively impacted by disruption experienced in global financial markets. Management is taking actions it considers prudent to minimize the impact on the Company’s liquidity. However, given the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the duration, magnitude and geographic reach of COVID-19, the Company is regularly evaluating the impact of COVID-19 on its liquidity.
Dividends / Distributions
Global Indemnity has adopted a dividend / distribution program. Although subject to the absolute discretion of the Board of Directors and factors, conditions, and prospects as such may exist from time to time when the Board of Directors considers the advisability of declaring a quarterly distribution, Global Indemnity Group, LLC currently anticipates a distribution rate of $0.25 per share per quarter ($1.00 per share per year). As of December 31, 2020, there are currently 14,397,088 shares issued and outstanding.
During 2020, the Board of Directors approved a dividend payment of $0.25 per common share to all shareholders of record on the close of business on March 24, 2020 and June 23, 2020 and approved a distribution payment of $0.25 per common share to all shareholders of record on the close of business on September 25, 2020 and December 24, 2020. Dividends / distributions paid were $14.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, distributions of $0.1 million were paid to Global Indemnity Group, LLC’s preferred shareholders during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During 2019, the Board of Directors approved a dividend payment of $0.25 per common share to all shareholders of record on the close of business on March 22, 2019, June 21, 2019, September 26, 2019, and December 24, 2019. Dividends paid were $14.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Redemption of Debt
In August 2020, GBLI Holdings and Global Indemnity Limited redeemed the entire outstanding $100 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.75% Subordinated Notes due 2045.
Repayment of Margin Borrowing Facility
The Company repaid all of the outstanding debt on the margin borrowing facility in August, 2020.
Quota Share Arrangements and Intercompany Pooling Arrangement
For 2017, the Company’s U.S. insurance companies participated in quota share reinsurance agreements with Global Indemnity Reinsurance whereby 40% of the net retained business of the U.S. insurance companies was ceded to Global Indemnity Reinsurance. These agreements exclude named storms. As a result of the enactment of the TCJA, effective January 1, 2018, premiums being ceded under the quota share arrangement could potentially be subject to a 10% BEAT tax. As a result, Global Indemnity Reinsurance and the Company’s U.S. insurance companies terminated the quota share arrangement effective January 1, 2018.
Global Indemnity Reinsurance is an unauthorized reinsurer. As a result, any losses and unearned premiums that were ceded to Global Indemnity Reinsurance by the U.S. insurance companies prior to the termination of the quota share arrangement must be collateralized. To satisfy this requirement, Global Indemnity Reinsurance has set up custodial trust accounts on behalf of the U.S. insurance companies. These custodial trust accounts were terminated in 2020 due to the 2018 termination of the quota share arrangement.
Global Indemnity Reinsurance also has established trust accounts to collateralize exposure it has to certain third party ceding companies. As a result of the redomestication, Penn-Patriot Insurance Company now holds these trust accounts. The Company invests the funds in securities that have durations that closely match the expected duration of the liabilities assumed. The Company believes that Penn-Patriot Insurance Company will have sufficient liquidity to pay claims prospectively.
Global Indemnity’s U.S. insurance companies participate in an intercompany pooling arrangement whereby premiums, losses, and expenses are shared pro rata amongst the U.S. insurance companies.
Capital Resources
In connection with the Company’s redomestication to the United States, actions were taken to simplify the Company’s organizational structure. Various intercompany capital contributions and distributions took place between many of the Company’s subsidiaries. Several of the Company’s subsidiaries merged into new or existing companies. This included, but was not limited to, the merger of Global Indemnity Reinsurance into Penn-Patriot Insurance Company (“Penn-Patriot”) with Penn-Patriot surviving as well as the amalgamation of Global Indemnity Limited with a newly formed company, New Cayco. The surviving company, New Cayco, then merged into Global Indemnity Group, LLC, a newly formed parent company, with Global Indemnity Group, LLC surviving as the ultimate parent company of the Global Indemnity group of companies. In addition, $541.4 million of intercompany debt between Global Indemnity Limited and Global Indemnity Reinsurance was cancelled. Through a series of transactions, the Company also settled $402.3 million of notes between Global Indemnity Holdings (U.K.) Limited and Global Indemnity Financial (U.K.) Limited in 2020. The cancellation and settlement of these debt arrangements had no impact to the consolidated results of the Company.
Intercompany Loan
On June 16, 2020, GBLI Holdings, LLC entered into a loan agreement with Global Indemnity Reinsurance. Under the terms of the loan agreement, GBLI Holdings, LLC agreed to lend $40.0 million to Global Indemnity Reinsurance by transferring cash and / or securities to Global Indemnity Reinsurance. This loan bore interest at a rate of 0.18% and was due on June 16, 2023. This loan was fully repaid at December 31, 2020.
On August 28, 2020, Global Indemnity Investments, Inc. entered into a promissory note with Global Indemnity Group, LLC for the principal amount of $11.3 million. This note was issued in conjunction with Global Indemnity Investment Inc.’s purchase of limited liability partnership interests from Global Indemnity Group, LLC. The note bears interest at a rate of 1.47% and is due on August 28, 2030. The outstanding balance on the note was $11.3 million at December 31, 2020.
Intercompany Dividends
In June, 2020, Global Indemnity Reinsurance declared and paid a dividend of $226.0 million to its parent, Global Indemnity Limited.
All of the intercompany transactions discussed above eliminate in consolidation and have no impact on the consolidating financial statements.
Margin Borrowing Facility
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had available a margin borrowing facility. The Company did not have any amounts outstanding on the margin borrowing facility as of December 31, 2020. The amount outstanding on the Company’s margin borrowing facility was $73.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The borrowing rate for this facility was tied to the Fed Funds Effective rate and was approximately 0.8% and 1.9% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This facility is due on demand. The borrowings are subject to maintenance margin, which is a minimum account balance that must be maintained. A decline in market conditions could require an additional deposit of collateral. The Company did not have any securities that were deposited as collateral at December 31, 2020. Approximately $88.2 million in securities were deposited as collateral to support borrowings as of December 31, 2019. The amount borrowed against the margin account may fluctuate as routine investment transactions, such as dividends received, investment income received, maturities and pay-downs, impact cash balances. The margin facility contains customary events of default, including, without limitation, insolvency, failure to make required payments, failure to comply with any representations or warranties, failure to adequately assure future performance, and failure of a guarantor to perform under its guarantee. The amount outstanding on the Company’s margin borrowing facility was $73.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
Derivative Instruments
The Company entered into derivative instruments related to interest rate swaps. Due to fluctuations in interest rates, the Company paid $20.5 million and $7.7 million in connection with these derivative instruments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Co-obligor Financial Information
The Company is providing the following information in compliance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X, “Financial Disclosures about Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities” with respect to the Company’s 7.875% Subordinated Notes due in 2047 (“2047 Notes”). See Note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information on the 2047 Notes, the supplemental indenture whereby Global Indemnity Group, LLC assumes the obligation under the 2047 Notes, and the co-obligor transaction whereby GBLI Holdings, LLC becomes a co-obligor on the 2047 Notes.
The following tables present summarized financial information for Global Indemnity Group, LLC (Parent co-obligor) and GBLI Holdings, LLC (Subsidiary co-obligor) on a combined basis after transactions and balances within the combined entities have been eliminated.
Parent and Subsidiary Co-obligors
The following table presents the summarized balance sheet information as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the summarized statement of operations information for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has commitments in the form of operating leases, commitments to fund limited liability investments, subordinated notes, and unpaid losses and loss expense obligations. As of December 31, 2020, contractual obligations related to Global Indemnity’s commitments, including any principal and interest payments, were as follows:
(1)
The Company leases office space and equipment as part of its normal operations. The amounts shown above represent future commitments under such operating leases.
(2)
Represents future funding commitment of the Company’s participation in three separate limited partnership investments. See Note 16 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information on these commitments.
(3)
Represents the Subordinated Notes due in 2047 in the aggregate principal amount of $130.0 million through an underwritten public offering. The notes bear interest at an annual rate equal to 7.875% payable quarterly. See Note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this report for additional information on the 2047 Subordinated Notes.
(4)
These amounts represent the gross future amounts needed to pay losses and related loss adjustment expenses and do not reflect amounts that are expected to be recovered from the Company’s reinsurers. See discussion in “Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses” for more details.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
Property and casualty insurance premiums are established before the Company knows the amount of losses and loss adjustment expenses or the extent to which inflation may affect such amounts. The Company attempts to anticipate the potential impact of inflation in establishing its reserves.
Future increases in inflation could result in future increases in interest rates, which in turn are likely to result in a decline in the market value of the investment portfolio and resulting in unrealized losses and reductions in shareholders' equity.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Some of the statements under “Business,” “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and elsewhere in this report may include forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Security Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, that reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward-looking statements are statements that are not historical facts. These statements can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as "believe," "expect," "may," "will," "should," "project," "plan," "seek," "intend," or "anticipate" or the negative thereof or comparable terminology, and include discussions of strategy, financial projections and estimates and their underlying assumptions, statements regarding plans, objectives, expectations or consequences of identified transactions or natural disasters, and statements about the future performance, operations, products and services of the companies.
The Company’s business and operations are and will be subject to a variety of risks, uncertainties and other factors. Consequently, actual results and experience may materially differ from those contained in any forward-looking statements. See “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this report for risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and experience to differ from those projected.
The forward-looking statements contained in this report are primarily based on the Company’s current expectations and projections about future events and trends that it believes may affect the Company’s business, financial condition, results of operations, prospects, business strategy and financial needs. The outcome of the events described in these forward-looking statements is subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors described in the section captioned “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. These risks are not exhaustive. Other sections of this report include additional factors that could adversely impact the Company’s business and financial performance. Moreover, the Company operates in a very competitive environment. New risks and uncertainties emerge from time to time and it is not possible for the Company to predict all risks and uncertainties that could have an impact on the forward-looking statements contained in this report. The Company cannot provide assurance that the results, events and circumstances reflected in the forward-looking statements will be achieved or occur, and actual results, events or circumstances could differ materially from those described in the forward-looking statements.
In addition, statements that “the Company believes” and similar statements reflect the Company’s beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based upon information available to the Company as of the date of this report, and while the Company believes such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and these statements should not be read to indicate that the Company have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely upon these statements.
This report and the documents that are referenced in this report and have filed as exhibits to this report should be read with the understanding that actual future results, levels of activity, performance and achievements may be materially different from what the Company expects. The Company qualifies all of its forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
The Company’s forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report or as of the date they were made. The Company undertake no obligation to publicly update or review any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise.