ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
This discussion and analysis reflects our financial statements and other relevant statistical data, and is intended to enhance your understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. The information in this section has been derived from the audited and unaudited financial statements, which appear beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Generations Bancorp is the successor to Seneca-Cayuga Bancorp as the holding company for Generations Bank. Like Seneca-Cayuga Bancorp, Generations Bancorp conducts its operations primarily through Generations Bank and Generations Commercial Bank.
Our results of operations depend primarily on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities. Our results of operations also are affected by our provisions for loan losses, noninterest income and noninterest expense. Noninterest income currently consists primarily of banking fees and service charges, insurance commissions, investment services commissions, unrealized gains on equity securities and gains on sales of available-for-sale securities and income from bank owned life insurance. Noninterest expense currently consists primarily of expenses related to compensation and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, service charges data processing, franchise taxes, federal deposit insurance premiums and other operating expenses.
Our results of operations also may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies and actions of regulatory authorities.
Business Strategy
Our current business strategy is to operate as a well-capitalized and profitable community bank dedicated to serving the needs of our consumer and business customers, and offering personalized and efficient customer service. Our goals are to increase interest income through loan portfolio growth, including expected material growth in our purchases of automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans, as well as increased originations and purchases of one-to four-family residential real estate loans, decrease interest expense by increasing core deposits, and achieve economies of scale through managed balance sheet growth. Highlights of our current business strategy include:
● Increasing our purchases and originations of automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans. In recent years we have increased our emphasis on the purchase and origination of automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans. At December 31, 2020, these loans totaled $80.4 million, or 29.2% of our total loan portfolio. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we purchased $42.2 million and $22.5 million of automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans. We intend to continue purchasing and originating these types of loans.
Automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home lending can increase loan yields with shorter repricing terms than one- to four-family residential real estate loans. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average rate on our automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans was 6.78%.
We believe that we have the experience and policies and procedures in place to increase loan purchases without undue risk. We began purchasing manufactured home loans in 2006. In part based on this experience, in 2016 we began purchasing automobile loans from one vendor and began purchasing automobile and recreational vehicle loans from a second vendor in February 2020. Additionally, we began purchasing manufactured home loans from a second vendor in 2019. To date, our credit experience on these loans has been satisfactory. See “Business of Generations Bank - Lending Activities - Manufactured Home Lending and “- Automobile Lending” and “- Other Consumer Lending.”
● Continuing to emphasize one- to four-family residential real estate lending. We will continue to focus on originating one- to four-family residential real estate loans for retention in our portfolio. At December 31, 2020, $127.4 million, or 46.1%, of our total loans consisted of one- to four-family residential real estate loans. We recently contracted with a third party to assist with
one- to four-family residential real estate loan generation, and expect to increase our purchases of one- to four-family residential real estate loans.
● Increasing our “core” deposit base. We seek to increase our core deposit base, particularly checking accounts. Core deposits include all deposit account types except certificates of deposit. Core deposits are our least costly source of funds, which improves our interest rate spread, and represent our best opportunity to develop customer relationships that enable us to cross-sell our full complement of products and services. Core deposits also contribute non-interest income from account-related fees and services and are generally less sensitive to withdrawal when interest rates fluctuate. We have continued our marketing efforts for checking accounts through digital, print and outdoor advertising channels. Core deposits at December 31, 2020 increased $50.3 million, or 28.6%, from December 31, 2019 as customers have increased their balances in these accounts, we believe, due to the economic uncertainty caused by the Covid-19 pandemic. In recent years, we have significantly expanded and improved the products and services we offer our retail and business deposit customers who maintain core deposit accounts and have improved our infrastructure for electronic banking services, including online banking, mobile banking, bill pay, and e-statements. The deposit infrastructure we have established can accommodate significant increases in retail and business deposit accounts without additional capital expenditure. Primarily for municipal deposits we have accepted in Generations Commercial Bank, we participate in reciprocal deposit services for our customers through the Certificate Deposit Account Registry Service (CDARS) and Insured Cash Sweep networks, which are currently considered by the bank regulators, to be brokered deposits, as a source of funds, in accordance with our asset/liability policies and funding strategies.
● Implementing a managed growth strategy without undue risk. We intend to pursue a growth strategy for the foreseeable future, with the goal of improving the profitability of our business through increased net interest income and retail deposit growth. Subject to market conditions, we intend to grow our one- to four-family residential fixed-rate, automobile, recreational and manufactured home loan portfolios. To a lesser extent we intend to grow our commercial real estate and multifamily home loan portfolios.
● Remaining a community-oriented institution and relying on high quality service to maintain and build a loyal local customer base. We were established in 1870 and have been operating continuously since that time in the northern Finger Lakes region of New York State which is located in the central to northwestern portion of New York State. Through the goodwill we have developed over years of providing timely, efficient banking services, we believe that we have been able to attract a solid base of local retail customers on which we hope to continue to build our banking business.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of income and expenses. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions that we use are based on historical experience and various other factors and are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, resulting in a change that could have a material impact on the carrying value of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
As an “emerging growth company” we may delay adoption of new or revised accounting pronouncements applicable to public companies until such pronouncements are made applicable to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Accordingly, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
The following represent our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses represents management’s estimate of losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the statement of financial condition date and is recorded as a reduction of loans. The allowance for loan losses is increased by the provision for loan losses, and decreased by charge-offs, net of recoveries. Loans deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance for loan losses, and subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. All, or part, of the principal balance of loans receivable is charged off to the allowance as soon as it is determined that the repayment of all, or part, of the principal balance is highly unlikely. Consumer loans not secured by residential real estate are generally charged off no later than 90 days past due on a contractual basis, earlier in the event of bankruptcy, or if there is an amount deemed uncollectible. Because all identified losses are immediately charged off, no portion of the allowance for loan losses is restricted to any individual loan or groups of loans, and the entire allowance is available to absorb any and all loan losses.
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level considered adequate to provide for losses that can be reasonably anticipated. Management performs a quarterly evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance. The allowance is based on our past loan loss experience, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral, composition of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions and other relevant factors. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires material estimates that may be susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
The allowance consists of specific, general and unallocated components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as impaired. For loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying amount of that loan. The general component covers pools of loans by loan class including commercial loans not considered impaired, automobile loans identified in pools by product and underwriting standards, as well as smaller balance homogeneous consumer loans. These pools of loans are evaluated for loss exposure based upon historical loss rates for each of these categories of loans, adjusted for qualitative risk factors. These qualitative risk factors include:
● Asset quality trends
● The trend in loan growth and portfolio mix
● Regional and local economic conditions
● Historical loan loss experience
● Underlying credit quality
Each factor is assigned a value to reflect improving, stable or declining conditions based on management’s best judgment using relevant information available at the time of the evaluation.
The risk characteristics within the loan portfolio vary depending on the loan segment. Consumer loans generally are repaid from personal sources of income. Risks associated with consumer loans primarily include general economic risks such as declines in the local economy creating higher rates of unemployment. Those conditions may also lead to a decline in collateral values should we be required to repossess the collateral securing consumer loans. These economic risks also impact the commercial loan segment, however commercial loans are considered to have greater risk than consumer loans as the primary source of repayment is from the cash flow of the business customer. Loans secured by real estate provide the best collateral protection and thus significantly reduce the inherent risk in the portfolio.
An unallocated component is maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses. The unallocated component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating specific and general losses in the portfolio.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan-by-loan basis for commercial loans, by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
An allowance for loan losses is established for an impaired loan if its carrying amount exceeds its estimated fair value. The estimated fair values of substantially all of our impaired loans are measured based on the estimated fair value of the loan’s collateral.
For commercial loans secured by real estate, including those in construction, estimated fair values are determined primarily through third-party appraisals. When a real estate secured loan becomes impaired, a decision is made as to whether an updated certified appraisal of the real estate is necessary. This decision is based on various considerations, including the age of the most recent appraisal, the loan-to-value ratio based on the original appraisal and the condition of the property. Appraised values are discounted to arrive at the estimated selling price of the collateral, which is considered to be the estimated fair value. The discounts also include estimated costs to sell the property.
For commercial business loans secured by non-real estate collateral, such as accounts receivable, inventory and equipment, estimated fair values are determined based on the borrower’s financial statements, inventory reports, accounts receivable agings or equipment appraisals or invoices. Indications of value from these sources are generally discounted based on the age of the financial information or the quality of the assets.
Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment. Accordingly, we do not separately identify individual consumer loans for impairment disclosures, unless such loans are the subject of a troubled debt restructuring agreement.
Loans whose terms are modified are classified as troubled debt restructurings if we grant such borrowers concessions and it is deemed that those borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty. Concessions granted under a troubled debt restructuring generally involve a temporary reduction in interest rate or an extension of a loan’s stated maturity date. Loans classified as troubled restructurings are designated as impaired.
The indirect automobile program loans, and the loans originated under a direct sub-prime automobile program, are evaluated separately from the rest of the consumer loan portfolio. Due to the inherent risk of the program loans, they are evaluated based on the historical losses in the portfolio and discounted collateral values. Since this piece of the portfolio no longer enjoys the participation of the dealers, their continuing reserves and dealer cooperation, there are no longer available cash reserves accumulated as part of the indirect loan assignment agreements with local dealers. The direct sub-prime automobile program was offered to consumers for approximately six months in 2014. The program was discontinued after a detailed analysis revealed that the loan type carried higher risk characteristics than the other automobile portfolios. We have analyzed the historical loss factors to date and have assigned higher reserve factors to these loans to represent the associated risk. Reserves for this loan type are based on the rate of delinquency, the prospect of payment established by collection efforts and discounted collateral values.
The allowance calculation methodology includes further segregation of loan classes into risk rating categories. The borrower’s overall financial condition, repayment sources, guarantors and value of collateral, if appropriate, are evaluated annually for commercial loans or when credit deficiencies arise, such as delinquent loan payments, for all loans.
Credit quality risk ratings include regulatory classifications of special mention, substandard, doubtful and loss. Loans classified as special mention have potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If uncorrected, the potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects. Loans classified as substandard have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They include loans that are inadequately protected by the current sound net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Loans classified as doubtful have all the weaknesses
inherent in loans classified as substandard with the added characteristic that collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of current conditions and facts, is highly improbable. Loans classified as loss are considered uncollectible and are charged to the allowance for loans losses. Loans not classified are rated as pass.
In addition, federal regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our allowance for loan losses and may have judgments different than management’s, and we may determine to increase our allowance as a result of these regulatory reviews. Based on management’s comprehensive analysis of the loan portfolio, management believes the current level of the allowance for loan losses is adequate.
Income Taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined using the liability method. Under this method, the net deferred tax asset or liability is recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as well as net operating losses, capital losses and contribution carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates applied to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date. To the extent that current available evidence about the future raises doubt about the likelihood of a deferred tax asset being realized, a valuation allowance is established. The judgment about the level of future taxable income, including that which is considered capital, is inherently subjective and is reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors change. Interest and penalties are included as a component of noninterest expense if incurred.
Uncertain tax positions are recognized if it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits, that the tax position will be realized or sustained upon examination. The term more likely than not means a likelihood of more than 50%. The terms examined and upon examination also include resolution of the related appeals or litigation processes, if any. A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is initially and subsequently measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. The determination of whether or not a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold considers the facts, circumstances and information available at the reporting date and is subject to management’s judgment.
Average Balance and Yields. The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information at the dates and for the periods indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made. Any adjustments necessary to present yields on a tax-equivalent basis are insignificant. All average balances are daily average balances. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances, but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The
yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or interest expense.
Rate Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume columns shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior
columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Total Assets. Total assets increased $25.5 million, or 7.4%, to $373.0 million at December 31, 2020 from $347.5 million at December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from increases in net loans of $26.0 million, in cash and cash equivalents of $13.4 million and in pension plan assets of $1.1 million, offset in part by decreases in investment securities available for sale of $12.7 million and in equity securities of $1.9 million.
Net Loans. Net loans increased $26.0 million, or 10.0%, to $285.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $259.6 million at December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from increases in manufactured home loans of $20.6 million, or 86.6%, recreational vehicle loans of $14.3 million, or 5,456.1%, commercial business loans of $6.1 million, which includes $4.9 million of PPP loans, or 42.1%, other consumer loans of $2.2 million, or 104.7%, and automobile loans of $386,000, or 1.8%, offset in part by decreases in one- to four-family residential real estate loans of $11.4 million, or 8.2%, and nonresidential loans of $10.9 million, or 30.7%. Net deferred fees increased $6.9 million, or 140.8%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing primarily fees paid for purchased loans which are amortized over the estimated loan lives.
Consistent with our business strategy, we intend to continue to increase the purchase and origination of automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we purchased $2.0 million of automobile loans, $14.9 million of recreational vehicle loans and $25.2 million of manufactured home loans. Additionally, to supplement originations, we intend to begin purchasing one- to four-family residential real estate loans.
Investment Securities. Securities available-for-sale decreased $12.7 million, or 41.4%, to $17.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $30.6 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in securities available-for-sale resulted from the sale of $18.9 million of municipal bonds, partially offset by purchases of $6.9 million of municipal bonds and a $83,000 increase in unrealized gains.
Equity investment securities, which are comprised of mutual funds invested in preferred stock and municipal bonds and equity securities held in a directors’ retirement plan rabbi trust decreased $1.9 million, or 74.4%, to $661,000 at December 31, 2020 from
$2.6 million at December 31, 2019 as a result of management’s decision to sell the mutual funds to eliminate the volatility of changing market prices.
Premises and Equipment. Premises and equipment decreased $845,000, or 4.8%, to $16.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $17.6 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted primarily from recognition of depreciation expense of $1.1 million.
Pension Plan Assets. Pension plan assets increased $1.1 million, or 14.7%, to $8.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $7.6 million at December 31, 2019. The increase resulted from estimated returns on pension assets of $1.8 million and employer contributions of $281,000, offset by estimated benefits paid of $441,000 and interest costs of $590,000.
Deposits. Deposits increased $26.2 million, or 9.2%, to $309.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $283.3 million at December 31, 2019. Noninterest-bearing deposits increased $27.6 million, or 72.4%, to $65.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $38.1 million as of December 31, 2019. Interest-bearing accounts decreased $1.4 million, or 0.6%, to $243.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $245.2 million at December 31, 2019. Interest-bearing checking accounts increased $4.2 million, or 15.3%, to $31.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $27.5 million at December 31, 2019. The largest increase in interest-bearing deposits was in savings accounts which increased $17.0 million, or 19.9%. Additionally, money market accounts increased $1.5 million or 5.9%, to $26.3 million at December 31, 2020 from $24.9 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020 we had $13.3million of deposits as a result of stock subscriptions from our second step conversion which was consummated on January 12, 2021 at which time these deposits were converted into equity. Certificates of deposit decreased $24.1 million, or 22.4%, to $83.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $107.6 million at December 31, 2019.
Municipal deposits held at Generations Commercial Bank decreased $36.5 million to $7.1 million at December 31, 2020 from $43.5 million at December 31, 2019. In light of the current historically low interest rate environment, during the last three months of 2020, we allowed a significant amount of municipal deposits to roll off at maturity without bidding for these ongoing relationships.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances. Federal Home Loan Bank advances decreased $3.8 million, or 12.1%, to $27.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $31.4 million at December 31, 2019. The average cost of outstanding advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank was 2.11% at December 31, 2020, compared to our weighted average rate on deposits of 0.76% at that date.
Subordinated Debt and Other Borrowings. Subordinated debt and other borrowings increased $500,000, or 68.0%, to $1.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $735,000 at December 31, 2019. In July 2020, we obtained $500,000 of debt at a fixed rate of 6.0% maturing February 15, 2021. We repaid the subordinated debt in January 2021 and other borrowings in February 2021 as well as accrued interest.
Total Equity. Total equity increased $1.7 million, or 5.9%, to $29.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $28.2 million at December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from net income of $1.7 million during the period and a $247,000 decrease in other accumulated comprehensive loss, offset in part, by recording the $290,000 fair value of our shares of common stock held in supplemental executive retirement plans.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.7 million, compared to $87,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.7 million. The increase was primarily due to a $890,000 increase in net interest income, a $412,000 increase in noninterest income and a $530,000 decrease in noninterest expense, partially offset by a $120,000 increase in the provision for loan loss.
Interest and Dividend Income. Interest and dividend income increased $648,000, or 5.1%, to $13.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $648,000 in interest on loans receivable. The average balance of loans increased $29.3 million, or 11.8%, to $278.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $249.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the purchase of loans secured by manufactured homes, automobiles and recreational vehicles. The average yield on loans decreased 26 basis points to 4.45% for 2020 from 4.71% for the 2019, reflecting the lower market interest rate environment period to period.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $242,000, or 7.6%, to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Decreases in interest expense for money market accounts of $104,000, for savings accounts of $45,000 and for certificates of deposit of $123,000 between the comparable periods were partially offset by increases of $31,000 in borrowings interest expense. The average cost of deposits and borrowings all decreased during the comparable periods due to the lower market interest rate environment. Borrowing expense increased due to a $2.4 million increase in average borrowings during the comparable periods.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $890,000, or 9.3%, to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net interest rate spread decreased 14 basis points to 3.32% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 3.46% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net interest margin decreased 11 basis points to 3.29% for 2020 from 3.40% for 2019. Net interest rate spread and net interest margin were affected by the decrease in interest rates when comparing 2020 and 2019.
Provision for Loan Losses. Based on management’s analysis of the allowance for loan losses described in Note 2(g) of our consolidated financial statements “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Allowance for Loan Losses,” we recorded a provision for loan losses of $480,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a provision for loan losses of $360,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increased provision for loan losses in 2020 was due primarily to an increase in total loans with an emphasis on loans purchased secured by manufactured homes, automobiles and recreational vehicles.
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income increased $412,000, or 11.6%, to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $835,000 increase in net gains on sale of available-for-sale securities and a $401,000 increase in other charges, commissions and fees, offset partially by a $383,000 increase in unrealized losses on equity securities, a $196,000 decrease on investment services commissions and a $162,000 decrease in service fees. The increased net gains on sale of available-for-sale securities were realized with sale of securities as they were no longer needed to collateralize deposits held at the commercial bank. Other charges, commissions and fees for the 2020 include a $330,000 gain recorded on the sale of the investment services book of business which also accounts for the decrease in the investment services commissions during the same period.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense decreased $530,000, or 4.1%, to $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Compensation and benefits decreased $516,000, or 4.0%, due to a reduction of employees. Service charges decreased $300,000, or 13.3%, due to the elimination of IT-related service fees related to our 2018 merger with Medina Savings and Loan Association. These savings were partially offset by a $167,000, or 34.9%, increase in professional and other services fees due to higher legal and accounting costs and a $101,000, or 47.6%, increase in regulatory assessments due primarily to increased FDIC deposit insurance costs.
Federal Income Taxes. An income tax benefit of $104,000 was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an income tax benefit of $155,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The benefit recorded in 2020 resulted from our ability to carryback a net operating loss pursuant to The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”).
Management of Market Risk
General. Our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk because, as a financial institution, the majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature and sensitive to changes in interest rates. Therefore, a principal part of our operations is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our financial condition and results of operations to changes in market interest rates. Our Asset/Liability Committee is responsible for evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, for determining the level of risk that is appropriate, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the policy and guidelines approved by our board of directors.
Our asset/liability management strategy attempts to manage the impact of changes in interest rates on net interest income, our primary source of earnings. Among the techniques we use to manage interest rate risk are:
● purchasing and originating consumer loans, including automobile, recreational vehicle and manufactured home loans, and commercial real estate and multifamily loans, all of which tend to have shorter terms and higher interest
rates than one- to four-family residential real estate loans, and which, if originated, may generate customer relationships that can result in larger non-interest bearing checking accounts;
● utilizing long-term Federal Home Loan Bank advances which are a closer match in duration to partially fund loan originations and purchases; and
● reducing our dependence on certificates of deposit to support lending and investment activities and increasing our reliance on core deposits, including checking accounts and savings accounts, which are less interest rate sensitive than certificates of deposit.
Our board of directors is responsible for the review and oversight of our Asset/Liability Committee, which is comprised of our executive management team and other essential operational staff. This committee is charged with developing and implementing an asset/liability management plan, and meets at least quarterly to review pricing and liquidity needs and assess our interest rate risk. We currently utilize a third-party modeling program, prepared on a quarterly basis, to evaluate our sensitivity to changing interest rates, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the guidelines approved by the board of directors.
Net Portfolio Value. We compute amounts by which the net present value of our cash flow from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items (net portfolio value or “NPV”) would change in the event of a range of assumed changes in market interest rates. We measure our interest rate risk and potential change in our NPV through the use of a financial model. This model uses a discounted cash flow analysis and an option-based pricing approach to measure the interest rate sensitivity of net portfolio value. Historically, the model estimated the economic value of each type of asset, liability and off-balance sheet contract under the assumption that the United States Treasury yield curve increases or decreases instantaneously by 100 to 300 basis points in 100 basis point increments. However, given the current level of market interest rates, an NPV calculation for an interest rate decrease of greater than 100 basis points has not been prepared. A basis point equals one-hundredth of one percent, and 100 basis points equals one percent. An increase in interest rates from 3% to 4% would mean, for example, a 100 basis point increase in the “Change in Interest Rates” column below.
The following tables set forth, at December 31, 2020, the calculation of the estimated changes in our net portfolio value that would result from the specified immediate changes in the United States Treasury yield curve. For purposes of these tables, 100 basis points equals 1%.
(1)Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities.
(2)NPV is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts.
(3)Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
(4)NPV Ratio represents NPV divided by the present value of assets.
The tables above indicate that at December 31, 2020, in the event of an instantaneous 100 basis point increase in interest rates, we would experience a 16.6% decrease in net portfolio value. In the event of an instantaneous 100 basis point decrease in interest rates, we would experience a 4.4% decrease in net portfolio value.
The following tables set forth, at December 31, 2020, the expected change in net interest income that would result from the specified immediate changes in the United States Treasury yield curve. For purposes of these tables, 100 basis points equals 1%.
(1)The calculated changes assume an immediate shock of the static yield curve.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity describes our ability to meet the financial obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet the borrowing and deposit withdrawal requirements of our customers and to fund current and planned expenditures. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities and proceeds from maturities of securities. We also have the ability to borrow from the Federal Home Loan Bank. At December 31, 2020, we had $27.6 million outstanding in advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank, and had the capacity to borrow approximately an additional $55.6 million based on our collateral capacity. At December 31, 2020, we had an additional $10.5 million in lines of credit available with other financial institutions.
While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. Our most liquid assets are cash and short-term investments including interest-bearing demand deposits. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending, and investing activities during any given period.
Our cash flows are comprised of three primary classifications: cash flows from operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in investing activities, which consists primarily of purchases of available-for-sale investment securities and disbursements for loan purchases and originations, offset by sale of equity securities, proceeds from maturities and principal reductions of available-for-sale investment securities and purchases of premises and equipment, was $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities, consisting primarily of the activity in deposit accounts and Federal Home Loan Bank advances, was $26.8 million for year ended December 31, 2020 and was $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We are committed to maintaining a strong liquidity position. We monitor our liquidity position on a daily basis. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds to meet our current funding commitments. In light of the current historically low interest rate environment, in October 2020 we allowed a significant amount of municipal deposits to roll off at maturity without bidding for these ongoing deposit relationships. We funded the outflow of these deposits, in part, through the sale of municipal securities.
Generations Bancorp is a separate corporate entity from Generations Bank and it must provide for its own liquidity to pay any dividends to its stockholders, to repurchase any shares of its common stock, and for other corporate purposes. Generations Bancorp’s primary source of liquidity is any dividend payments it may receive from Generations Bank. Generations Bank paid no dividends to its parent during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See “Supervision and Regulation - Federal Banking Regulation - Capital Distributions” for a discussion of the regulations applicable to the ability of Generations Bank to pay dividends. At December 31, 2020, Generations Bancorp (on an unconsolidated, stand-alone basis) had liquid assets totaling $113,000.
At December 31, 2020, Generations Bank exceeded all its regulatory capital requirements and was categorized as well capitalized. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Management is unaware of any conditions or events since the most recent notification that would change our category.
The net proceeds from the stock offering increased our liquidity and consolidated capital resources. Over time, the initial level of liquidity will be reduced as net proceeds from the stock offering are used for general corporate purposes, including funding loans. Our financial condition and results of operations will be enhanced by the net proceeds from the stock offering, which will increase our net interest-earning assets and net interest income. However, due to the increase in equity resulting from the net proceeds raised in the stock offering, as well as other factors associated with the stock offering, our return on equity will be adversely affected following the stock offering. This could negatively affect the trading price of our shares of common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
Commitments. As a financial services provider, we routinely are a party to various financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risks, such as commitments to extend credit and unused lines of credit. While these contractual obligations represent our future cash requirements, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans we make. At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding commitments to originate loans of $4.0 million and unfunded lines of credit of $14.8 million. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds available to meet our current lending commitments. Time deposits that are scheduled to mature in one year or less from December 31, 2020 totaled $61.6 million. We may utilize Federal Home Loan Bank advances in place of the maturing time deposits.
Contractual Obligations. In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include data processing services, operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Price
The consolidated financial statements and related data presented elsewhere in this annual report have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates, generally, have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than does inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.
Coronavirus Disease 2019
The outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) could adversely impact a broad range of industries in which the Company’s customers operate and impair their ability to fulfill their obligations to the Company. The World Health Organization has declared Covid-19 to be a global pandemic indicating that almost all public commerce and related business activities must be, to varying degrees, curtailed with the goal of decreasing the rate of new infections.
The spread of the outbreak will likely cause disruptions in the U.S. economy and is highly likely to disrupt banking and other financial activity in the areas in which the Company operates and could potentially create widespread business continuity issues for the Company.
The Company’s business is dependent upon the willingness and ability of its employees and customers to conduct banking and other financial transactions. If the global response to contain COVID-19 escalates or is unsuccessful, the Company could experience a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.