ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated $48,044 in annual revenue compared to $7,120 in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s revenue was positively impacted due to the sale of our ETP patches to Symtomax.
Cost of sales was $48,090 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $3,125 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our operating expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $294,411 as compared to $529,318 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our net loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $951,170 as compared to the net loss of $1,648,595 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The amounts presented in the financial statements do not provide for the effect of inflation on our operations or our financial position. Amounts shown for costs and expenses reflect historical cost and do not necessarily represent replacement cost. The net operating losses shown would be greater than reported if the effects of inflation were reflected either by charging operations with amounts that represent replacement costs or by using other inflation adjustments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had $112,953 cash on hand at December 31, 2020, compared to $24,662 at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, we had $22,875 in principal amount of outstanding convertible notes.
Please see NOTE E - NOTES PAYABLE TO THIRD PARTIES for further information.
The proceeds from loans, convertible debentures as well as cash on hand is being used to fund the operations of our current operations.
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flows for the twelve months ended December 31, 20120 and 2019.
Trends
The factors that will most significantly affect our future operating results, liquidity and capital resources will be:
● Government regulation of the marijuana industry;
● Revision of Federal banking regulations for the marijuana industry; and
● Legalization of the use of marijuana for medical or recreational use in other states.
Other than the foregoing, we do not know of any trends, events or uncertainties that have had, or are reasonably expected to have, a material impact on:
● revenues or expenses;
● any material increase or decrease in liquidity; or
● expected sources and uses of cash.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The SEC issued Financial Reporting Release No. 60, “Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies” suggesting that companies provide additional disclosure and commentary on their most critical accounting policies. In Financial Reporting Release No. 60, the SEC has defined the most critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and operating results and require management to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the following significant policies as critical to the understanding of our financial statements. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make a variety of estimates and assumptions that affect (i) the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and (ii) the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods covered by the financial statements. Our management expects to make judgments and estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. As the number of variables and assumptions affecting the future resolution of the uncertainties increase, these judgments become even more subjective and complex. Although we believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, actual results may differ significantly from these estimates. Changes in estimates and assumptions based upon actual results may have a material impact on our results.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.