ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included in Item 15 of this Annual Report, as well as the discussion of the Company’s business and risk contained in Item 1 - Business and Item 1A - Risk Factors,
Overview
Since 2013 the Company has been engaged in developing its Camelina assets. Between July 2018, the date that we entered into a letter of intent for the purchase of the Bakersfield Biorefinery, and the closing of the purchase of the Bakersfield Biorefinery in May 2020, we were exclusively engaged in completing the purchase of the refinery and in obtaining the financing necessary purchase and retool the Bakersfield Biorefinery into a renewable fuels facility. Accordingly, our principal expenses during 2019 and until we purchased the Bakersfield Biorefinery in May 2020 consisted of general and administrative expenses and costs incurred to obtain the financing required to purchase and retool the Bakersfield Biorefinery. After the purchase of the Bakersfield Biorefinery on May 7, 2020, both our operating expenses and our capital expenditures increased significantly.
Since all of our resources were dedicated to the purchase and financing of the Bakersfield Biorefinery, we did not generate any operating revenues in either 2019 or 2020. In order to fund our operating expenses during these periods, we obtained $6 million under a derivative contract (the “Derivative Contract”) that we entered into with a commodity trading company late in October 2018. In October 2019 we modified the Derivative Contract, entered into a new Derivative Contract, and received another $4 million in cash. The Derivative Contract was further amended in 2020 and replaced by a fixed payment obligation that requires the Company to make total payments of $24.8 million, consisting of the $4.5 million payment we made in June 2020, and six equal monthly installment payments beginning in May 2022. The cash that we received from the Derivative Contract was used to fund our operating costs, our due diligence costs, our pre-acquisition costs, the purchase price down payment/deposit for the Bakersfield Biorefinery, our consulting and legal fees associated with the acquisition, and our payments to key vendors and suppliers.
In May 2020 we completed the purchase of the Bakersfield Biorefinery. The total amount of cash consideration paid for the refinery was $40 million and the total amount of all consideration and assumed liabilities was $89.4 million. In order to fund the purchase price of the Bakersfield Biorefinery and the currently on-going conversion of the facility into a renewable diesel refinery, in May 2020 we also entered into a $300 million senior loan facility and a $65 million mezzanine loan facility. In November 2020 we added a total of $15 million to our credit facilities whereby as of December 31, 2020 our senior loan facility was $313.2 million and our mezzanine loan facility was $66.8 million. We are currently converting the Bakersfield Biorefinery from a crude oil refinery into a biorefinery, and we do not expect to commence our proposed biofuel refinery operations until early 2022. Therefore, we do not anticipate generating revenues from the operations of the Bakersfield Biorefinery until the first half of 2022.
Credit Agreements
In order to finance the costs of the Refinery Acquisition and the development, construction, completion, ownership and operation of the biorefinery, our newly formed special purpose subsidiaries (collectively, “Loan Parties”) entered into two credit facilities, the terms of which will materially impact our future cash flow and results of operations.
On May 4, 2020 we entered into a senior credit agreement with a group of lenders (the “Senior Lenders”) pursuant to which the Senior Lenders agreed to provide us a $300 million senior secured term loan facility to enable us to acquire the equity interests of BKRF and to pay the costs of the retooling of the Bakersfield Biorefinery. The Senior Lenders consist of Orion Energy Partners, L.P., GCM Grosvenor and Voya Investment Management. Orion Energy Partners TP Agent, LLC acts as administrative agent for the Senior Lenders. The Senior Lenders have revised the terms of the senior credit agreement to increase the amount available thereunder by $13.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowed $151.5 million under the senior credit facility.
The senior loan bears interest at the rate of 12.5% per annum, payable quarterly. The principal of the senior loans is due at maturity, provided that we must offer to prepay the senior loans with any proceeds of asset dispositions, borrowings other than permitted borrowings, proceeds from damage or losses at the refinery, and excess net cash flow. We have the right to prepay the senior loan in whole or in part with the payment of a prepayment premium. As additional consideration for the senior loans, certain of the Loan Parties issued membership interests to the Senior Lenders, which membership interests may provide the Senior Lenders with certain limited cash distributions (see below).
The senior loans are secured by all of the assets of the applicable Loan Parties (including its membership interests in BKRF and the Bakersfield Biorefinery). The senior loans mature on November 4, 2026. The Senior Lenders have a right to accelerate the maturity date of the senior loans if, among other reasons, the retooling and repurposing of the Bakersfield Biorefinery is not substantially complete by March 31, 2022, and the Bakersfield Biorefinery’s production does not meet certain project milestones by dates specified dates in the senior credit agreement.
On May 4, 2020 we also entered into a second credit agreement, dated May 4, 2020, with certain mezzanine lenders (the “Mezzanine Lenders”) pursuant to which the Mezzanine Lenders agreed to provide us with a $65 million secured term loan facility to be used to pay the costs of repurposing and starting up the Bakersfield Biorefinery. The second credit facility has been amended to increase the amount of credit available to us thereunder by $1.8 million. The Mezzanine Lenders, for whom Orion Energy Partners TP Agent, LLC acts as administrative agent, consist of Orion Energy Partners, L.P., GCM Grosvenor and Voya Investment Management. We have not drawn down on the credit facility as of the date of this Annual Report.
The mezzanine loans bear interest at the rate of 15.0% per annum on amounts borrowed, payable quarterly, provided that we may defer interest to the extent we don’t not have sufficient cash to pay the interest, such deferred interest being added to principal. As additional consideration for the mezzanine loans, we have agreed to issue membership interest to the Mezzanine Lenders in certain of the Loan Parties, which interests will be issued at such times as advances are made under the mezzanine loans (see below).
The mezzanine loans mature in November 2027. Principal of the mezzanine loans is due at maturity, provided that we must offer to prepay the loan with any excess net cash flow. We have the right to prepay the loan in whole or in part with the payment of a prepayment premium. The mezzanine loans are secured by the assets of the applicable Loan Parties. The Mezzanine Lenders have a right to accelerate the maturity date of the mezzanine loans upon the occurrence of an event of default. Events of default include, in addition to customary events of default, the change of control of a loan party and any default under the senior credit agreement.
As part of the senior and mezzanine credit agreements, we agreed to grant the senior and mezzanine lenders certain membership interests in one of the Loan Parties, which membership interests will provide the senior and mezzanine lenders with an interest in excess cash flows from the Bakersfield Biorefinery’s operations. These membership interests provide the lenders with an indirect financial interest in the Bakersfield Biorefinery. Other than certain limited approval rights, we have the right to manage the Loan Parties and the refinery, and the lenders have no voting rights. These membership interests are to be issued under the BKRF HCB LLC Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement (the “BKRF Mezz Borrower LLC Agreement”). The BKRF Mezz Borrower LLC Agreement provides for three classes of membership interests (Units): (i) Class A Units, all of which are held by GCE Acquisitions and evidence our ownership of this subsidiary; (ii) Class B Units that are issued to the Senior Lenders as we draw down on the senior credit facility, and (iii) Class C Units that are reserved for the issuance to the Mezzanine Lenders and will be issued if/when we borrow under the mezzanine credit facility.
Until the later of (i) five years from the commercial operations date of the Bakersfield Biorefinery and (ii) the date the Senior Lenders have received two times the loan amount under the credit facility (the “Termination Date”), the Senior Lenders, as holders of the Class B Units, are entitled to receive quarterly distributions of 25% of the free cash flow until the Senior Lenders have received (collectively, from these cash distributions plus principal and interest on the senior loans) an amount equal to a 2X multiple of invested capital (“MOIC”), or two times the amount of the senior loans, for a total of up to $626.4 million, and, if the Termination Date has not occurred, thereafter quarterly distributions of 5% of the free cash flow until the Termination Date. See Note E to the consolidated financial statements for additional details regarding the credit facility.
Under the BKRF Mezz Borrower LLC Agreement, the Mezzanine Lenders, as holders of the Class C Units, are entitled to receive out of the distributions by BKRF Mezz Borrower not paid to the Class B Members, the following:
● First, 80.0% of such distributions until the Mezzanine Lenders have received cumulative payments (distributions and principal and interests on the mezzanine loans) equal to 2.0X MOIC;
● Second, 65.0% of such distributions until the Mezzanine Lenders have received cumulative payments equal to 3.0X MOIC;
● Third, 50.0% of such distributions until the Mezzanine Lenders have received cumulative payments equal to 4.0X MOIC;
● Fourth, 30.0% of such distributions until the Mezzanine Lenders have received cumulative payments equal to 99.0X MOIC.
Amendments to Credit Agreements: The senior Credit Agreement and mezzanine loan Credit Agreement were entered into on May 4, 2020 in order to fund the acquisition, development and construction of the Bakersfield Biorefinery. Since the two credit agreements were entered into, the scope of the Bakersfield Biorefinery has both changed and expanded to include additional capabilities and equipment, which changes have affected certain of the assumptions made regarding the cost of installing, developing and constructing the Bakersfield Biorefinery. Accordingly, effective March 26, 2021, the Loan Parties entered into Amendment No. 3 to the Credit Agreement to more accurately reflect the updated scope and cost estimates of the Bakersfield Biorefinery and to establish a contingency reserve account to fund the costs of the additional capabilities and equipment and to fund possible cost overruns. Concurrently, BKRF HCB, LLC, BKRF HCP, LLC and the Mezzanine Lenders entered into Consent No. 2 And Amendment No. 2 To Credit Agreement. Under these two amendments, the borrowers (our BKRF OCB, LLC and BKRF HCB, LLC subsidiaries) agreed to establish an additional cash reserve of at least $35 million, which cash reserve would be used at the direction of the administrative agent to fund project costs (including the cost of development, design, engineering, procurement, construction, installation, equipping, completion, start-up, and operation) of the Bakersfield Biorefinery to the extent that such costs exceed the amounts available under the two credit agreements. Funds remaining in the additional reserve account after the completion of the Bakersfield Biorefinery will, with the approval of the administrative agent, be used to first make a $5 million principal payment on the senior loan, and any remaining funds will be returned to GCEH.
In order to fund the new $35 million contingency cash reserve, the two amendments to the credit agreements provide that we will raise no less than $35 million by July 31, 2021 and that we will deposit at least $35 million into the new Bakersfield Biorefinery cash reserve account. The Credit Agreement amendments contemplate that the $35 million will be raised in a public or private financing transaction and, in connection therewith, that we will enter into an agreement with a placement agent or underwriter, or that we will file a registration statement with the SEC by April 30, 2021.
As consideration for the amendments to the two Credit Agreements, the borrowers agreed to pay to each senior and mezzanine lender an amendment and consent premium equal to 1.00% of the aggregate commitments and loans of such lender. The fee is payable in the same securities that we may issue in connection with raising the $35 million cash reserve. If we fund the $35 million cash reserve other than through a financing transaction, we will pay the 1% lenders’ premium in shares of our common stock or in cash. The amendments to senior Credit Agreement and mezzanine loan Credit Agreement also require the borrowers to provide certain updated financial statements and budgets, and amend other provisions of those agreements, including procedures to approve project change orders, and updates to our feedstock execution plan, the rail development milestones, and gas supply milestones.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported assets, liabilities, sales and expenses in the accompanying financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those that require the most subjective and complex judgments, often employing the use of estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
The Company’s most critical accounting policies and estimates that may materially impact the Company’s results of operations include:
Asset Retirement Obligations. The Company recognizes liabilities which represent the fair value of a legal obligation to perform asset retirement activities, including those that are conditional on a future event, when the amount can be reasonably estimated. If a reasonable estimate cannot be made at the time the liability is incurred, we record the liability when sufficient information is available to estimate the liability’s fair value. We have asset retirement obligations with respect to our Bakersfield Biorefinery due to various legal obligations to clean and/or dispose of these assets at the time they are retired. However, the majority of these assets can be used for extended and indeterminate periods of time provided that they are properly maintained and/or upgraded. It is our practice and intent to continue to maintain these assets and make improvements based on technological advances. A portion of these obligations relate to the required cleanout of hydrocarbons previously used in the pipeline and terminal tanks. In order to determine the fair value of the obligations management must make certain estimates and assumptions including, among other things, projected cash flows, a credit-adjusted risk-free rate and an assessment of market conditions that could significantly impact the estimated fair value of the asset retirement obligations. We believe the estimates selected, in each instance, represent our best estimate of future outcomes, but the actual outcomes could differ from the estimates selected.
Environmental Remediation Liabilities. The Company recognizes its asset retirement obligation and environmental liabilities in accordance with ASC 410-30, and has estimated such liabilities as of its acquisition date. It is the Company’s policy to accrue environmental and clean-up related costs of a non-capital nature when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Environmental liabilities represent the current estimated costs to investigate and remediate contamination at our properties. This estimate is based on internal and third-party assessments of the extent of the contamination, the selected remediation technology and review of applicable environmental regulations, typically considering estimated activities and costs for 20 years, and up to 30 years if a longer period is believed reasonably necessary. Accruals for estimated costs from environmental remediation obligations generally are recognized no later than completion of the remedial feasibility study and include, but are not limited to, costs to perform remedial actions and costs of machinery and equipment that are dedicated to the remedial actions and that do not have an alternative use. Such accruals are adjusted as further information develops or circumstances change. We discount environmental liabilities to their present value if payments are fixed and determinable. Expenditures for equipment necessary for environmental issues relating to ongoing operations are capitalized. Changes in laws and regulations and actual remediation expenses compared to historical experience could significantly impact our results of operations and financial position. We believe the estimates selected, in each instance, represent our best estimate of future outcomes, but the actual outcomes could differ from the estimates selected.
Capitalization of Pre-Acquisition Costs. The Company capitalizes its pre-acquisition costs once management determines that it is probable that the project will occur. Probability is determined based on (i) whether management, having the requisite authority, has implicitly or explicitly authorized and committed to funding the acquisition or construction of a specific asset, (ii) the financial resources are available consistent with such authorization, and (iii) the ability exists to meet the necessary local and other governmental regulations. Cost capitalization occurs when the event is probable, but prior to the start of construction. We capitalize those costs that are directly identifiable with the specific property and those costs that would be capitalized if the property were already acquired. We expense general and administrative and overhead costs and costs, including payroll, that would be considered support functions.
Derecognition of Liabilities. The Company reviews its liabilities, including but not limited to, accounts payable, notes payable, accrued expenses, accrued liabilities and other legal obligations, for a determination of the legal enforcement or settlement of an obligation. Upon conclusive evidence that an obligation may be extinguished, has expired, is discharged, cancelled or otherwise no longer legally exists, then the Company will derecognize the respective liability on the Company’s balance sheet.
Derivative Commodity Instruments. The Company has used derivative commodity instruments as a means of generating cash for its efforts in procuring a refinery to fulfill its business plan. The Company may use such instruments in the future to manage its exposures for its feedstocks or end products. Normal purchases and normal sales are contracts that provide for the purchase or sale of something other than a financial instrument or derivative instrument that will be delivered in quantities expected to be used or sold over a reasonable period in the normal course of business. While the Company may deliver refined products from the refinery in the future, at this time these derivative contracts are not considered normal sales contracts. The results of our derivative activities were material to the company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows in 2018 and 2019. The Company’s risk management practices and its compliance with policies are reviewed by the Company’s Board of Directors. Derivatives beyond those designated as normal purchase and normal sale contracts are recorded at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheet with resulting gains and losses reflected in income. Fair values are derived principally from published market quotes and other independent third-party quotes. The change in fair value of Company’s derivative commodity instruments in 2019 was material to the Company’s results of operations. The company does not currently hold any derivative commodity instruments.
Recoverability of Intangible Assets. The Company invests in the development of various plant-based feedstocks for conversion to fuel as part of its core business plan and mandate. The Company has purchased patents and associated know-how that relate directly to the development and growing of Camelina. The Company invests in the ongoing development of Camelina through research and additional patents as breakthroughs occur. The Company capitalizes all of its patent expenses and amortizes these costs over a 17-year period in conjunction with the life of the patent protection. We evaluate the carrying costs of these assets on a periodic basis and will impair such value if deemed necessary. As of 2019, no impairment is necessary and the carrying value of our intellectual property (intangible assets) remains a significant value and expected economic generator going forward.
Income Taxes. The Company utilizes the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and the carryforward of operating losses and tax credits, and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance against deferred tax assets is recorded when it is more likely than not that such tax benefits will not be realized. Assets and liabilities are established for uncertain tax positions taken or positions expected to be taken in income tax returns when such positions are judged to not meet the “more-likely-than-not” threshold based on the technical merits of the positions. Estimated interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are included as a component of general and administrative expense.
Certain other critical accounting policies, including the assumptions and judgments underlying them, are disclosed in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report. However, we do not believe that there are any alternative methods of accounting for our operations that would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Results of Operations
Revenues. As discussed above, during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 (“fiscal 2019”) and until May 7, 2020 our activities were devoted solely to the acquisition and financing of the Bakersfield Biorefinery. Since our acquisition of the Bakersfield Biorefinery on May 7, 2020, we have been engaged in converting and repositioning the refinery into a biorefinery and in further developing our Camelina feedstock production supply chain. Accordingly, in fiscal 2019 and the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”) we did not engage in any activities that generated current revenues and, as a result, we had no operating revenues in fiscal 2020 or fiscal 2019. The Bakersfield Biorefinery currently is being retooled and converted from a crude oil refinery into a biorefinery and is not expected to commence operations until early 2022. Therefore, we do not anticipate generating revenues from the operations of the Bakersfield Biorefinery until 2022.
General And Administrative Expenses and Facility Expenses. General and administrative expense consists of expenses generally involving corporate overhead functions and operations. Our general and administrative expenses increased by $5.6 million, or 181%, from $3.1 million in fiscal 2019 to $8.0 million in fiscal 2020. This increase was due to higher payroll costs (we have hired over 50 new employees since May 6, 2020), higher accounting and professional fees, higher insurance, information technology services and general office expenses arising from the ownership of the Bakersfield Biorefinery. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in 2021 as the development of the refinery progresses, and expenses will further increase once the Bakersfield Biorefinery is fully operational. Facility expenses primarily consist of maintenance costs to keep the Bakersfield assets, purchased in May 2020, in an operational mode and expenses normally related to the operations of a refinery. The 2020 facility expense was $3.2 million with no comparable expense in 2019.
Interest Income/Expense. Our net fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020 interest expenses consisted of accrued interest of $0.4 million and $2.3 million, respectively. Interest expense in fiscal 2019 represented interest accrued from $2.1 million of promissory notes outstanding. However, in May 2020 we entered into the $300 million senior loan and the $65 million mezzanine loan. As of December 31, 2020 we borrowed $151.5 million under the senior credit facility. Accordingly, our interest expense in fiscal 2020 represents interest accrued on the amounts borrowed, including the senior credit facility. During 2021 we expect to use all or substantially all of the credit available to us under these two facilities and, accordingly, we expect that our interest expenses will significantly increase as the outstanding principal balances of the credit facilities increase. While the amount of interest that we have to pay under the two credit facilities will increase, the applicable portion of construction period interest costs will be capitalized into the project under the guidance of the current accounting standards.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative and Class B Units and Finance Charges. In October of 2018 we entered into the Derivative Contract under which we recorded an initial $15.1 million liability associated with opening the derivative position. In 2018 we received $6 million in cash from the derivative transaction and recorded a decrease in the derivative liability, which resulted in $3.2 million of income. However, on December 31, 2019 the value of the derivative liability increased to $24.8 million, which after receiving $4 million in cash, resulted in a charge of $8.9 million, and a change of $12.1 million during the year. We modified the terms of the derivative in October of 2019 and received $4 million in cash from the transaction. As part of the Derivative Contract, we recorded a gain from the change in fair value of the derivative of $5.5 million in 2020 and a finance charge of $8.9 million in 2019. In May 2020 we entered into a senior loan credit facility whereby we issued equity units in a subsidiary. We record these units at their fair value when they are issued or become issuable, and we remeasure the fair value of these units at the end of each reporting period. As of December 31, 2020 we determined that the fair value of the liability of the mandatorily redeemable instruments to be $5.1 million, which was an increase in fair value of $2 million, which was charged to other expenses . We had no comparable expense related to the fair value of Class B units in 2019.
Net losses. For 2020 we incurred an operating loss of $12.2 million, an increase of $7.3 million from our operating loss of $4.9 million in 2019. Our operating loss increased because of the substantial increase in our general and administrative expenses (including facilities costs), the costs related to the retooling of the Bakersfield Biorefinery, and our activities in developing the Camelina farming operations and feedstock program. Our total net loss for the year 2020 was $10.6 million, a decrease of $1.2 million or 10% compared to the $11.8 million loss in 2019. Our net loss for 2020 increased over 2019 primarily due to a reduction in the derivative fair value liability of $5.5 million, a gain on the derivative revaluation of $0.5 million and an expense of $2 million due to the change in fair value of Class B units. These gains offset the higher general and administrative costs incurred in 2020. We expect to continue to incur losses in 2021 while our biorefinery is under construction and therefore not operational.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2019 and 2020, we had approximately $0.5 million and $40 million of cash, including $35.6 million of restricted cash, of which $22.7 million is considered as long-term as that cash is more than likely to be spent on the construction project and will be capitalized into the project as spent. On December 31, 2020 we had working capital of negative $5.8 million and negative working capital of $33 million at the end of fiscal 2019.
Our efforts to acquire the Bakersfield refinery commenced in early 2018. Our operating costs, including the costs of the professionals that we engaged, exceeded our capital resources. Accordingly, on October 15, 2018, we entered into a derivative contract with a commodities trading company whereby we received $6 million of cash in exchange for a contract for ultra-low sulfur diesel to be settled beginning in July of 2020. This contract created a net fair value liability of $15.1 million. The purpose of this contract was to obtain the cash the Company needed to pursue the acquisition of the Bakersfield Biorefinery. Because of a delay in completing the purchase of the Bakersfield Biorefinery, we had to unwind the original derivative contract on October 29, 2019 and enter into a new derivative transaction whereby we received an additional cash payment of $4 million. The new derivative contract was amended again on April 20, 2020 and calls for a cash payment of $4.5 million in June 2020 (that we paid) and six equal monthly payments of $3.375 million beginning in May 2022. This payment stream is scheduled to coincide around the commencement of operations and the resulting cash flow of the Bakersfield Biorefinery.
The Bakersfield Biorefinery is currently being retooled and converted from a crude oil refinery into a biofuels refinery. The construction of the Bakersfield Biorefinery is expected to be completed, and the Bakersfield Biorefinery is expected to commence commercial operations in early 2022. Until the Bakersfield Biorefinery is operational, we will not generate any refinery operating revenues. We anticipate that we will generate some revenues in 2021 from sales of Camelina seed, although such revenues are not expected to be significant. During the construction phase of the biorefinery, we will incur significant operating costs and capital expenditures to upgrade the existing equipment and facilities. The expenses that we expect to incur include, among others, the purchase of new biorefinery equipment, the payments to our contractors under the various engineering, procurement and construction agreements that we entered into, the costs of maintaining the existing facility during the construction phase, paying licensing fees, the costs of upgrading the refinery’s rail line and certain pipelines, and making interest and other payments under our senior and mezzanine credit facilities.
In order to fund the cost of acquiring the Bakersfield Biorefinery, converting the existing refinery into a biorefinery, and paying all operating expenses during the preoperational period, in May 2020 we entered into a $300 million senior secured term loan facility with the Senior Lenders and a $65 million secured term loan facility with the Mezzanine Lenders. Our senior and mezzanine lenders have also recently agreed to make an additional $15 million available to us, if requested, to develop the Bakersfield Refinery and our Camelina feedstock program. As of December 31, 2020, we have borrowed $151.5 million under the senior credit facility, of which approximately $45 million was unspent as of the end of 2020. We borrowed approximately $31 million in March 2021 to continue the retooling of the Bakersfield Biorefinery and ongoing operations. As of the date of this Annual Report, we have not yet utilized the mezzanine credit facility or the additional $15 million of available credit the senior and mezzanine lenders have made available to us.
The senior loan bears interest at the rate of 12.5% per annum, payable quarterly. No principal payments are required to be made under the senior loan until maturity. The senior loan matures on November 4, 2026. The mezzanine loan will bear interest at the rate of 15.0% per annum on amounts borrowed, payable quarterly, provided that we may defer up to 2.5% interest to the extent we do not have sufficient cash to pay the interest (any deferred interest will be added to principal). Principal of the mezzanine loans is due at maturity. As additional consideration for the senior loans and mezzanine loans, the senior lenders were issued Class B units (and the mezzanine lenders will be issued Class C Units when we borrow under the mezzanine loans) in our subsidiary that indirectly owns the Bakersfield Biorefinery. The Class B and C Units will not affect our liquidity until the Bakersfield Biorefinery commences operations in 2022. However, since the holders of the Class B and C Units will be entitled to certain priority cumulative distributions, if any, that may be made in the future from the operations of the Bakersfield Biorefinery, distributions made on behalf of the Class B and C Units will reduce the amount of distributions that we may be entitled to receive in the future from the operations of the Bakersfield Biorefinery.
Based on our construction budget (including the purchase orders we have issued for the required equipment) and on our internal projections of our future operating expenses, we anticipated that the $380 million available to us under the senior and mezzanine loans (including the supplemental $15 million) would be sufficient to fund our projected capital expenditures and operating expenses at the Bakersfield Biorefinery until the Bakersfield Biorefinery becomes operational. However, the scope of the Bakersfield Biorefinery has both changed and expanded to include additional capabilities and equipment, which changes may increase the cost of installing, developing and constructing the Bakersfield Biorefinery. In order to be prepared for cost overruns, we have agreed with our senior and mezzanine lenders to establish a $35 million contingency reserve by July 31, 2021 to fund any cost overruns. See “Item 9B. Other Information.” We currently do not have the funds to establish the contingency reserve and will, therefore, have to raise this amount through a public or private sale of our securities. No assurance can be given that we will be able to raise the funds by July 31, 2021, or at all. A portion of GCEH’s corporate overhead has been funded from the senior and mezzanine loan advances, which advances GCEH has agreed to pay to the Bakersfield Biorefinery.
Our transition to profitability is dependent upon, among other things, the successful and timely development and construction of our biorefinery and the future commercialization of the products that we intend to produce at the Bakersfield Biorefinery. In order to ensure that we have a buyer for the renewable diesel produced at our biorefinery, we have entered into an offtake agreement with ExxonMobil Oil Corporation. Under that agreement, ExxonMobil has agreed to purchase a minimum of 105 million gallons per year of renewable diesel from the Bakersfield Biorefinery for a period of five years following the date that the Bakersfield Biorefinery commences commercial operations, with the right to acquire additional volumes. The price of the renewable diesel to be sold to ExxonMobil under the contract is based on a combination of both a fixed price and variable price. The revenues we expect to receive under the offtake agreement, together with our other projected sources of revenues, are expected to fund our anticipated working capital and liquidity needs.
Once completed, the Bakersfield Biorefinery will be able to produce renewable diesel from various renewable feedstocks, such as Camelina oil produced from our patented Camelina varieties, soybean oil, used cooking oil, inedible animal fat, and other vegetable oils. We believe that one of our strategic advantages is that a significant portion of the feedstock expected to be used at our biorefinery will be Camelina grain produced by third party farmers for the Bakersfield Biorefinery using our patented Camelina varieties. However, we anticipate that we will need additional funding for general corporate purposes and to grow our certified Camelina seeds, to enter into agreements with farmers, and to otherwise ramp up the cultivation and production of Camelina. As of the date of this report, we have only secured limited funding for our Camelina production plans. Although we are currently in discussions with certain agri-finance companies, other strategic partners, our existing lenders, and possible third party investors for debt or equity financing for our Camelina operations and corporate purposes, no assurance can be given that we will obtain the necessary funds, or that if we do obtain such funding, that the terms under which we obtain such funding will be beneficial to us.
Inflation and changing prices have had minimal effect on our continuing operations over our two most recent fiscal years.