ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included in this Annual Report. In addition to the historical information, certain statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of certain events may differ significantly from those projected in such forward-looking statements. Refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report for additional information regarding forward-looking statements.
Overview
We own and operate a diversified entertainment platform, consisting of a portfolio of gaming assets that focus on resort casino operations and distributed gaming (including gaming in our branded taverns).
We conduct our business through two reportable operating segments: Casinos and Distributed Gaming. In our Casinos segment, we own and operate ten resort casino properties in Nevada and Maryland. Our Distributed Gaming segment involves the installation, maintenance and operation of slots and amusement devices in non-casino locations such as restaurants, bars, taverns, convenience stores, liquor stores and grocery stores in Nevada and Montana, and the operation of branded taverns targeting local patrons located primarily in the greater Las Vegas, Nevada metropolitan area.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
The $279.3 million, or 29%, decrease in revenues resulted primarily from decreases of $102.1 million, $90.9 million, $60.8 million and $25.5 million in gaming, food and beverage, room and other revenues, respectively, primarily due to mandated temporary property closures and the limitations on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
The $200.1 million, or 33%, decrease in revenues related to our Casinos segment compared to the prior year resulted primarily from decreases of $46.4 million, $70.3 million, $60.8 million and $22.6 million in gaming, food and beverage, room and other revenues, respectively, primarily due to mandated temporary property closures and the limitations on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
The $79.0 million, or 22%, decrease in revenues related to our Distributed Gaming segment resulted primarily from decreases of $55.6 million, $20.6 million and $2.8 million in our gaming, food and beverage and other revenues, respectively, primarily due to the impact of mandated temporary tavern closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the limitations on our operations following re-opening arising from our implementation of protocols and public health orders intended to protect our team members, gaming patrons and guests from potential COVID-19 exposure.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted EBITDA in our Casinos segment as a percentage of segment revenues (or Adjusted EBITDA margin) was 28%, compared to Adjusted EBITDA margin in our Distributed Gaming segment of 9% as compared to 29% and 15%, respectively, for the prior year. The lower Adjusted EBITDA margin in our Distributed Gaming segment relative to our Casinos segment reflects the fixed and variable amounts paid to third parties under our space lease and participation agreements as expenses in the Distributed Gaming segment (which includes the percentage of gaming revenues
paid to third parties under space lease agreements with revenue share provisions). Refer to “Note 15 - Segment Information” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report for additional information regarding segment Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of segment Adjusted EBITDA to segment net loss.
Operating Expenses
The $159.5 million, or 28%, decrease in operating expenses compared to the prior year resulted primarily from $59.9 million, $67.5 million, $22.6 million and $9.5 million decreases in gaming, food and beverage, room and other expenses, respectively. These operating expense decreases primarily reflect the impact of mandated temporary property closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the various mitigating actions taken by Golden to preserve liquidity, including delaying material capital expenditures, reducing operating expenses and implementing a cost reduction program with respect to discretionary expenditures.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The $46.4 million, or 21%, decrease in selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses compared to the prior year was primarily due to the impact of mandated temporary property closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a decrease in payroll, rent and other expenses.
Within our Casinos segment, SG&A expenses decreased $31.2 million, or 23%, primarily due to mandated temporary closures of our casino properties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a decrease in payroll, marketing and advertising and other expenses. The majority of the SG&A expenses in this segment were comprised of payroll and payroll-related expenses, marketing and advertising, utilities expenses, repairs and maintenance, and property taxes.
Within our Distributed Gaming segment, SG&A expenses decreased $2.6 million or 8%, primarily due to mandated temporary tavern closures and suspension of our Distributed Gaming operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a decrease in payroll, rent and other expenses. The majority of SG&A expenses in this segment were comprised of payroll and payroll-related expenses, building and rent expense, utilities expenses, insurance, and property taxes.
Corporate SG&A expenses decreased $12.6 million, or 22% compared to the prior year, primarily from a reduction in labor costs, utilities, shared based compensation and professional services in accounting compared to the prior year. The majority of SG&A expense in this segment were comprised of corporate office overhead, legal, accounting, third-party service providers, executive compensation, share based compensation, payroll and payroll-related expenses.
Acquisition and Severance Expenses
Severance expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 were incurred as a result of mitigating actions we took to preserve liquidity in light of COVID-19. Acquisition expenses were incurred primarily during the year ended December 31, 2019 and related to consulting and other services in connection with the Laughlin Acquisition, which closed on January 14, 2019, and subsequent integration activities.
Preopening Expenses
Preopening expenses consist of labor, food, utilities, training, initial licensing, rent and organizational costs incurred. Non-capital costs associated with the opening of tavern and casino locations are also expensed as preopening expenses as incurred.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, preopening expenses primarily related to our planned expansion into new markets for our Distributed Gaming segment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, preopening expenses primarily related to costs incurred in the opening of new taverns in the Las Vegas Valley.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $7.8 million, or 7%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to the depreciation of the assets related to the remodel of The Strat and the amortization of intangible assets related to the Laughlin Acquisition.
Non-Operating Expense, Net
Non-operating expense, net decreased $18.4 million, or 21%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to a $9.2 million decrease in loss on extinguishment and modification of debt, $5.1 million decrease in interest expense and a $4.2 million decrease in loss related to change in fair value of derivative.
Income Taxes
Income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.1 million, which resulted primarily from the change in valuation allowance. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.9 million, attributable primarily to the change in valuation allowance. The effective tax rate was (0.04)% for the year ended December 31, 2020, which differed from the federal tax rate of 21% due primarily to the change in valuation allowance. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 4.5%, which differed from the federal tax rate of 21% due primarily to the change in valuation allowance.
As of December 31, 2020, we evaluated all available positive and negative evidence related to our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets. We considered the expected future taxable income (and losses) and deductions from existing deferred tax assets and liabilities, net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards, and other factors in reaching the conclusion that the deferred tax assets are not currently expected to be realized, and that therefore, the valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets required adjustment.
The Company recognizes penalties and interest related to uncertain tax benefits in the provision for income taxes.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-GAAP Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use Adjusted EBITDA, a measure we believe is appropriate to provide meaningful comparison with, and to enhance an overall understanding of, our past financial performance and prospects for the future. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to both management and investors by excluding specific expenses and gains that we believe are not indicative of our core operating results. Further, Adjusted EBITDA is a measure of operating performance used by management, as well as industry analysts, to evaluate operations and operating performance and is widely used in the gaming industry. The presentation of this additional information is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. A reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA is provided in the table below.
We define “Adjusted EBITDA” as earnings before interest and other non-operating income (expense), income taxes, depreciation and amortization, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, acquisition and severance expenses, preopening and related expenses, loss on disposal of assets, loss on extinguishment and modification of debt, share-based compensation expenses, other expenses and change in fair value of derivative.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)Preopening and related expenses include rent, organizational costs, non-capital costs associated with the opening of tavern and casino locations, and expenses related to The Strat rebranding and the launch of the True Rewards loyalty program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $103.6 million in cash and cash equivalents. We currently believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements during the next 12 months.
Our operating results and performance depend significantly on national, regional and local economic conditions and their effect on consumer spending. Declines in consumer spending would cause revenues generated in both our Casinos and Distributed Gaming segments to be adversely affected.
To further enhance our liquidity position or to finance any future acquisition or other business investment initiatives, we may obtain additional financing, which could consist of debt, convertible debt or equity financing from public and/or private credit and capital markets.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities was $36.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $113.9 million for the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations (as discussed under “Overview - Impact of COVID-19” in Part I, Item 1: Business) and the timing of working capital spending.
Net cash used in investing activities was $35.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $256.1 million for the prior year. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities reflects the closing of the Laughlin Acquisition and capital expenditures made in 2019, and the deferral of material capital expenditures in light of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Net cash used in financing activities was $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $137.8 million for the prior year. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to repayments of notes payable, payments under finance leases and a repurchase of shares of common stock under our share repurchase program. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to $375.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Unsecured Notes offset by $220.0 million of repayments under our Credit Facility.
Long-Term Debt
For information regarding our Credit Facility and Indenture refer to “Note 7 - Debt” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report.
Share Repurchase Program
On November 7, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $25.0 million shares of common stock, subject to available liquidity, general market and economic conditions, alternate uses for the capital and other factors. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we repurchased approximately 1.2 million shares of our common stock in open market transactions for approximately $19.6 million at an average price of $16.06 per share. The November 7, 2018 authorization was replaced on March 12, 2019, when our Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to $25.0 million worth of additional shares of common stock, subject to available liquidity, general market and economic conditions, alternate uses for the capital and other factors. Share repurchases may be made from time to time in open market transactions, block trades or in private transactions in accordance with applicable securities laws and regulations and other legal requirements, including compliance with our finance agreements. There is no minimum number of shares that we are required to repurchase and the repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
On December 22, 2020, we repurchased 50,000 shares of our common stock from Lyle A. Berman, an independent non-employee member of our Board of Directors, pursuant to our share repurchase program at a price of $19.00 per share, resulting in a charge to accumulated deficit for $1.0 million. This transaction was approved by the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors prior to being executed. There were no other repurchase transactions under our share repurchase program during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
The outcome of the following specific matters, including our commitments and contingencies, may also affect our liquidity.
Commitments, Capital Spending and Development
We perform on-going refurbishment and maintenance at our facilities, of which certain maintenance costs are capitalized if such improvement or refurbishment extends the life of the related asset, while other maintenance costs that do not so qualify are expensed as incurred. The commitment of capital and the related timing thereof are contingent upon, among other things, negotiation of final agreements and receipt of approvals from the appropriate regulatory bodies. We intend to fund such capital expenditures through our Revolving Credit Facility and operating cash flows.
Refer to “Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report for additional information regarding commitments and contingencies that may also affect our liquidity.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Represents estimated interest payments on our outstanding term loan borrowings under our Credit Facility based on interest rates as of December 31, 2020 until maturity. Includes interest on 2026 Unsecured Notes and notes payable.
(2)Includes total operating lease interest obligations of $62.0 million.
(3)Includes total finance lease interest obligations of $3.2 million.
(4)Represents obligations related to license agreements.
Other Opportunities
We may investigate and pursue expansion opportunities in our existing or new markets from time to time. Such expansions will be influenced and determined by a number of factors, which may include licensing availability and approval, suitable investment opportunities and availability of acceptable financing. Investigation and pursuit of such opportunities may require us to make substantial investments or incur substantial costs, which we may fund through cash flows from operations or borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility. To the extent such sources of funds are not sufficient, we may also seek to raise such additional funds through public or private equity or debt financings or from other sources. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available or that, if available, such financing will be obtainable on terms favorable to us. Moreover, we can provide no assurances that the investigation or pursuit of an opportunity will result in a completed transaction.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The SEC has defined critical accounting policies as those that are most important to the presentation of the financial position and results of operations, and which require management to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. We have identified our critical accounting policies that meet this definition below. Other key accounting policies that involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions are discussed in “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, based upon information presently available; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
As of December 31, 2020, the value of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets was $158.4 million and $46.8 million, respectively. As discussed in “Note 5 - Goodwill and Intangible Assets” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report, for the year ended December 31, 2020 we recorded impairment charges to our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets of $27.1 million and $6.9 million, respectively.
We test our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets comprised of trade names for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each year, and whenever events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. When performing testing for impairment, we either conduct a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired, or elect to bypass this qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative test. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider both positive and negative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry events, financial performance and other changes, and make a determination of whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the qualitative factors, we determine that it is more likely than not the asset is impaired, we then perform a quantitative test in which the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is compared with its carrying amount, including goodwill. The fair value of our trade names is estimated using the income approach to valuation at each of our reporting units.
The estimation of fair value for both goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires management to make critical estimates, judgments and assumptions, such as: the valuation methodology, the estimated future cash flows for each of our reporting units, the discount rate used to calculate the present value of such cash flows, our current valuation multiple and multiples of comparable publicly traded companies, and royalty rate to be applied to valuation of our trade names. Application of alternative estimates and assumptions could produce significantly different results, especially with regards to estimated future cash flows, as they are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from such estimates. Cash flow estimates are unpredictable and inherently uncertain, since they are based on the current regulatory, political and economic climates, recent operating information and projections. Such estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, competition, events affecting various forms of travel and access to our properties, and other factors. If our estimates of future cash flows are not met or if there are changes in significant assumptions and judgments used in the estimation process, including the discount rate and market multiple, we may have to record impairment charges in the future.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets at Colorado Belle
As of December 31, 2020, the value of long-lived assets at Colorado Belle was $36.8 million. As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the operations of the Colorado Belle remain suspended. Since we review the carrying amounts of our long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable, suspension of this resort casino property’s operations qualified as an indicator that impairment may exist related to our long-lived assets at Colorado Belle. As discussed in “Note 4 - Property and Equipment” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report, the results of interim and annual assessments conducted during the year did not indicate an impairment of the long-lived assets at Colorado Belle as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Recoverability of a long-lived asset is evaluated by comparing the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to its carrying amount. If the undiscounted estimated future cash flows exceed the carrying amount, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted estimated future cash flows do not exceed the carrying amount, impairment is recorded based on the difference between the asset’s estimated fair value and its carrying amount. To estimate fair values, we generally use market comparables, when available, or a discounted cash flow model. The estimation of fair value utilizing a discounted cash flow model requires management to make critical estimates, judgments and assumptions with regards to estimated future cash flows, as they are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from such estimates. Cash flow estimates are unpredictable and inherently uncertain, since they are based on the current regulatory, political and economic climates, recent operating information and projections. Such estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, competition, events affecting various forms of travel and access to our properties, and other factors. If our estimates of future cash flows are not met or if there are changes in significant assumptions and judgments used in the estimation process, we may have to record impairment charges in the future.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplemental Data of this Annual Report for information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Regulation and Taxes
The casino and distributed gaming industries are subject to extensive regulation by state gaming authorities. Changes in applicable laws or regulations could have a material adverse effect on us.
The gaming industry represents a significant source of tax revenues to regulators. From time to time, various federal and state legislators and officials have proposed changes in tax law, or in the administration of such law, affecting the gaming industry. It is not possible to determine the likelihood of possible changes in tax law or in the administration of such law. Such changes, if adopted, could have a material adverse effect on our future financial position, results of operations, cash flows and prospects. Refer to the “Regulation” section included in Part I, Item 1: Business of this Annual Report for further discussion of applicable regulations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.