Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
GENERAL
This annual report on Form 10-K and other reports filed by Gold Entertainment Group, Inc. ("GOLD", " we," "us,"" "our," or the "Company") from time to time with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (collectively, the "Filings") contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, the Company's management as well as estimates and assumptions made by the Company's management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof.
When used in the filings, the words "anticipate," "believe," "estimate," "expect," "future," "intend," "plan," or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to the Company or the Company's management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the current view of the Company with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including the risks contained in elsewhere in this report, relating to the Company's industry, the Company's operations and results of operations, and any businesses that the Company may acquire. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned. The Company was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on February 3, 1999. Our most recent registration statement has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 3, 2017 and was effective on March 6, 2017.
PLAN OF OPERATIONThe Company is in the process of investigating potential business ventures, which, in the opinion of management, will provide a source of eventual profit to the Company. Such involvement may take many forms, including the acquisition of an existing business or the acquisition of assets to establish subsidiary businesses. The Company's management does not expect to remain involved as management of any acquired business.
As the Company possesses limited funds, the Company will be extremely limited in its attempts to locate potential business situations for investigation. The Company intends to commence, on a limited basis, the process of investigating possible merger and acquisition candidates, and believes that the Company's status as a publicly held corporation will enhance its ability to locate such potential business ventures. No assurance can be given as to when the Company may locate suitable business opportunities and such opportunities may be difficult to locate; however, the Company intends to actively search for potential business ventures for the foreseeable future.
Business opportunities, if any arise, are expected to become available to the Company principally from the personal contacts of our officer and director. While it is not expected that the Company will engage professional firms specializing in business acquisitions or reorganizations, such firms may be retained if funds become available in the future, and if deemed advisable. Opportunities may thus become available from professional advisors, securities broker-dealers, venture capitalists, members of the financial community, and other sources of unsolicited proposals. In certain circumstances, the Company may agree to pay a finder's fee or other form of compensation, including perhaps one-time cash payments, payments based upon a percentage of revenues or sales volume, and/or payments involving the issuance of securities, for services provided by persons who submit a business opportunity in which the Company shall decide to participate, although no contracts or arrangements of this nature presently exist. The Company is unable to predict at this time the cost of locating a suitable business opportunity.
The analysis of business opportunities will be undertaken by or under the supervision of the Company's management. Current management does not have significant experience in evaluating potential mergers or acquisitions. Among the factors which management will consider in analyzing potential business opportunities are the available technical, financial and managerial resources; working capital and financial requirements; the history of operation, if any; future prospects; the nature of present and anticipated competition; potential for further research, developments or exploration; growth and expansion potential; the perceived public recognition or acceptance of products or services; name identification, and other relevant factors.
It is not possible at present to predict the exact matter in which the Company may participate in a business opportunity. Specific business opportunities will be reviewed and, based upon such review, the appropriate legal structure or method of participation will be decided upon by management. Such structures and methods may include, without limitation, leases, purchase and sale agreements, licenses, joint ventures; and may involve merger, consolidation or reorganization. The Company may act directly or indirectly through an interest in a partnership, corporation or reorganization. However, it is most likely that any acquisition of a business venture the Company would make would be by conducting a reorganization involving the issuance of the Company's restricted securities. Such a reorganization may involve a merger (or combination pursuant to state corporate statutes, where one of the entities dissolves or is absorbed by the other), or it may occur as a consolidation, where a new entity is formed and the Company and such other entity combine assets in the new entity. A reorganization may also occur, directly or indirectly, through subsidiaries, and there is no assurance that the Company would be the surviving entity. Any such reorganization could result in loss of control of a majority of the shares. The Company's present director may be required to resign in connection with reorganization. Substantial dilution of percentage equity ownership may result to the shareholders, in the discretion of management.
The Company may choose to enter into a venture involving the acquisition of or merger with a company, which does not need substantial additional capital but desires to establish a public trading market of its securities. Such a company may desire to consolidate its operations with the Company through a merger, reorganization, asset acquisition, or other combination, in order to avoid possible adverse consequences of undertaking its own public offering. (Such consequences might include expense, time delays or loss of voting control). In the event of such a merger, the Company may be required to issue significant additional shares, and it may be anticipated that control over the Company's affairs may be transferred to others.
As part of their investigation of acquisition possibilities, the Company's management may meet with executive officers of the business and its personnel; inspect its facilities; obtain independent analysis or verification of the information provided, and conduct other reasonable measures, to the extent permitted by the Company's limited resources and management's limited expertise. Generally, the Company intends to analyze and make a determination based upon all available information without reliance upon any single factor as controlling.
In all likelihood, the Company's management will be inexperienced in the areas in which potential businesses will be investigated and in which the Company may make an acquisition or investment. Thus, it may become necessary for the Company to retain consultants or outside professional firms to assist management in evaluating potential investments, and to hire managers or outside professional firms to assist management in evaluating potential investments, and to hire managers to run or oversee the operations of its acquisitions of investments. The Company can give no assurance that we will be able to find suitable consultants or managers. The Company has no policy regarding the use of consultants, however, if management, in its discretion, determines that it is in the best interests of the Company, management may seek consultants to review potential merger or acquisitions candidates. There are currently no contracts or agreements between any consultant and any companies that are searching for "shell" companies with which to merge.
It may be anticipated that the investigation of specific business opportunities and the negotiation, drafting and execution of relevant agreements, disclosure documents and other instruments will require substantial management time and attention, and substantial costs for accountants, attorneys and others. Should a decision thereafter be made not to participate in a specific business opportunity, it is likely that costs already expended would not be recoverable. It is likely, in the event a transaction should eventually fail to be consummated, for any reason, that the costs incurred by the Company would not be recoverable. The Company's officer and director are entitled to reimbursement for all expenses incurred in their investigation of possible business ventures on behalf of the Company, and no assurance can be given that if the Company has available funds they will not be depleted by such expenses.
Based on current economic and regulatory conditions, management believes that it is possible, if not probable, for a company like the Company, without assets or many liabilities, to negotiate a merger or acquisition with a viable private company. The opportunity arises principally because of the high legal and accounting fees and the length of time associated with the registration process of "going public." However, should any of these conditions change, it is very possible that there would be little or no economic value for anyone taking over control of the Company.
Management of the Company believes the best chance to obtain value for the shareholders is to seek a merger or acquisition with an existing business. At this time, management has been unable to locate any potential mergers or acquisitions.
Management is not able to determine the time or resources that will be necessary to locate and acquire or merge with a business prospect. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to acquire an interest in any such prospects, products or opportunities that may exist or that any activity of the Company, regardless of the completion of any transaction, will be profitable.
If and when the Company locates a business opportunity, management of the Company will give consideration to the dollar amount of that entity's profitable operations and the adequacy of its working capital in determining the terms and conditions under which the Company would consummate such an acquisition. Potential business opportunities, no matter which form they may take, will most likely result in substantial dilution for the Company's shareholders due to the issuance of stock to acquire such an opportunity.
We are an emerging growth company with limited operations. As of January 31, 2018 and 2017, we had total assets of $2,250 and $188, respectively, and total liabilities of $127,145 and $128,145, respectively. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses in the next 12 months while we explore new business opportunities and generate positive cash flow. We expect we will require additional capital to meet our short term operating requirements. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity or debt securities or by further contributions from our sole Officer and Director.
Year Ended January 31, 2018 Compared to the Year Ended January 31, 2017
Revenues
During the twelve-month period ending January 31, 2018 and 2017, the Company did not generate any revenues.
Operating Expenses
During the twelve month period ended January 31, 2018, we incurred general and administrative expenses and professional fees of $40,938 compared to $25,516 incurred during the period ended January 31, 2017. General and administrative and professional fee expenses were generally related to corporate overhead, and financial and administrative contracted services, such as legal, accounting, and developmental costs.
Net Losses
Our net loss for the year ended January 31, 2018 was $40,938 compared to a net loss of $25,516 during the period ended January 31, 2017. The major reason for the increase of our net loss was due to a charge for the impairment of intangible assets.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of January 31, 2018 our current assets were $2,250 compared to $188 as of the end of the prior fiscal year. The major reason for the increase in current assets was due to loans made from a related party.
As of January 31, 2018, our current liabilities were $127,145 compared to $128,145 in current liabilities at January 31,2017. The decrease in the current liabilities was primarily due to the forgiveness of $24,000 in debt by a related partyand the accrual of management fees of $10,000 net related party loans in the amount of $13,000.
As at January 31, 2018 the Company had $2,250 cash on hand, and had incurred a net loss of $40,938 during the year ended January 31, 2018. Further losses are anticipated in the development of its business, raising substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company generating profitable operations in the future and, or, to obtain the necessary financing to meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. There is no assurance that these events will be satisfactorily completed.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended January 31, 2018, net cash flows used in operating activities was $10,938 compared to cash flows used in operating activities in the prior year of $1,016. The reason for the decrease in cash flows from operations from the prior year was a decrease in current liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We neither generated nor used funds in investing activities during the years ended January 31, 2018 or,2017.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended January 31, 2018, financing activities provided $13,000 compared to having used $1,898 in the prior period ended January 31, 2017. The reason for the increase is due to an increase in net related party loans proceeds of $13,000.
PLAN OF OPERATION AND FUNDING
We expect that working capital requirements will continue to be funded through a combination of our existing funds and further issuances of securities for the short term until acquisition are identified and in place generating positive cash flow. Our working capital requirements are expected to increase in line with the growth of our business.
We have no existing working capital or any anticipated cash flow. Further advances and debt instruments are expected to be adequate to fund our operations over the next twelve months.
We have no lines of credit or other bank financing arrangements. Generally, we have financed operations to date through the proceeds of the private placement of equity and debt instruments. In connection with our business plan, management anticipates additional increases in operating expenses and capital expenditures relating to: (i) acquisition of inventory; (ii) developmental expenses associated with a start-up business; and (iii) marketing expenses (iv) acquiring existing entertainment train operations. We intend to finance these expenses with further issuances of securities, and debt issuances. Thereafter, we expect we will need to raise additional capital and generate revenues to meet short-term operating requirements. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current shareholders. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.
GOING CONCERN
As a result of our net loss from operations, net cash used in operations, deficit accumulated as of January 31, 2018, our ability to continue as a going concern is in substantial doubt. Our ability to continue as a going concern is subject to the ability of the Company to generate profits from operations and/or obtaining the necessary funding from outside sources. Management's plan to address the Company's ability to continue as a going concern includes (i) obtaining funding from private placement sources; (ii) obtaining additional funding from the sale of the Company's securities; and (iii) obtaining loans from shareholders as necessary, (iv) acquiring existing entertainment trains to generate cash flow from operations. Although management believes that it will be able to obtain the necessary funding and acquisitions to allow the Company to remain a going concern, and to pursue its's acquisition strategy through the methods discussed above, there can be no assurances that such methods will prove successful.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The Company has reviewed all recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and does not believe the future adoption of any such pronouncements may be expected to cause a material impact on its financial condition or results of its operations as reported in its financial statements
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
Generally, all forms of share-based payments, including stock option grants, restricted stock grants and stock appreciation rights, are measured at their fair value on the awards grant date, and based on the estimated number of awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Share-based payment awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable. The expense resulting from share-based payments are recorded as a component of general and administrative expense.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of the date of this report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.