Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Please read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes thereto included under Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
NortonLifeLock Inc. has the largest Consumer Cyber Safety platform in the world, empowering nearly 80 million users in more than 150 countries. We are the trusted and number one top of mind brand in consumer Cyber Safety, according to the 2020 NortonLifelock brand tracking study. We help prevent, detect, and restore potential damages caused by many cyber criminals.
We have utilized and expect to continue to utilize acquisitions to contribute to our long-term growth objectives. During fiscal year 2021, we completed the acquisition of Avira, which provides a consumer-focused portfolio of cybersecurity and privacy solutions primarily in Europe and key emerging markets. We believe this acquisition will help accelerate our international growth.
Fiscal Year Highlights
•In May 2020, we settled the $625 million principal and conversion rights of our 2.0% Convertible Notes for $1,176 million in cash. The repayments resulted in an adjustment to stockholders’ equity of $578 million and a gain on extinguishment of $20 million.
•In July 2020, we completed the sale of our Culver City property for cash consideration of $118 million, net of selling costs, and recognized a gain on sale of $35 million.
•In September 2020, we borrowed $750 million under the Delayed Draw Term Loan, maturing in 2024, and used the entire amount of the proceeds to repay in full the principal and accrued interest under our 4.2% Senior Notes due September 2020. The first amendment to our credit agreement, executed in May 2021, extends the maturity date from November 2024 to May 2026 for this tranche. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•In October 2020, we entered into multiple agreements with Broadcom for an aggregate amount of $200 million to license Broadcom’s enterprise software and security engines and to resolve all outstanding payments and claims related to the asset purchase and transition services agreement.
•In December 2020, we substantially completed our restructuring plan (the November 2019 Plan) in connection with the strategic decision to divest our Enterprise Security business. We incurred total costs of $509 million since the inception of the November 2019 Plan, excluding stock-compensation expense, primarily related to workforce reduction, contract termination, and asset write-offs and impairment charges.
•In January 2021, we completed the acquisition of Avira for total aggregate consideration of $344 million, net of $32 million cash acquired.
•On April 1, 2021, we completed the sale of certain land and buildings in Mountain View for cash consideration of $100 million, net of selling costs, and recognized a gain on sale of $63 million.
Fiscal calendar and basis of presentation
We have a 52/53-week fiscal year ending on the Friday closest to March 31. Fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 in this report refers to fiscal year ended April 2, 2021, April 3, 2020, and March 29, 2019, respectively. Fiscal 2020 was a 53-week year, whereas fiscal 2021 and 2019 each consisted of 52 weeks.
Key financial metrics
The following table provides our key financial metrics for fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020:
•Net revenues increased $61 million, primarily due to increased sales of our consumer security products and our identity and protection products, partially offset by the divestiture of our ID Analytics solutions and the additional week of revenue recognized during fiscal 2020.
•Operating income increased $541 million, primarily due to lower compensation expense, outside services expense, and facility and IT costs that were driven by our cost reduction programs, partially offset by a legal accrual relating to an ongoing civil lawsuit involving a government contract with the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA).
•Income from continuing operations increased $118 million, primarily due to higher operating income, gain on sale of our Culver City and certain Mountain View properties, gain on extinguishment of debt, and lower income tax expense, partially offset by the absence of the $379 million gain on sale of our equity method investment in DigiCert and the $250 million gain on the sale of our ID Analytics solutions, which were divested in fiscal 2020.
•We incurred a loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, compared to a gain during the corresponding period in fiscal 2020, primarily due to the absence of gain on the sale of certain of our Enterprise Security assets and certain liabilities to Broadcom Inc. (the “Broadcom sale”), the absence of operating income as a result of the Broadcom sale, and a settlement with Broadcom in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 of all outstanding payments and certain claims related to the Broadcom sale.
•Net income and net income per share decreased, primarily due to the loss from discontinued operations for the reasons discussed above, partially offset by higher income from continuing operations.
•Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments decreased by $1,312 million compared to April 3, 2020, primarily due to repayment of debt, net of borrowings, and to a lesser extent, payments for dividends and dividend equivalents, and payment for acquisitions. The payments were partially offset by net cash provided by operating activities and proceeds from the sale of our Culver City and certain Mountain View properties. In May 2020, we settled the principal and conversion rights of $625 million of our 2.0% Convertible Notes for $1,176 million in cash.
•Contract liabilities increased $189 million compared to April 3, 2020, primarily due to higher billings than recognized revenue and the acquisition of Avira.
COVID-19 UPDATE
The COVID-19 pandemic is having widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. To protect the health and well-being of our employees, partners and third-party service providers, we implemented a near company-wide work-from-home requirement for most employees, made substantial modifications to employee travel policies, and cancelled or shifted our conferences and other marketing events to virtual-only. We continue to monitor the situation and plan to adjust our current policies as recommendations and public health guidance is changing. To date, we have not seen any meaningful negative impact on our customer success efforts, sales and marketing efforts, or employee productivity. Nevertheless, as employees, partners or third-party services providers return to work during the COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of inadvertent transmission of COVID-19 through human contact could still occur and result in litigation.
The U.S. and global economies have experienced a recession due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we did not experience a material increase in cancellations by customers or a material reduction in our retention rate in
2021, we may experience such an increase or reduction in the future, especially in the event of a prolonged recession as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. A prolonged recession could adversely affect demand for our offerings, retention rates and harm our business and results of operations, particularly in light of the fact that our solutions are discretionary purchases and thus may be more susceptible to macroeconomic pressures, as well impact the value of our common stock, ability to refinance our debt, and our access to capital.
The duration and extent of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately forecasted at this time, such as the severity and transmission rate of new variants of the disease, the extent, effectiveness and acceptance of containment actions, such as vaccination programs, and the impact of these and other factors on our employees, customers, partners and third-party service providers. For more information on the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, please see “Risk Factors” in Item 1A.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (GAAP) requires us to make estimates, including judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates on a regular basis and make changes accordingly. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed, and the resulting amounts are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Making estimates and judgments about future events is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Business combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The allocation of purchase price requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed especially with respect to intangible assets.
Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from customer relationships, developed technology, trade names, and acquired patents, and discount rates. Management estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Third-party valuation specialists are also utilized for certain estimates. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates, or actual results.
Income taxes
We are subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. We are required to estimate the current tax exposure as well as assess the temporary differences between the accounting and tax treatment of assets and liabilities, including items such as accruals and allowances not currently deductible for tax purposes. We apply judgment in the recognition and measurement of current and deferred income taxes which includes the following critical accounting estimates.
We use a two-step process to recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. If we determine that the tax position will more likely than not be sustained on audit, the second step requires us to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as this requires us to determine the probability of various outcomes. We re-evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit, and new audit activity. Such a change in recognition or measurement would result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision in the period.
Loss contingencies
We are subject to contingencies that expose us to losses, including various legal and regulatory proceedings, asserted and potential claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. An estimated loss from such contingencies is recognized as a charge to income if it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether a loss is reasonably estimable. We review the status of each significant matter quarterly, and we may revise our estimates. Until the final resolution of such matters, there may be an exposure to loss in excess of the amount recorded, and such amounts could be material. Should any of our estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements for that reporting period.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth our Consolidated Statements of Operations data as a percentage of net revenues for the periods indicated:
Note: The percentages may not add due to rounding.
Net revenues
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020
Net revenues increased $61 million primarily due to a $91 million increase in sales of our consumer security products and a $60 million increase in sales of our identity and protection products. This was driven by the increase in our direct customer count year-over-year, and stable annual retention rate and average revenue per user (ARPU) in fiscal 2021. The increase was partially offset by a $46 million decrease as a result of the divestiture of our ID Analytics solutions in January 2020 and $44 million of revenue recognized during an additional week in fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019
Net revenues increased $34 million primarily due to approximately $44 million of revenues from the additional week in fiscal 2020.
Performance Metrics
We regularly monitor a number of metrics in order to measure our current performance and estimate our future performance. Our metrics may be calculated in a manner different than similar metrics used by other companies.
The following table summarizes supplemental key performance metrics for our solutions:
(1) Direct customer revenues in fiscal 2021 excludes a $5 million reduction of revenue from a contract liability purchase accounting adjustment recognized during the last quarter due to the acquisition of Avira. Direct customer revenues in fiscal 2020 and 2019 excludes $46 million and $48 million, respectively, of revenue from ID Analytics solutions, which were divested in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
(2) Average direct customer count for fiscal 2021 is calculated as an average of the fiscal quarters. The average direct customer count for the fourth fiscal quarter was pro-rated to include 1.6 million customers from the Avira acquisition.
(3) ARPU in fiscal 2020 was normalized to exclude the impact of the extra week on direct revenue, which we estimate to be approximately $41 million of direct customer revenue. Excluding this adjustment, ARPU would have been $9.07 in fiscal 2020.
We define direct customer revenues as revenues from sales of our consumer solutions to direct customers, which we define as active paid users who have a direct billing relationship with us at the end of the reported period. Users with multiple products or entitlements are counted for based on which solutions they are subscribed. We exclude users on free trials and promotions and users who have indirectly purchased our product or services through partners unless such users convert or renew their subscriptions directly with us.
From time to time, we update our methodology due to changes in the business. In fiscal 2021, the average direct customer count calculation has been refined primarily to pro-rate for acquisitions that happen during a quarter, such as Avira, which was acquired in January 2021. The full year average direct customer count is calculated as an average across the quarters. This change in methodology had an immaterial impact to historical amounts presented.
ARPU is calculated as estimated direct customer revenues for the period divided by the average direct customer count for the same period, expressed as a monthly figure. We monitor ARPU because it helps us understand the rate at which we are monetizing our consumer customer base.
Annual retention rate is defined as the number of direct customers who have more than a one-year tenure as of the end of the most recently completed fiscal period divided by the total number of direct customers as of the end of the period from one year ago. We monitor annual retention rate to evaluate the effectiveness of our strategies to improve renewals of subscriptions.
Net revenues by geographic region
Percentage of revenue by geographic region as presented below is based on the billing location of the customer.
Percentages may not add to 100% due to rounding.
The Americas include U.S., Canada, and Latin America; EMEA includes Europe, Middle East, and Africa; APJ includes Asia Pacific and Japan.
Percentage of revenue by geographic region remained consistent in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Cost of revenues
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020
Our cost of revenues decreased $31 million primarily due to decreases in royalty charges and technical support costs, partially offset by an increase in commissions, reflecting higher investments in affiliate marketing programs.
Fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019
Our cost of revenues decreased $62 million primarily due to decreases in technical support costs and service costs, partially offset by an increase in royalty charges. In addition, during fiscal 2019, we recorded higher inventory write-offs of $10 million due to our discontinuation of our consumer hardware product line.
Operating expenses
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020
Sales and marketing expense decreased $125 million primarily due to a $147 million decrease in shared facility and IT costs, partially offset by a $12 million increase in advertising and promotional expense.
Research and development expense decreased $61 million due to a $44 million decrease in shared facility and IT costs and a $17 million decrease in compensation, driven by lower headcount.
General and administrative expense decreased $153 million primarily due to a $70 million decrease in compensation expense, a $55 million decrease in shared facility and IT costs, and a $43 million decrease in outside services expense, partially offset by an additional legal accrual of $25 million in fiscal 2021 relating to an ongoing civil lawsuit involving a government contract with the GSA.
The overall decreases in our sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses were driven by our cost reduction initiatives.
Amortization of intangible assets was relatively flat compared to fiscal 2020.
Restructuring, transition and other costs decreased $105 million primarily due to a $50 million decrease of contract cancellation charges and a $59 million decrease in severance costs in connection with our November 2019 restructuring plan (the November 2019 Plan). The decrease was partially offset by a $11 million increase in asset write-offs and impairments. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our restructuring plans.
Fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019
Sales and marketing expense decreased $11 million primarily due to a $75 million decrease in compensation expense and allocated corporate costs, reflecting our cost reduction initiatives. These decreases were partially offset by a $64 million increase in advertising and promotional expense reflecting our higher investments in direct marketing programs.
Research and development expense decreased $92 million primarily due to a $77 million decrease in compensation expense and allocated corporate costs, and a $23 million decrease in outside services, reflecting our cost reduction initiatives.
General and administrative expense decreased $42 million primarily due to a $34 million decrease in compensation expense other than stock-based compensation and allocated corporate costs, and a $18 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense.
Amortization of intangible assets was relatively flat compared to fiscal 2019.
Restructuring, transition and other costs increased $45 million primarily due to $101 million of contract cancellation charges incurred in fiscal 2020, a $71 million increase in severance costs, a $45 million increase in asset impairments, and a $20 million increase in stock-based compensation. These increases were partially offset by $185 million costs related to transition projects incurred in fiscal 2019 that were completed by the end of that period.
Non-operating income (expense), net
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020
Non-operating income, net of expense, decreased $488 million primarily due the absence of the $379 million gain on sale of our equity method investment in DigiCert and the $250 million gain on the sale of our ID Analytics solutions, which were divested in fiscal 2020. The decrease was partially offset by the absence of loss from our equity interest in DigiCert, gain on sale of our Culver City property and certain Mountain View properties, and the gain on extinguishment of debt due to the repayment of our 2.0% Convertible Notes in fiscal 2021.
Fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019
Non-operating income, net of expense, increased $729 million primarily due to a $379 million gain on the sale of the DigiCert equity method investment and a $250 million gain on the sale of our ID Analytics solutions in fiscal 2020. In addition, our loss from equity interest that was divested in fiscal 2020 decreased $70 million and our interest income increased $38 million as a result of higher investments in money market funds purchased with proceeds from the Broadcom sale.
Provision for income taxes
We are a U.S.-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and international tax jurisdictions. Our results of operations would be adversely affected to the extent that our geographical mix of income becomes more weighted toward jurisdictions with higher tax rates and would be favorably affected to the extent the relative geographic mix shifts to lower tax jurisdictions. Any change in our mix of earnings is dependent upon many factors and is therefore difficult to predict.
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020
Our effective tax rate decreased primarily due to releases in uncertain tax positions and favorable withholding tax rulings.
Fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019
Our effective tax rate increased primarily due to an increase in income taxes from non-deductible goodwill, and an increase in income taxes as a result of the Altera Ninth Circuit Opinion. See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about the Altera Ninth Circuit Opinion.
Discontinued operations
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020
We incurred a loss from discontinued operations in fiscal 2021, compared to a gain during the corresponding period in fiscal 2020, primarily due to the absence of gain on the Broadcom sale, the absence of operating income as a result of the Broadcom sale, and a $200 million settlement with Broadcom in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 of all outstanding payments and certain claims related to the Broadcom sale.
Fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019
Income from discontinued operations in fiscal 2020 reflects a $5,434 million gain on the Broadcom sale and $2,122 million income tax expense primarily related to the gain. In addition, we recognized $261 million restructuring, transition and other costs in fiscal 2020, compared to $20 million in fiscal 2019.
LIQUIDITY, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND CASH REQUIREMENTS
Liquidity
We have historically relied on cash generated from operations, borrowings under credit facilities, issuances of debt, and proceeds from divestitures for our liquidity needs.
As of April 2, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of approximately $1.0 billion, of which $0.4 billion was held by our foreign subsidiaries. Our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are managed with the objective to preserve principal, maintain liquidity, and generate investment returns. The participation exemption system under current U.S. federal tax regulations generally allows us to make distributions of non-U.S. earnings to the U.S. without incurring additional U.S. federal tax; however, these distributions may be subject to applicable state or non-U.S. taxes. We have recognized deferred income taxes for local country income and withholding taxes that could be incurred on distributions of certain non-U.S. earnings or for outside basis differences in our subsidiaries.
We also have an undrawn revolving credit facility of $1 billion. The first amendment to our credit agreement, executed in May 2021, extends the maturity date from November 2024 to May 2026. For additional discussion on the amendment, see Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our principal cash requirements are primarily to meet our working capital needs and support on-going business activities, including payment of taxes and cash dividends, funding capital expenditures, servicing existing debt, repurchasing our common stock, and investing in business acquisitions.
Our capital allocation strategy is to balance driving stockholder returns, managing financial risk, and preserving our flexibility to pursue strategic options, including acquisitions. Historically, this has included a quarterly cash dividend, the repayment of debt, and the repurchase of our common stock.
Divestiture of Enterprise Security business
In fiscal 2020, we completed the sale of certain assets and the assumption of certain liabilities of our Enterprise Security business to Broadcom. During fiscal 2021, we paid approximately $70 million of U.S. and foreign income taxes as a result of the transaction.
On October 1, 2020, we entered into multiple agreements with Broadcom and paid an aggregate amount of $200 million. We licensed Broadcom’s enterprise software, multiple security engines and related telemetry for 5.6 years. In addition, we resolved all outstanding payments and certain claims related to the asset purchase and transition services agreements.
Debt
In May 2020, we settled the $625 million principal and conversion rights of our 2.0% Convertible Notes for $1,176 million in cash. In September 2020, we borrowed $750 million under the Delayed Draw Term Loan, maturing in November 2024, and used the entire amount of the proceeds to repay in full the principal and accrued interest under our 4.2% Senior Notes due September 2020. In March 2021, we made a $6 million quarterly principal payment on our initial term loan (the Initial Term Loan) and a $9 million quarterly principal payment on the Delayed Draw Term Loan. On May 7, 2021, we entered into the first amendment to our credit agreement, which provides an additional five year term loan (the First Amendment Additional Term Loan), and extends the maturity date of the Initial Term Loan, the Delayed Draw Term Loan, and revolving credit facility from November 2024 to May 2026. For additional discussion on the amendment, see Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In May 2021, we entered into a Convertible Notes Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) under which we agreed to repurchase $250 million in aggregate principal amount of our new 2.50% convertible senior notes due 2022. Under the terms of the Agreement, we paid an aggregate of $365 million on May 20, 2021, representing $24.40 per underlying share into which the notes are convertible, accrued and unpaid interest through the date of settlement, and a portion of the cash dividend that we declared on May 10, 2021 . For additional discussion on the Agreement, see Note 19 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Sale of certain assets
On July 27, 2020, we completed the sale of our Culver City property for cash consideration of $118 million, net of selling costs.
On April 1, 2021, we completed the sale of certain land and buildings in Mountain View for cash consideration of $100 million, net of selling costs.
Acquisition of Avira
On January 8, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Avira for total aggregate cash consideration of $344 million, net of $32 million cash acquired.
Share repurchase program
During fiscal 2021, we executed repurchases of 15 million shares of our common stock under our existing share repurchase program for an aggregate amount of $304 million.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Cash from operating activities
Fiscal 2021
Our cash from operating activities in fiscal 2021 reflected net income of $554 million, adjusted by non-cash items, primarily consisting of amortization and depreciation of $150 million, impairments of current and long-lived assets of $90 million, stock-based compensation expense of $81 million, deferred income taxes of $42 million, and gain on sale of properties of $98 million.
Changes in operating assets and liabilities during fiscal 2021 consisted primarily of the following:
Contract liabilities increased $118 million, primarily due to higher billings than recognized revenue.
Accounts payable decreased $44 million, primarily due to a reduction in operating costs in connection with our November 2019 Plan, which was completed during fiscal 2021.
Income taxes payable decreased $299 million primarily due to tax payments made during fiscal 2021, including payments related to the Broadcom sale, payments of federal and foreign income taxes, and a decrease as a result of favorable tax rulings. During fiscal 2021, we made aggregate tax payments of $341 million related to these transactions.
Fiscal 2020
Our cash flows for fiscal 2020 reflected net income of $3,887 million, adjusted by non-cash items, primarily consisting of gains on divestitures of $5,684 million and a gain on the sale of our equity method investment of $379 million, amortization and depreciation of $361 million, and stock-based compensation of $312 million.
Changes in operating assets and liabilities during fiscal 2020 consisted primarily of the following:
Accounts receivable decreased $583 million, primarily due to the collections of receivables related to our Enterprise Security solutions. Such receivables were not included in the assets that were sold in connection with the Broadcom sale.
Contract liabilities decreased $121 million, primarily due to seasonally higher recognized revenue from our Enterprise Security solutions than billings during the period prior to the Broadcom sale.
Accrued compensation and benefits decreased $117 million, primarily due to a decrease in headcount as a result of the Broadcom sale and our restructuring activities.
Income taxes payable increased $383 million primarily due to taxes owed on the Broadcom sale and the sale of our DigiCert equity method investment. During fiscal 2020, we made aggregate tax payments of $2 billion related to these transactions.
Cash from investing activities
Our cash flows used in investing activities in fiscal 2021 primarily consisted of payment for the Avira acquisition of $344 million, net of $32 million cash acquired, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of our Culver City and certain Mountain View properties of $218 million and proceeds from maturities and sales of short-term investments of $68 million.
Our investing activities in fiscal 2020 primarily consisted of $10,918 million in net proceeds from the Broadcom sale and the divestiture of our ID Analytics solutions and $380 million from the sale of our equity method investment in DigiCert.
Cash from financing activities
Our financing activities in fiscal 2021 primarily consisted of repayments of debt of $1,941 million in connection with the settlement of our 2.0% Convertible Notes, repayments of our 4.2% Senior Notes, and quarterly principal payments of our Initial Term Loan and Delayed Draw Term Loan, payment of dividends and dividend equivalents of $373 million, and repurchases of common stock of $304 million, partially offset by proceeds from issuance of debt of $750 million under our Delayed Draw Term Loan.
Our financing activities in fiscal 2020 primarily consisted of payments of dividends and dividend equivalents of $7,481 million, repurchases of common stock of $1,581 million, debt repayments of $868 million, consisting of $552 million in principal and a $316 million cash settlement of the equity rights associated with our Senior Convertible notes, and cash consideration of $546 million paid in connection with the exchange of convertible debt.
Cash requirements
Debt - As of April 2, 2021, our total outstanding principal amount of indebtedness is summarized as follows. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about our debt.
Debt covenant compliance - The credit agreement we entered into in November 2019, which was amended and extended through May 2026 on May 7, 2021, contains customary representations and warranties, non-financial covenants for financial reporting, affirmative and negative covenants, including a covenant that we maintain a consolidated leverage ratio of not more than 5.25 to 1.0, or 5.75 to 1.0 if we acquire assets or business in an aggregate amount greater than $250 million, and restrictions on indebtedness, liens, investments, stock repurchases, and dividends (with exceptions permitting our regular quarterly dividend and other specific capital returns). As of April 2, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt covenants.
Dividends - On May 10, 2021, we announced a cash dividend of $0.125 per share of common stock to be paid in June 2021. Any future dividends will be subject to the approval of our Board of Directors.
Stock repurchases - Under our stock repurchase program, we may purchase shares of our outstanding common stock through accelerated stock repurchase transactions, open market transactions (including through trading plans intended to qualify under Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act,) and privately-negotiated transactions. As of April 2, 2021, the remaining balance of our stock repurchase authorization is $274 million and does not have an expiration date. On May 4, 2021, our Board of Directors approved an incremental share repurchase authorization of $1,500 million, bringing the total authorized amount under the stock repurchase program to $1,774 million. The authorization does not have an expiration date. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including price, general business and market conditions, and other investment opportunities.
Restructuring - Under our restructuring plans approved by our Board of Directors in November 2019 and December 2020, we have incurred cash expenditures primarily for severance and termination benefits, contract terminations, and other exit and disposal costs. The November 2019 Plan was completed in fiscal 2021 with total cash payments of $139 million during the fiscal year. As of April 2, 2021, we estimate that we will incur total costs up to $20 million in connection with the December 2020 Plan. During fiscal 2021, we made $9 million in cash payments related to the December 2020 Plan. These actions are expected to be
completed in fiscal 2022. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further cash flow information associated with our restructuring activities.
Contractual obligations
The following is a schedule of our significant contractual obligations as of April 2, 2021, including those associated with our discontinued operations. The expected timing of payments of the obligations in the following table is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different, depending on the time of receipt of goods or services, or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
(1)Interest payments were calculated based on the contractual terms of the related Senior Notes, Convertible Senior Notes, and credit facility. Interest on variable rate debt was calculated using the interest rate in effect as of April 2, 2021. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on the Senior Notes, Convertible Senior Notes, and Term loans.
(2)These amounts are associated with agreements for purchases of goods or services generally including agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. The table above also includes agreements to purchase goods or services that have cancellation provisions requiring little or no payment. The amounts under such contracts are included in the table above because management believes that cancellation of these contracts is unlikely, and we expect to make future cash payments according to the contract terms or in similar amounts for similar materials.
(3)These amounts represent the transition tax on previously untaxed foreign earnings of foreign subsidiaries under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which may be paid through July 2025.
(4)We have entered into various non-cancelable operating lease agreements that expire on various dates through fiscal 2028. The amounts in the table above exclude expected sublease income. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on leases.
Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits and other long-term taxes as of April 2, 2021, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. Therefore, $525 million in long-term income taxes payable has been excluded from the contractual obligations table. See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Indemnifications
In the ordinary course of business, we may provide indemnifications of varying scope and terms to customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, subsidiaries, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of our breach of agreements or representations and warranties made by us. In connection with the sale of Veritas and the sale of our Enterprise Security business to Broadcom, we assigned several leases to Veritas Technologies LLC or Broadcom and/or their related subsidiaries. In addition, our bylaws contain indemnification obligations to our directors, officers, employees, and agents, and we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain of our officers to give such directors and officers additional contractual assurances regarding the scope of the indemnification set forth in our bylaws and to provide additional procedural protections. We maintain director and officer insurance, which may cover certain liabilities arising from our obligation to indemnify our directors and officers. Refer to Note 18 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our indemnifications.