Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to assist you in understanding our results of operations and our present financial condition and contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. We caution you that our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors,” all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
There is limited historical financial information about our Company upon which to base an evaluation of our future performance. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our hemp businesses. We are subject to risks inherent in a small company, including limited capital resources, delays and cost overruns due to price and cost increases. There is no assurance that future financing will be available to our company on acceptable terms. Additional equity financing could result in dilution to existing shareholders.
Overview
Generation Hemp was initially incorporated on July 28, 2008 in the State of Colorado. On November 27, 2019, we completed the Transaction with EHR. As part of the Transaction, we changed our name from Home Treasure Finders, Inc. to Generation Hemp, Inc. We own approximately 94% of the issued and outstanding common stock of EHR.
At December 31, 2020, EHR held an 8% working interest in certain oil and gas and/ or oil, gas and mineral leases, lands interests, and other properties located in Cochran County. EHR’s oil & gas activities are currently held for sale and are presented in the consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations for each of the periods presented.
The Transaction was accounted for as a reverse merger, whereby EHR is considered to be the accounting acquirer and became a majority-owned subsidiary of the Company. Accordingly, the Company’s historical financial statements prior to the reverse merger were and will be replaced with the historical financial statements of EHR prior to the reverse merger and in this and all future filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) There is limited historical financial information about our Company upon which to base an evaluation of our future performance. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in the hemp businesses. We are subject to risks inherent in a small company, including limited capital resources, delays and cost overruns due to price and cost increases. There is no assurance that future financing will be available to our Company on acceptable terms. Additional equity financing could result in dilution to existing shareholders.
How the Company Generates Revenue
We generate revenue from rental of our “Cannabis Zoned” (Hemp) warehouse property located in Denver, Colorado leased to a hemp seed company.
Our Costs and Expenses of Conducting Business
The principal costs and expenses involved in conducting our business are real estate holding costs (interest, taxes, depreciation and maintenance costs). We incur general and administrative expenses for our management, contract labor, professional fees and other costs of being a public company. We also incur costs in seeking acquisitions and financings of our business.
Subsequent Acquisition of Assets of Halcyon Thruput, LLC
On January 11, 2021, we completed the acquisition of certain assets of Halcyon Thruput, LLC (“Halcyon Thruput”). The Company will continue Halcyon Thruput’s business of providing post-harvest and midstream services to growers by drying, processing, cleaning, stripping harvested hemp directly from the field and wetbaled at its 48,000 square foot facility located in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. Additionally, the Company will offer safe storage services for processed hemp, which enables farmers to maximize strategic market timing. The midstream business is fee income oriented, based upon a price per pound of material handled, and therefore is more protected from significant commodity price variations. The facility is able to process approximately 10,000 wet pounds per hour and in development are plans to scale up to 20,000 wet pounds per hour in order to meet market demands as licensed and harvested hemp acreage continues to dramatically increase across Kentucky and Tennessee.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.6 million as compared with a net loss of $8.1 million for 2019. The larger loss in 2019 was principally caused by higher impairment expenses as discussed further below.
The Company reports its oil & gas activities as discontinued operations. The loss from discontinued operations was $34 thousand in 2020 as compared with $1.0 million in 2019.
The Company’s continuing operations were limited in 2020 and 2019 to merger and acquisition activities including preparing for and closing the Transaction and the pending acquisition of Halcyon Thruput. We are active within the “hemp” space and intent to grow by acquisition of businesses and assets within the hemp industry.
Revenue. Revenue from continuing operations was limited in 2020 and 2019. The Company leases its Denver warehouse under a lease for $7,500 per month. We recognized one month of rental revenue in 2019 since closing of the Transaction on November 27, 2019. We recognized rental revenue each month of 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization. Total depreciation and amortization expense was $71 thousand in 2020 and $16 thousand in 2019. We expect higher levels of depreciation expense as our asset base grows.
Impairment Expense. Goodwill totaling $5.0 million was recorded in the Transaction. An impairment analysis performed as of the date of closing showed that the recorded goodwill was fully impaired. As such, goodwill impairment expense of $5.0 million was recorded in 2019 subsequent to the Transaction. The Company also recognized a $247 thousand impairment of its right-to-use asset for leased office space in 2019.
Merger and Acquisition Costs. We incurred $100 thousand of costs in evaluating acquisition opportunities in 2020 and $512 thousand in 2019. The amount of future expenses of this type that we incur will depend upon our future acquisition activities.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expenses totaled $1.1 million in 2020 as compared with $997 thousand in 2019. These expenses include legal and accounting costs of being a public company. Our general and administrative expenses will increase as we commence greater operations and expand our management team.
Other Income/Expense. Other expense, net totaled $296 thousand for 2020 as compared with $394 thousand for 2019 and includes interest income, interest expense and the change in fair value of marketable securities. Higher interest expense in 2020 was partially offset by a reduction in the unrealized loss recognized for the decline in value of a marketable equity security we hold for investment.
Loss from Discontinued Operations. In 2020, we recognized a loss from discontinued operations of $34 thousand as compared with $1.0 million in 2019. The major classes of line items constituting the loss on discontinued operations is presented in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 4-Discontinued Operations.”
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s oil and gas properties became impaired due to the market decline and the Company’s determination to exit the oil and gas business. Accordingly, impairment expense totaling $3.7 million was recorded within the loss from discontinued operations.
On March 1, 2019, the Company entered into a Termination, Repurchase and Release Agreement with Lubbock Energy Partners LLC (“LEP”) wherein the Company reassigned a 52% working interest in the oil & gas assets acquired in the San Andres Acquisition #1 back to LEP (with the Company continuing to hold an 8% working interest in those assets) in exchange for the return and cancellation of 412,500 shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock plus all accrued and unpaid dividends thereon and LEP’s assumption of the Company’s obligations under its Senior Subordinated Debentures totaling $400,000. Operatorship of the oil & gas assets was transferred by the Company to LEP, and amounts owed by the Company to LEP and all trade payables associated with the assets were memorialized in the form of a non-recourse promissory note totaling $1.1 million. The Company and LEP also entered into certain financial arrangements and mutual releases in order to settle all existing disputes relating to the assets arising prior to the effective date. The promissory note was due March 1, 2020, bore interest at 5% per annum and required no payments until maturity. The Company recognized a gain on disposal of $1,666,790 for this transaction within the loss from discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations in 2019. In May 2020, the $1.1 million non-recourse promissory note and accrued interest thereon was settled upon LEP’s foreclosure of the Company’s Gap Band property interest.
In May 2020, LEP completed the foreclosure of the Company’s remaining ownership interest in the Gap Band property due to the Company’s default on its $1.1 million non-recourse promissory note and accrued interest thereon. The Company recognized a gain of $24,008 in the second quarter of 2020 as a result of this disposal.
We recognized other income of $1.2 million as part of discontinued operations in 2019 for option and promote fees on oil & gas property interest transactions with third parties. We do not expect such activities in the future.
At December 31, 2020, EHR held an 8% working interest in certain oil and gas and/ or oil, gas and mineral leases, lands interests, and other properties located in Cochran County. Until we fully dispose of these remaining oil & gas property interests, we expect that future revenues and costs will be substantially lower than incurred in previous periods as our ownership interests are lower and production activities have declined substantially. We do not anticipate making future investment of growth capital into these properties.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary source of cash from continuing operations is limited presently to rental income for the lease of our hemp warehouse in Denver, Colorado. Our primary uses of cash include general and administrative expenses and merger and acquisition expenses.
Cash flow information from continuing operations was as follows:
● Cash used in operating activities during 2020 was $865 thousand; an improvement from the prior year primarily resulting from lower overall costs and expenses. The Company used $1.7 million of cash for operating activities in 2019.
● There were no cash flows from investing activities in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities was $135 thousand for 2019. Investing activities in 2019 was principally for purchases of property and equipment.
● Cash flows from financing activities were $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to net borrowings and private placements of common and preferred stock during the period including funding of the cash portions needed for the January 2021 acquisition of assets of Halcyon. Cash flows from financing activities were $1.3 million for 2019, which was primarily due to net borrowings and private placements of common and preferred stock during the period.
Cash flow information from discontinued operations was as follows:
● Cash flows from operating activities totaled $32 thousand during 2020 as compared with $162 thousand in 2019. The decline from the prior year primarily resulting from the lower oil & gas operating results.
● There were no cash flows from investing activities for discontinued operations in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities was $17 thousand for 2019 for capital expenditures. We significantly curtailed oil & gas development efforts in 2019 as we were making our decision to exit this business.
● There were no cash flows from financing activities for discontinued operations in 2020 or 2019.
Funding Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we grow our hemp business and add operational and financial personnel to handle the public company reporting and other requirements to which we will be subject.
We expect that we will require additional capital to fund operations, including hiring additional employees and completing acquisitions during the next twelve (12) month period.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our business, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● our success in identifying and making acquisitions of profitable operations;
● our ability to negotiate operating contracts with growers and others within the hemp industry on favorable terms, if at all;
● deriving revenue from our assets and operations; and
● the cost of such operations and costs of being a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our shareholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common shareholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our growth plans and future commercialization efforts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the amounts of revenue and expenses reported for the period then ended.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. These events and circumstances include, but are not limited to, a current expectation that a long-lived asset will be disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life, a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which we use a long-lived asset or a change in its physical condition.
When such events or changes in circumstances occur, a recoverability test is performed comparing projected undiscounted cash flows from the use and eventual disposition of an asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the projected undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount, an impairment is recorded for the excess of the carrying amount over the estimated fair value.
We make various assumptions, including assumptions regarding future cash flows in our assessments of long-lived assets for impairment. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on the current and long-term business plans related to the long-lived assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements.”