ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
Unless the context indicates otherwise, when we refer to “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company” in this Form 10-K, we are referring to Guess?, Inc. and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
COVID-19 Business Update
The COVID-19 pandemic, which is ongoing and dynamic in nature, has had and is continuing to have a material impact on the Company’s financial performance. Since the start of the pandemic, the Company has experienced various temporary retail store closures in key regions globally, including the closure of a significant majority of its stores during the first quarter of fiscal 2021. During the second quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company gradually reopened most of its global fleet of stores. Toward the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company started to incur a new round of government-mandated temporary store closures, mostly in Europe.
While the number of temporarily closed stores ebbed and flowed during the fourth quarter based on local conditions, the overall impact resulted in stores being closed for over 15% of the total days during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. As of January 30, 2021, approximately 70% of our stores were open, with the majority of closed stores located primarily in Europe and Canada. As of March 27, 2021, approximately 77% of our stores were open. The Company will continue to reopen stores (and/or close again, if appropriate) as governmental guidelines and local conditions permit or require, taking an informed, measured approach based on numerous factors. The Company’s e-commerce sites have remained open in all regions throughout the pandemic. In addition to the impact of store closures, retail stores that are open have and continue to experience significant reductions in traffic and revenue. Many of the Company’s wholesale and licensing partners have also substantially reduced their operations. The Company has brought back furloughed store associates and support staff as stores reopen. The extent and duration of the global pandemic remains uncertain and may continue to impact consumer purchasing activity in the foreseeable future.
During fiscal 2021, in addition to the negative impact from lower net revenue, the Company’s operating results reflected asset impairment charges as well as additional inventory valuation reserves and higher allowances for markdowns and doubtful accounts due to the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. These charges were partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses driven primarily by expense savings, both one-time, such as furloughs and temporary salary reductions, and permanent, such as headcount reductions and lower discretionary spending. In addition, the Company benefited from various government assistance programs related primarily to the recovery of employee payroll costs as well as certain favorable tax treatments.
During fiscal 2021, the Company implemented a number of measures to help mitigate the operating and financial impact of the pandemic, including: (i) furloughing its U.S. and Canada store associates and significant portions of its U.S. and Canada corporate and distribution center associates and permanently reducing U.S. corporate headcount; (ii) implementing temporary tiered salary reductions for management level corporate employees, including its executive officers; (iii) deferring annual merit increases; (iv) executing substantial reductions in expenses, store occupancy costs, capital expenditures and overall costs, including reduced inventory purchases; (v) working globally with country management teams to maximize the Company’s participation in all eligible government or other initiatives available to businesses or employees impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic; (vi) drawing down on certain credit facilities and entering into certain term loans to ensure financial flexibility and maintain maximum liquidity; (vii) engaging with landlords to negotiate rent deferrals or other rent concessions; (viii) working with vendors to extend payment terms; and (ix) postponing its decision related to the payment of its quarterly cash dividend.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2021, as the situation began to stabilize, the Company repaid a significant portion of its previously drawn down credit facilities, continued to bring back furloughed employees, eliminated the temporary tiered salary reductions and invested in share repurchases to return value to its shareholders. The Company also announced that it would resume paying its quarterly cash dividend beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, but decided to not declare any cash dividends for the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021.
Business Segments
The Company’s businesses are grouped into five reportable segments for management and internal financial reporting purposes: Americas Retail, Americas Wholesale, Europe, Asia and Licensing. Management evaluates segment performance based primarily on revenues and earnings (loss) from operations before corporate performance-based compensation costs, asset impairment charges, net gains (losses) from lease modifications, restructuring charges and certain non-recurring credits (charges), if any. The Americas Retail segment includes the Company’s retail and e-commerce operations in the Americas. The Americas Wholesale segment includes the Company’s wholesale operations in the Americas. The Europe segment includes the Company’s retail, e-commerce and wholesale operations in Europe and the Middle East. The Asia segment includes the Company’s retail, e-commerce and wholesale operations in Asia and the Pacific. The Licensing segment includes the worldwide licensing operations of the Company. The business segment operating results exclude corporate overhead costs, which consist of shared costs of the organization, asset impairment charges, net gains (losses) on lease modifications, restructuring charges and certain non-recurring credits (charges), if any. Corporate overhead costs are presented separately and generally include, among other things, the following unallocated corporate
costs: accounting and finance, executive compensation, corporate performance-based compensation, facilities, global advertising and marketing, human resources, information technology and legal. Information regarding these segments is summarized in “Part IV. Financial Statements - Note 18 - Segment Information” in this Form 10-K.
Products
We derive our net revenue from the sale of GUESS?, G by GUESS (GbG), GUESS Kids and MARCIANO apparel and our licensees’ products through our worldwide network of directly-operated and licensed retail stores, wholesale customers and distributors, as well as our online sites. During fiscal 2021, we made the decision to integrate our G by GUESS brand into our Factory business in order to drive further efficiencies. We also derive royalty revenue from worldwide licensing activities.
Foreign Currency Volatility
Since the majority of our international operations are conducted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar (primarily the British pound, Canadian dollar, Chinese yuan, euro, Japanese yen, Korean won, Mexican peso, Polish zloty, Russian rouble and Turkish lira), currency fluctuations can have a significant impact on the translation of our international revenues and earnings (loss) into U.S. dollars.
Some of our transactions that occur primarily in Europe, Canada, South Korea, China and Mexico are denominated in U.S. dollars, Swiss francs, British pounds and Russian roubles, exposing them to exchange rate fluctuations when these transactions (such as inventory purchases or periodic lease payments) are converted to their functional currencies. As a result, fluctuations in exchange rates can impact the operating margins of our foreign operations and reported earnings (loss), and are largely dependent on the transaction timing and magnitude during the period that the currency fluctuates. In addition, there are certain real estate leases which are denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the respective entity that entered into the agreement (primarily Swiss francs, Russian roubles and Polish zloty). As a result, the Company may be exposed to volatility related to unrealized gains or losses on the translation of present value of future lease payment obligations when translated at the exchange rate as of a reporting period-end. When these foreign exchange rates weaken versus the U.S. dollar at the time the respective U.S. dollar denominated payment is made relative to the payments made in the comparable period, our product margins could be unfavorably impacted.
During fiscal 2021, the average U.S. dollar rate was stronger against the Turkish lira, Canadian dollar, Mexican peso, Polish zloty, Russian rouble, and Korean won, and weaker against the euro, Chinese yuan, British pound and Japanese yen, compared to the average rate in fiscal 2020. This had an overall unfavorable impact on the translation of our international revenues and earnings from operations during fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year.
If the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to the respective fiscal 2021 foreign exchange rates, foreign exchange could negatively impact our revenues and operating results, as well as our international cash and other balance sheet items during fiscal 2022, particularly in Canada, Europe (primarily the euro, British pound, Turkish lira and Russian rouble) and Mexico. Alternatively, if the U.S. dollar weakens relative to the respective fiscal 2021 foreign exchange rates, our revenues and operating results, as well as our other cash balance sheet items, could be positively impacted by foreign currency fluctuations during fiscal 2022, particularly in these regions.
The Company enters into derivative financial instruments to offset some but not all of the exchange risk on foreign currency transactions. For additional discussion regarding our exposure to foreign currency risk, forward contracts designated as hedging instruments and forward contracts not designated as hedging instruments, refer to “Part II,