Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, beliefs, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following generally compares our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. A detailed discussion comparing our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
We are a leading precision oncology company focused on helping conquer cancer globally through use of our proprietary blood-based tests, vast data sets and advanced analytics. We believe that the key to conquering cancer is unprecedented access to its molecular information throughout all stages of the disease, which we intend to enable by a routine blood draw, or liquid biopsy. Our Guardant Health Oncology Platform is designed to leverage our capabilities in technology, clinical development, regulatory and reimbursement to drive commercial adoption, accelerate drug development, improve patient clinical outcomes and lower healthcare costs. In pursuit of our goal to manage cancer across all stages of the disease, we have launched our Guardant360, Guardant360 CDx, and GuardantOMNI liquid biopsy-based tests for advanced stage cancer and our Guardant Reveal liquid biopsy-based tests for residual and recurring cancer to first address the need in Stage II-III colorectal cancer. We are developing tests under our Guardant360 tissue program which aims to address challenges with tissue genotyping products currently available in the market and tests from our LUNAR program which aims to address the needs of early stage cancer patients with neoadjuvant and adjuvant treatment selection, cancer survivors with surveillance, and asymptomatic individuals eligible for cancer screening and individuals at a higher risk for developing cancer with early detection. We have also developed our GuardantINFORM platform to further accelerate precision oncology drug development by biopharmaceutical companies by offering them an in-silico research platform to unlock further insights into tumor evolution and treatment resistance across various biomarker-driven cancers.
We perform our tests in our clinical laboratory located in Redwood City, California. Our laboratory is certified pursuant to the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, or CLIA, accredited by the College of American Pathologists, or CAP, permitted by the New York State Department of Health, or NYSDOH, and licensed in California and four other states. In September 2020, we dual-launched our Guardant360 CDx and Guardant360 LDT tests. Our Guardant360 CDx test was the first comprehensive liquid biopsy test approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, to provide tumor mutation profiling for cancer patients with solid tumors and to be used as a companion diagnostic initially in connection with one therapeutic product of a biopharmaceutical customer.
In the United States, we market our tests to clinical customers through our sales organization, which is engaged in sales efforts and promotional activities primarily targeting oncologists and cancer centers. Outside the United States, we market our tests to clinical customers through distributors and direct contracts with healthcare institutions and partnerships with research organizations. We also market our tests to biopharmaceutical customers globally through our business development team, which promotes the broad utility of our tests throughout drug development and commercialization. Additionally, we have established a joint venture with SoftBank to accelerate commercialization of our products including in Asia, the Middle East and Africa.
We generated total revenue of $286.7 million, $214.4 million and $90.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We also incurred net losses of $246.3 million, $67.9 million and $84.3 million in
the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We have funded our operations to date principally from the sale of our common stock, the issuance of convertible senior notes, and revenue from our precision oncology testing and development services and other. In October 2018, we completed our initial public offering, or the IPO, selling 14,375,000 shares of our common stock and raising $249.5 million net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses payable by us. In May 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of a total of 5,175,000 shares of our common stock, through which we received net proceeds of $349.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. In June 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of a total of 4,312,500 shares of our common stock, through which we received net proceeds of $354.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. In November 2020, we issued our convertible senior notes with an aggregate principal amount of $1.15 billion. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of approximately $2.0 billion.
Factors affecting our performance
We believe there are several important factors that have impacted and that we expect will impact our operating performance and results of operations, including:
•Testing volume, pricing and customer mix. Our revenue and costs are affected by the volume of testing and mix of customers from period to period. We evaluate both the volume of tests that we perform for patients on behalf of clinicians and the number of tests we perform for biopharmaceutical companies. Our performance depends on our ability to retain and broaden adoption with existing customers, as well as attract new customers. We believe that the test volume we receive from clinicians and biopharmaceutical companies are indicators of growth in each of these customer verticals. Customer mix for our tests has the potential to significantly affect our results of operations, as the average selling price for biopharmaceutical sample testing is currently higher than our average reimbursement for clinical tests because we are not a contracted provider for, or our tests are not covered by clinical patients’ insurance for, the majority of the tests that we perform for patients on behalf of clinicians. Approximately 37%, 38% and 38% of our U.S. clinical tests for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were for Medicare beneficiaries.
•Payer coverage and reimbursement. Our revenue depends on achieving broad coverage and reimbursement for our tests from third-party payers, including both commercial and government payers. Precision oncology revenue from tests for clinical customers is calculated based on our expected cash collections, using the estimated variable consideration. The variable consideration is estimated based on historical collection patterns as well as the potential for changes in future reimbursement behavior by one or more payers. Estimation of the impact of the potential for changes in reimbursement requires significant judgment and considers payer' past patterns of changes in reimbursement as well as any stated plans to implement changes. Any cash collections over the expected reimbursement period exceeding the estimated variable consideration is recorded in future periods based on actual cash received. Payment from commercial payers can vary depending on whether we have entered into a contract with the payers as a “participating provider” or do not have a contract and are considered a “non-participating provider”. Payers often reimburse non-participating providers, if at all, at a lower amount than participating providers. Because we are not contracted with these payers, they determine the amount that they are willing to reimburse us for any of our tests and they can prospectively and retrospectively adjust the amount of reimbursement, adding to the complexity in estimating the variable consideration. When we contract with a payer to serve as a participating provider, reimbursements by the payer are generally made pursuant to a negotiated fee schedule and are limited to only covered indications or where prior approval has been obtained. Becoming a participating provider can result in higher reimbursement amounts for covered uses of our test and, potentially, no reimbursement for non-covered uses identified under the payer’s policies or the contract. As a result, the potential for more favorable reimbursement associated with becoming a participating provider may be offset by a potential loss of reimbursement for non-covered uses of our tests. Current Procedural Terminology, or CPT, coding plays a significant role in how our Guardant360 test is reimbursed both from commercial and governmental payers. In addition, Z-Code Identifiers are used by certain payers, including under Medicare's Molecular Diagnostic Services Program, or MolDx, to supplement CPT codes for molecular diagnostics tests such as our Guardant360 test. Changes to the codes used to report the Guardant360 test to payers may result in significant changes in its reimbursement. If a coding change were to occur, including as a result of the FDA approval of our Guardant360 test, payments for certain uses of the Guardant360 test could be reduced, put on hold, or eliminated by such payers. Cigna, Priority Health, multiple Blue Cross Blue Shield plans as well as the health plans associated with eviCore adopted policies that cover our Guardant360 test for the majority of NSCLC patients we test. If their policies were to change in the future to cover additional cancer indications, we anticipate that our total reimbursement would increase. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately 43%, 44% and 46% of our U.S. clinical tests were for
patients tested for NSCLC. In September 2018, we began to receive reimbursements from Medicare for claims submitted with respect to Guardant360 clinical tests performed for NSCLC patients. In March 2020, we began to receive reimbursement from Medicare for claims submitted, with respect to Guardant360 clinical tests performed for qualifying patients diagnosed with solid tumor cancers of non-central nervous system origin other than NSCLC. Following the FDA approval of our Guardant360 CDx test, a new Z-Code Identifier is expected to be issued, and a new pricing is expected to be established under MolDx for the Guardant360 CDx test. While we expect to continue to submit claims to Medicare for Guardant360 LDT clinical tests performed for such qualifying patients using the existing Z-Code Identifier, Medicare has instructed us to not submit claims to Medicare for Guardant360 CDx clinical tests until the new code is issued for the Guardant360 CDx test and the corresponding pricing is established. This new pricing for Guardant360 CDx clinical tests could be different from the current pricing for Guardant360 LDT clinical tests which could affect our future revenue. A proprietary laboratory analyses, or PLA code was issued for our Guardant360 CDx in January 2021 with an effective date in April 2021. Once the code is effective, all Guardant360 CDx services will be billed with this new code. Additionally, based on this new PLA code, we applied to CMS for our Guardant360 CDx test to become an advanced diagnostic laboratory test, or ADLT. If CMS grants ADLT status to the Guardant360 CDx test, for the first three quarters thereafter, we can only bill Medicare at the lowest available commercial rate at the launch of the test. After the initial three quarters, we can bill Medicare for Guardant360 CDx services at the median rate of claims paid by commercial payers. Changes to the codes used to bill a test to payers may result in significant changes in its reimbursement, which could negatively impact our revenue. As a result of implementing this new coding change for our Guardant360 CDx test, payments for Guardant360 CDx services could be reduced, put on hold, or eliminated by such payers. Due to the inherent variability and unpredictability of the reimbursement landscape, including related to the amount that payers reimburse us for any of our tests, previously recorded revenue adjustments are not indicative of future revenue adjustments from actual cash collections, which may fluctuate significantly. This variability and unpredictability could increase the risk of future revenue reversal and result in our failing to meet any previously publicly stated guidance we may provide.
•Biopharmaceutical customers. Our revenue also depends on our ability to attract, maintain and expand relationships with biopharmaceutical customers. As we continue to develop these relationships, we expect to support a growing number of clinical trials globally and continue to have opportunities to offer our platform to such customers for development services, including companion diagnostic development, novel target discovery and validation, as well as clinical trial enrollment. For example, our Guardant360, Guardant360 CDx and GuardantOMNI tests are being developed as companion diagnostics under collaborations with biopharmaceutical companies, including AstraZeneca, Amgen, Janssen Biotech and Radius Health.
•Research and development. A significant aspect of our business is our investment in research and development, including the development of new products. In particular, we have invested heavily in clinical studies as we believe these studies are critical to gaining physician adoption and driving favorable coverage decisions by payers. With respect to our LUNAR program, we initiated a prospective screening study, which we refer to as the ECLIPSE trial, aiming to recruit approximately 10,000 patients and evaluate the performance of our LUNAR-2 assay in detecting colorectal cancer in average-risk adults. In addition, we are investing very heavily in establishing clinical utility of our Guardant Reveal test in adjuvant treatment settings. In 2020, we launched three trials in collaboration with key cancer researchers: COBRA, a randomized controlled study, comprising over 1,400 low-risk stage-II colon cancer patients, ACT-3, comprising over 500 stage 3 colorectal cancer patients, and PEGASUS for the de-escalation of therapy, encompassing over 140 high-risk stage-II and stage-III colon cancer patients. We have expended considerable resources, and expect to increase such expenditures over the next few years, to support our research and development programs with the goal of fueling further innovation.
•International expansion. A component of our long-term growth strategy is to expand our commercial footprint internationally, and we expect to increase our sales and marketing expense to execute on this strategy. We currently offer our tests in countries outside the United States primarily through distributor relationships, direct contracts with hospitals or partnerships with research organizations. In May 2018, we formed and capitalized a joint venture, Guardant Health AMEA, Inc., which we refer to as the Joint Venture, with SoftBank, relating to the sale, marketing and distribution of our tests generally outside the Americas and Europe. We expect to rely on the Joint Venture to accelerate commercialization of our products in Asia, the Middle East and Africa.
•Sales and marketing expense. Our financial results have historically, and will likely continue to, fluctuate significantly based upon the impact of our sales and marketing expense, and in particular, our various marketing programs around existing and new product introductions.
•General and administrative expense. Our financial results have historically, and will likely continue to, fluctuate significantly based upon the impact of our general and administrative expense, and in particular, our stock-based compensation expense. Our equity awards, including market-based restricted stock units and performance-based restricted stock units, are intended to retain and incentivize employees to lead us to sustained, long-term superior financial and operational performance.
•COVID-19 Global Pandemic. The global outbreak of coronavirus 2019, or COVID-19, has disrupted, and we expect will continue to disrupt, our operations. To protect the health and well-being of our workforce, partners, vendors and customers, we have provided free COVID-19 testing for employees working on-site, implemented social distance and building entry policies at work, restricted travel and facility visits, and followed California’s “shelter in place” public health orders and the guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The COVID-19 global pandemic also has started to negatively affect, and we expect will continue to negatively affect, our revenue and our clinical studies. For example, our biopharmaceutical customers are facing challenges in recruiting patients and in conducting clinical trials to advance their pipelines, for which our tests could be utilized. We launched our Guardant-19 test and received the FDA’s emergency use authorization for use in the detection of the novel coronavirus. The test is being offered to our employees and select partner organizations our CLIA-certified clinical laboratory. We cannot predict the extent to which the Guardant-19 test will be used by third parties.
While each of these areas presents significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”), a non-GAAP financial measure is a key metric to assess period-to-period comparison in evaluating the performance of our core business by removing the impact of income (expenses) attributable to material non-cash items, specifically stock-based compensation and fair value remeasurements due to the subjectivity, management judgment, and market fluctuations involved around these amounts. We exclude certain other items because we believe that these income (expenses) do not reflect expected future operating expenses. Additionally, certain items are inconsistent in amounts and frequency, making it difficult to perform a meaningful evaluation of our current or past operating performance.
“Adjusted EBITDA” is defined by us as net loss attributable to Guardant Health, Inc. common stockholders before: (i) interest income, (ii) interest expense, (iii) provision for (benefit from) income taxes, (iv) depreciation and amortization expense, (v) other (income) expense, net, (vi) stock-based compensation expense, (vii) adjustments relating to non-controlling interest and contingent consideration and, (viii) acquisition-related expenses, and other non-recurring items, if applicable in a reporting period.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA as a non-GAAP financial measure is not intended to be considered in isolation from, as substitute for, or as superior to, the corresponding financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP and you should not consider it in isolation or substitute for analysis of our results reported under GAAP. There are limitations inherent in non-GAAP financial measures because they exclude charges and credits that are required to be included in a GAAP presentation, and do not present the full measure of our recorded costs against its revenue. In addition, our definition of non-GAAP financial measures may differ from non-GAAP measures used by other companies.
The following table reconciles net loss attributable to Guardant Health, Inc. common stockholders (which is the most directly comparable GAAP operating financial measure) to Adjusted EBITDA.
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2020, acquisition related expenses consist of a dispute settlement expense of $1.2 million and an IPR&D technology write off of $8.5 million incurred during the three months ended March 31, 2020 in connection with a settlement and a license purchase agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2019, acquisition related expenses of $0.4 million primarily include certain diligence, accounting, and legal expenses incurred related to our Bellwether acquisition.
Components of results of operations
Revenue
We derive our revenue from two sources: (i) precision oncology testing and (ii) development services and other.
Precision oncology testing. Precision oncology testing revenue is generated from sales of our Guardant360, Guardant360 CDx and GuardantOMNI tests to clinical and biopharmaceutical customers. In the United States, through December 31, 2020, we generally performed tests as an out-of-network service provider without contracts with health insurance companies. We submit claims for payment for tests performed for patients covered by U.S. private payers. We submit claims to Medicare for reimbursement for Guardant360 clinical testing performed for qualifying patients diagnosed with solid tumor cancers of non-central nervous system origin who meet the criteria of Medicare's National Coverage Determination for Next Generation Sequencing first established in March 2018. Tests for patients covered by Medicare represented approximately 37% and 38% of U.S. tests performed during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We also provide precision oncology testing to biopharmaceutical customers under contracts for which all recognition criteria are met, and we have recognized revenue on an accrual basis for those services.
Development services and other. Development services and other revenue primarily represents services, other than precision oncology testing, that we provide to biopharmaceutical companies and large medical institutions. It includes companion diagnostic development and regulatory approval services, clinical trial setup, monitoring and maintenance, referrals, liquid biopsy testing development and support, as well as GuardantConnect, GuardantINFORM, Guardant-19, and kits fulfillment related revenues. We collaborate with biopharmaceutical companies in the development and clinical trials of new drugs. As part of these collaborations, we provide services related to regulatory filings to support companion diagnostic device submissions for our liquid biopsy panels. Under these arrangements, we generate revenue from progression of our collaboration efforts, as well as from provision of on-going support. Development services and other revenue can vary over time as different projects start and complete.
Costs and operating expenses
Cost of precision oncology testing. Cost of precision oncology testing generally consists of cost of materials, inventory write-downs, direct labor, including bonus, employee benefits and stock-based compensation; equipment and infrastructure expenses associated with processing liquid biopsy test samples, including sample accessioning, library preparation, sequencing, quality control analyses and shipping charges to transport blood samples; freight; curation of test results for physicians; and license fees due to third parties. Infrastructure expenses include depreciation of laboratory equipment, rent costs, depreciation of leasehold improvements and information technology costs. Costs associated with performing our tests are recorded as the tests are performed regardless of whether revenue was recognized with respect to the tests. Royalties for licensed technology are calculated as a percentage of revenues generated using the associated technology and recorded as expense at the time the related revenue is recognized. One-time royalty payments related to signing of license agreements or other milestones, such as issuance of new patents, are amortized to expense over the expected useful life of the patents. While we do not
believe the technologies underlying these licenses are necessary to permit us to provide our tests, we do believe these technologies are potentially valuable and of possible strategic importance to us or our competitors.
We expect the cost of precision oncology testing to generally increase in line with the increase in the number of tests we perform, but the cost per test to decrease modestly over time due to the efficiencies we may gain as test volume increases, and from automation and other cost reductions.
Cost of development services and other. Cost of development services and other primarily includes costs incurred for the performance of development services requested by our customers comprising of direct labor and material costs including any inventory write-downs. For development of new products, costs incurred before technological feasibility has been achieved are reported as research and development expenses, while costs incurred thereafter are reported as cost of revenue. Cost of development services and other will vary depending on the nature, timing and scope of customer projects.
Research and development expense. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred to develop technology and include salaries and benefits including stock-based compensation, reagents and supplies used in research and development laboratory work, infrastructure expenses, including allocated facility occupancy and information technology costs, contract services, other outside costs and costs to develop our technology capabilities. Research and development expenses also include costs related to activities performed under contracts with biopharmaceutical companies before technological feasibility has been achieved. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are deferred and recognized as expense in the period in which the related goods are received or services are rendered. Costs to develop our technology capabilities are recorded as research and development unless they meet the criteria to be capitalized as internal-use software costs. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to innovate and develop additional products, expand our genomic and medical data management resources and conduct our ongoing and new clinical trials.
Sales and marketing expense. Our sales and marketing expenses are expensed as incurred and include costs associated with our sales organization, including our direct sales force and sales management, client services, marketing and reimbursement, medical affairs, as well as business development personnel who are focused on our biopharmaceutical customers. These expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, bonuses, employee benefits, travel expenses and stock-based compensation, as well as marketing, sales incentives, and educational activities and allocated overhead expenses. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales force, increase our presence within and outside of the United States, and increase our marketing activities to drive further awareness and adoption of our tests.
General and administrative expense. Our general and administrative expenses include costs for our executive, accounting and finance, information technology, legal and human resources functions. These expenses consist principally of salaries, bonuses, employee benefits, travel expenses and stock-based compensation, as well as professional services fees such as consulting, audit, tax and legal fees, and general corporate costs and allocated overhead expenses.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars, primarily due to increased stock-based compensation expense, including resulting from the market-based restricted stock units granted to our Chief Executive Officer and our President and Chief Operating Officer in May 2020, increased headcount and increased costs associated with operating as a growing public company, including expenses related to legal, accounting, information systems, regulatory, maintaining compliance with exchange listing and requirements of the SEC, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations. These expenses, though expected to increase in absolute dollars, are expected to decrease modestly as a percentage of revenue in the long term, though they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses being incurred.
Interest income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists primarily of charges relating to amortization/accretion of debt issuance costs and debt discount, interest on finance leases or capital leases and royalty obligations.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists of foreign currency exchange gains and losses, payments due and received in relation to the settlement of a patent dispute, net of credit losses, and the relief fund grant from the Department of Health and Human Services, or HHS, under the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act. We expect our foreign currency gains and losses to continue to fluctuate in the future due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Provision for (Benefit from) income tax
Income taxes are recorded using an asset and liability approach. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Tax benefits are recognized when it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained during an audit. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if current evidence indicates that it is considered more likely than not that these benefits will not be realized.
Our tax positions are subject to income tax audits. We recognize the tax benefit of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the position is sustainable upon examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits. The tax benefit recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit which is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement with the taxing authority. We recognize interest accrued and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in its tax provision. We evaluate uncertain tax positions on a regular basis. The evaluations are based on a number of factors, including changes in facts and circumstances, changes in tax law, correspondence with tax authorities during the course of the audit, and effective settlement of audit issues. The provision for (benefit from) income taxes includes the effects of any accruals that we believe are appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Results of operations
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations for the periods presented.
(1)Amounts include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue was $286.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $214.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $72.4 million, or 34%.
Precision oncology testing revenue increased to $236.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $180.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $55.9 million, or 31%. This increase in precision oncology testing revenue was primarily due to an increase in tests performed, an increase in average selling price per test as a result of expanded coverage of our tests for clinical customers. Precision oncology revenue from tests for clinical customers was $171.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, up 70% from $101.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in clinical testing revenue was driven primarily by increases in test volume, higher average revenue per test, plus $11.0 million in revenue received from Medicare during the year ended December 31, 2020 for samples processed in 2019 up from $9.4 million in revenue received from Medicare during the year ended December 31, 2019 for samples processed in 2018. Tests for clinical customers increased to 63,254 for year ended December 31, 2020 from 49,926 for the year ended December 31, 2019 mainly due to an increase in the number of physicians ordering Guardant360 clinical tests. In March 2020, we began to receive reimbursement from Medicare for claims submitted with respect to Guardant360 clinical tests performed for qualifying patients diagnosed with solid tumor cancers of non-central nervous system origin other than NSCLC.
Precision oncology revenue from tests for biopharmaceutical customers was $64.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $79.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Tests for biopharmaceutical customers decreased to 15,983 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 20,643 for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the timing and progression of clinical trials and studies which resulted in fluctuation in the number of samples received for testing. The average selling price of biopharmaceutical tests was $4,037 for the year ended December 31, 2020, up from $3,850 for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a greater number of such tests being the GuardantOMNI test, which has a higher selling price than the Guardant360 test. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, beginning in the latter half of March 2020, we began receiving fewer samples for testing on a daily average basis from our clinical and biopharmaceutical customers than before the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our future sample volumes and precision oncology revenue may be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic for the affected periods.
Development services and other revenue increased to $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $33.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $16.5 million, or 49%. This increase in development services and other revenue was primarily due to new collaboration agreements entered in the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as progression of existing collaboration projects from biopharmaceutical customers for companion diagnostic development and regulatory approval services completed during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our development services arrangements with biopharmaceutical customers and development services revenue may continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in future periods.
Costs of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue was $92.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $21.8 million, or 31%.
Cost of precision oncology testing revenue was $74.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $62.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $12.5 million, or 20%. This increase in cost of precision oncology testing was attributable to an increase in sample volumes and was primarily due to a $10.9 million increase in production labor and overhead costs, a $3.1 million increase in material costs, and a $1.9 million increase in other costs including costs related to kits, freight and curation of test results for physicians, offset by a $3.3 million decrease in royalties.
Cost of development services and other was $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $9.3 million, or 110%. This increase in cost of development services and other was primarily due to an increase in labor costs and materials related to companion diagnostic development and regulatory approval service contracts and costs associated with the development of the Guardant-19 product.
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 68% compared to 67% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross margin improvement primarily reflects the impact of increased average selling price per test. Our gross margin may continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic depending on how long the pandemic lasts and the severity of the situation in the coming periods.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expense
Research and development expenses were $149.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $86.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $63.6 million, or 74%. This increase in research and development expense was primarily due to an increase of $25.1 million in personnel-related costs for employees in our research and development group, including a $4.1 million increase in stock-based compensation, as we increased our headcount to support continued investment in our technology. The increase is also attributable to an increase of $10.7 million in development consulting fees, an increase of $10.7 million in material costs related to various programs, an increase of $8.5 million relating to in-process research and development (IPR&D) technology expensed in connection with a patent license acquisition that occurred in March 2020, an increase of $5.9 million related to allocated facility and information technology infrastructure costs and an increase of $0.9 million in allocated facilities and information technology infrastructure costs as we increased our headcount to support continued investment in our technology. Our research and development expenses are expected to increase in absolute dollars in coming years as the Company continues to innovate and invest in new product initiatives with a particular focus on LUNAR program.
Sales and marketing expense
Selling and marketing expenses were $106.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $78.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $28.2 million, or 36%. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $18.7 million in personnel-related costs, including a $4.6 million increase in stock-based compensation, associated with the expansion of our commercial organization, an increase of $5.3 million related to allocated facilities and information technology infrastructure costs, and an increase of $4.3 million in professional service expenses related to marketing activities. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales force, increase our presence within and outside of the United States, and increase our marketing activities to drive further awareness and adoption of our tests.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expenses were $192.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $61.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $131.4 million, or 214%. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $122.1 million in personnel-related costs, including a $117.5 million increase in stock-based compensation primarily in connection with the issuance of market-based restricted stock units to our Chief Executive Officer and our President and Chief Operating Officer as well as an increase in our headcount, an increase of $4.3 million related to allocated facilities and information technology infrastructure costs, an increase of $1.7 million in office administrative costs, an increase of $1.2 million related to settlement costs in connection with a patent license acquisition that occurred in March 2020, and an increase of $1.2 million in professional service expenses related to outside legal, accounting, consulting and IT services. Our general and administrative expenses may increase in the near term due to increase in stock-based compensation expense associated with increase headcount as well as expense recognition associated with the market-based restricted stock units.
Interest income
Interest income was $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $3.6 million, or (26)%. This decrease was primarily due to a significant decrease in interest rate as the U.S. Federal Reserve lowered the risk-free interest rate to nearly zero, offset by a significant increase in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities related to the receipt of cash proceeds from our follow-on public offering completed in June 2020 and borrowings on our convertible senior notes issued in November 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $3.6 million, or 304%. This increase was primarily due to charges related to amortization of debt issuance costs and accretion of debt discount related to our convertible senior notes issued in November 2020, partially offset by the decrease in interest expense due to the settlement of all outstanding royalty obligations in March 2020 related to a patent license agreement we entered into in January 2017.
Other income (expense), net
* Not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income (expense), net included receipt of $1.8 million received from HHS’s relief fund under the CARES Act, and $1.0 million received in connection with settlement of a patent dispute. There was no similar charge or gain for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other income (expense), net also included foreign currency exchange gains of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Foreign currency exchange gains/losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was immaterial.
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
Provision for income taxes was immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2020. Benefit from income taxes of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the release of valuation allowance of $1.6 million associated with nondeductible intangible assets recorded as part of the Bellwether Bio acquisition. Additionally, there was a benefit of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 associated with the utilization of tax losses from continuing operations against other comprehensive income gains.
Quarterly results of operations
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the eight quarters in the 24-month period ended December 31, 2020. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America and on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, reflect all adjustments, which include only normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair presentation of our results of operations. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly operating results are not necessarily indicative of our operating results for the full year or any future period.
Liquidity and capital resources
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and as of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $606.6 million. We expect to incur additional operating losses in the near future and our operating expenses will increase as we continue to invest in clinical trials and develop new product, expand our sales organization, and increase our marketing efforts to drive market adoption of our tests. As demand for our tests are expected to continue to increase from physicians and biopharmaceutical companies, we anticipate that our capital expenditure requirements could also increase if we require additional laboratory capacity.
We have funded our operations to date principally from the sale of stock, convertible debt and through revenue from precision oncology testing and development services and other. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $833.0 million and marketable securities of $1.2 billion. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to provide liquidity while ensuring capital preservation. Currently, our funds are held in marketable securities consisting of United States treasury securities.
Based on our current business plan, we believe our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and anticipated cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for more than 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We may consider raising additional capital to expand our business, to pursue strategic investments, to take advantage of financing opportunities or for other reasons. As revenue from precision oncology testing and development services and other is expected to grow long-term, we expect our accounts receivable and inventory balances to increase. Any increase in accounts receivable and
inventory may not be completely offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses, which could result in greater working capital requirements.
If our available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and anticipated cash flows from operations are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements including because of lower demand for our products as a result of lower than currently expected rates of reimbursement from our customers or other risks described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we may seek to sell additional common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding or seek other debt financing. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and, in the case of preferred equity securities or convertible debt, those securities could provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our common stock. The terms of debt securities issued or borrowings pursuant to a credit agreement could impose significant restrictions on our operations. If we raise funds through collaborations and licensing arrangements, we might be required to relinquish significant rights to our platform technologies or products or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. Additional capital may not be available to us on reasonable terms, or at all.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $103.9 million, which resulted from a net loss of $246.3 million and net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $47.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $190.0 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $144.1 million of stock-based compensation, $16.1 million of depreciation and amortization, $8.5 million of charge of in-process research and development costs with no alternative future use, $7.2 million of credit loss adjustment and others, $5.6 million of non-cash operating lease costs, and $4.0 million of amortization of premium on investment. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of a $19.3 million increase in other assets for security deposits relating to new leases we entered into in 2020, a $7.9 million decrease in accounts payable, a $7.5 million increase in inventory due to higher testing volumes, a $6.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $6.0 million payment of operating lease liabilities net of receipt of tenant improvement allowance, a $5.5 million increase in accounts receivables driven by increased sales to biopharmaceutical customers and a $3.7 million decrease in deferred revenue partially offset by a $9.7 million increase in accrued compensation due to increased personnel.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $47.1 million, which resulted from a net loss of $67.9 million and net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $8.3 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $29.0 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $11.4 million of depreciation and amortization and $17.0 million of stock-based compensation, partially offset by $2.3 million of amortization of discount on investment. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of a $7.4 million increase in accounts receivable driven by increased sales to biopharmaceutical customers and adoption of ASC 606, a $6.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $6.0 million increase in inventory to support testing volumes, a $2.9 million increase in other assets for security deposits relating to new leases entered into in 2019 and a $3.9 million decrease in deferred revenue partially offset by a $9.3 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, a $5.6 million increase in accrued compensation due to increased personnel, a $4.3 million increase in accounts payable and a $1.2 million increase in operating lease liabilities as a result of the adoption of ASC 842.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $617.1 million, which resulted primarily from purchases of marketable securities of $1.1 billion, purchases of property and equipment of $36.2 million, and purchases of intangible assets of $17.9 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities of $562.5 million.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $317.6 million, which resulted primarily from purchases of marketable securities of $614.3 million, purchases of property and equipment of $18.7 million, purchase of business of $7.3 million and purchase of intangible assets of $2.5 million, partially offset by our proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities of $325.3 million.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.4 billion which was primarily due to net proceeds of $1.1 billion from borrowings on convertible senior notes, proceeds of $354.6 million from a follow-on offering of our common stock, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, proceeds of $9.5 million from exercise of stock options and proceeds of $7.1 million from issuances under employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by purchases of note hedges relating to the convertible senior notes of $90.0 million and taxes paid related to net share settlement of restricted stock units of $3.4 million.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $367.3 million which was primarily due to proceeds of $350.4 million from the follow-on offering completed in May 2019, and receipt of proceeds of $11.6 million from issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options and $6.4 million from issuances under our employee stock purchase plan.
Contractual obligations and commitments
Our contractual commitments will have an impact on our future liquidity. The following table summarizes our contractually committed future obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)We lease our office and laboratory space in Redwood City, California, and office space in Spring City, Texas and Seattle, Washington under operating leases that expire between January 2021 and November 2027. We also have operating leases for manufacturing and office equipment through March 2023.
(2)Excludes two facility lease agreements entered into in July 2020 that had not yet commenced as of December 31, 2020. The lease terms of these facility leases range from 8-12 years, and one of the lease agreements provides an option to renew the lease term for an additional ten years. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has additional future minimum lease payments relating to these two facility lease agreements amounting to $239.5 million. The Company anticipates to take possession of these facilities within the second fiscal quarter of 2021.
(3)We have patent license agreements with four parties. Under these agreements, we have made one-time and milestone license fee payments that we have capitalized and are amortizing to expense ratably over the useful life of the applicable underlying patent rights. Under some of these agreements, we are obligated to pay low single-digit percentage running royalties on net sales where the patent right(s) are used in the product or service sold, subject to minimum annual royalties or fees in certain agreements.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have not had any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Our preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and related disclosures at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as revenue and expenses recorded during the reporting periods. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could therefore differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We derive revenue from the provision of precision oncology testing services provided to our ordering physicians and biopharmaceutical customers, as well as from biopharmaceutical research and development services provided to our biopharmaceutical customers. Precision oncology services include genomic profiling and the delivery of other genomic information derived from our platform. Development services and other include companion diagnostic development, clinical trial set up, monitoring and maintenance, information solutions and laboratory services, and other miscellaneous revenue streams. We currently receive payments from commercial third-party payers, certain hospitals and oncology centers and individual patients, as well as biopharmaceutical companies and research institutes.
Effective January 1, 2019, we began recognizing revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Revenues are recognized when control of services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. ASC 606 provides for a five-step model that includes identifying the contract with a customer, identifying the performance obligations in the contract, determining the transaction price, allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and recognizing revenue when, or as, an entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Precision oncology testing
We recognize revenue from the sale of our precision oncology tests for clinical customers, including certain hospitals, cancer centers, other institutions and patients, at the time results of the test are reported to physicians. Most precision oncology tests requested by clinical customers are sold without a written agreement; however, we determine an implied contract exists with our clinical customers. We identify each sale of our liquid biopsy test to clinical customer as a single performance obligation. With the exception of certain limited contracted arrangements with insurance carriers and other institutions where the transaction price is fixed, a stated contract price does not exist and the transaction price for each implied contract with our clinical customers represents variable consideration. We estimate the variable consideration under the portfolio approach and consider the historical reimbursement data from third-party payers and patients, as well as known current or anticipated reimbursement trends not reflected in the historical data. We monitor the estimated amount to be collected in the portfolio at each reporting period based on actual cash collections in order to assess whether a revision to the estimate is required. Both the estimate and any subsequent revision contain uncertainty and require the use of judgment in the estimation of the variable consideration and application of the constraint for such variable consideration. We analyze actual cash collections over the expected reimbursement period and compare it with the estimated variable consideration for each portfolio and any difference is recognized as an adjustment to estimated revenue after the expected reimbursement period, subject to assessment of the risk of future revenue reversal.
Revenue from sales of precision oncology tests to biopharmaceutical customers are based on a negotiated price per test or on the basis of an agreement to provide certain testing volume over a defined period. We identify our promise to transfer a series of distinct liquid biopsy tests to biopharmaceutical customers as a single performance obligation. Precision oncology tests to biopharmaceutical customers are generally billed at a fixed price for each test performed. For agreements involving testing volume to be satisfied over a defined period, revenue is recognized over time based on the number of tests performed as the performance obligation is satisfied over time.
Results of our precision oncology services are delivered electronically, and as such there are no shipping or handling fees incurred by us or billed to customers.
Development services and other
We perform development services for our biopharmaceutical customers utilizing our precision oncology information platform. Development services typically represent a single performance obligation as we perform a significant integration service, such as analytical validation and regulatory submissions. The individual promises are not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, are not distinct. However, under certain contracts, a biopharmaceutical customer may engage us for multiple distinct development services which are both capable of being distinct and separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, distinct performance obligations.
We collaborate with pharmaceutical companies in the development and clinical trials of new drugs. As part of these collaborations, we provide services related to regulatory filings to support companion diagnostic device submissions for our liquid biopsy panels. Under these collaborations, we generate revenue from achievement of milestones, as well as provision of on-going support. These collaboration arrangements include no royalty obligations. For development services performed, we are compensated through a combination of an upfront fee and performance-based non-refundable regulatory and other developmental milestone payments. The transaction price of our
development services contracts typically represents variable consideration. Application of the constraint for variable consideration to milestone payments is an area that requires significant judgment. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be managed to achieve the respective milestone and the level of effort and investment required to achieve the respective milestone. In making this assessment, we consider our historical experience with similar milestones, the degree of complexity and uncertainty associated with each milestone, and whether achievement of the milestone is dependent on parties other than us. The constraint for variable consideration is applied such that it is probable a significant reversal of revenue will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the contingency is resolved. Application of the constraint for variable consideration is updated at each reporting period as a revision to the estimated transaction price.
We recognize development services and other revenue over the period in which biopharmaceutical research and development services are provided. Specifically, we recognize revenue using an input method to measure progress, utilizing costs incurred to-date relative to total expected costs as its measure of progress. We also assess the changes to the total expected cost estimates as well as any incremental fees negotiated resulting from changes to the scope of the original contract in determining the revenue recognition at each reporting period. For development of new products or services under these arrangements, costs incurred before technological feasibility is reached are included as research and development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations, while costs incurred thereafter are recorded as cost of development services.
We also have other miscellaneous revenue streams such as relating to GuardantINFORM, Guardant-19 screening in connection with the outbreak of COVID-19, referral fees, maintenance, kits fulfillment related revenues.
Contracts with multiple performance obligations
Contracts with biopharmaceutical customers may include multiple distinct performance obligations, such as provision of precision oncology testing, biopharmaceutical research and development services, and clinical trial enrollment assistance, among others. We evaluate the terms and conditions included within our contracts with biopharmaceutical customers to ensure appropriate revenue recognition, including whether services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together. We first identify material promises, in contrast to immaterial promises or administrative tasks, under the contract and then evaluates whether these promises are both capable of being distinct and distinct within the context of the contract. In assessing whether a promised service is capable of being distinct, we consider whether the customer could benefit from the service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer, including factors such as the research, development, and commercialization capabilities of a third party and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In assessing whether a promised service is distinct within the context of the contract, we consider whether we provide a significant integration of the services, whether the services significantly modify or customize one another, or whether the services are highly interdependent or interrelated.
For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine standalone selling price by considering the historical selling price of these performance obligations in similar transactions as well as other factors, including, but not limited to, the price that customers in the market would be willing to pay, competitive pricing of other vendors, industry publications and current pricing practices, and expected costs of satisfying each performance obligation plus appropriate margin.
Variable interest entity
We review agreements we enter into with third party entities, pursuant to which we may have a variable interest in the entity, in order to determine if the entity is a variable interest entity, or VIE. If the entity is a VIE, we assess whether or not we are the primary beneficiary of that entity. In determining whether we are the primary beneficiary of an entity, we apply a qualitative approach that determines whether we have both (1) the power to direct the economically significant activities of the entity and (2) the obligation to absorb losses of, or the right to receive benefits from, the entity that could potentially be significant to that entity. If we determine we are the primary beneficiary of a VIE, we consolidate the statements of operations and financial condition of the VIE into our consolidated financial statements. Accounting for the consolidation is based on our determination if the VIE meets the definition of a business or and asset. Assets, liabilities and noncontrolling interests, excluding goodwill, of VIEs that are not determined to be businesses are recorded at fair value in our financial statements upon consolidation. Assets and liabilities that we have transferred to a VIE, after, or shortly before the date we became the primary beneficiary are recorded at the same amount at which the assets and liabilities would have been measured if they had not been transferred. Our determination about whether we should consolidate such VIEs is made continuously as changes to existing relationships or future transactions may result in a consolidation or deconsolidation event.
In May 2018, we and an affiliate of SoftBank formed and capitalized the Joint Venture for the sale, marketing and distribution of our tests in the JV Territory. We expect to rely on the Joint Venture to accelerate commercialization of our products in Asia, the Middle East and Africa. The Joint Venture is deemed to be a VIE and we are identified as the primary beneficiary of the VIE. Consequently, we have consolidated the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the Joint Venture in our financial statements and all intercompany balances have been eliminated in consolidation.
The joint venture agreement also includes a put-call arrangement with respect to the shares of the Joint Venture held by SoftBank and its affiliates. SoftBank will have a put right to cause us to purchase all shares of the Joint Venture held by SoftBank and its affiliates, and we will have a call right to purchase all such shares in the event of (i) certain material disagreement relating to the Joint Venture or its business that may seriously affect the ability of the Joint Venture to perform its obligations under the joint venture agreement or may otherwise seriously impair the ability of the Joint Venture to conduct its business in an effective matter, other than one relating to the Joint Venture’s business plan or to factual matters that may be capable of expert determination; (ii) the effectiveness of our initial public offering, a change in control, the seventh anniversary of the formation of the Joint Venture, or each subsequent anniversary of each of the foregoing events; or (iii) a material breach of the joint venture agreement by the other party that goes unremedied within 20 business days. Unless the shares of the Joint Venture are publicly traded and listed on a nationally recognized stock exchange, the purchase price per share of the Joint Venture in these situations will be determined by a third-party valuation firm on the assumption that the sale is on an arm’s-length basis on the date of the put or call notice. The third-party valuation firm may evaluate a range of factors and employ assumptions that are subjective in nature, which could result in the fair value of SoftBank’s interest in the Joint Venture being determined to be materially different from what has been recorded in our consolidated financial statements, including those included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the event we exercise our call right, the fair value of the Joint Venture will be deemed to be no less than an amount that yields a 20% internal rate of return on each tranche of capital invested by SoftBank and its affiliates in the Joint Venture, taking into account all proceeds received by SoftBank and its affiliates arising from their shares through such date.
In the event SoftBank exercises its put right and the fair value of the Joint Venture is determined to be greater than 40% of our fair value, we will only be required to purchase the number of shares of the Joint Venture held by SoftBank and its affiliates having an aggregate value equal to the product of 40% of our fair value and the pro rata portion of the outstanding shares of the Joint Venture held by SoftBank and its affiliates.
We may pay the purchase price for the shares of the Joint Venture in cash, in shares of our common stock, or in a combination thereof. In the event we exercise the call right, SoftBank will choose the form of consideration. In the event SoftBank exercises the put right, we will choose the form of consideration. The noncontrolling interest held by SoftBank contains embedded put-call redemption features that are not solely within our control and has been classified outside of permanent equity in our consolidated balance sheets. The put-call feature embedded in the redeemable noncontrolling interest do not currently require bifurcation as it does not meet the definition of a derivative and is considered to be clearly and closely related to the redeemable noncontrolling interest. The noncontrolling interest is considered probable of becoming redeemable as SoftBank has the option to exercise its put right to sell its equity ownership in the Joint Venture to us on or after the seventh anniversary of the formation of the Joint Venture, on each subsequent anniversary of the IPO and under certain other circumstances. We elected to recognize the change in redemption value immediately as they occur as if the put-call redemption feature were exercisable at the end of the reporting period.
Stock-based compensation
After the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting on January 1, 2019, we measure stock-based compensation expense for stock options granted to our employees, directors, and nonemployee consultants on the date of grant and recognize the corresponding compensation expense of those awards over the period that the related services are rendered, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Compensation expense for stock options with performance metrics is calculated based upon expected achievement of the metrics specified in the grant.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted under the 2012 Stock Plan, the 2018 Incentive Award Plan, and under the Guardant Health AMEA, Inc.'s 2020 Equity Incentive Plan for the Joint Venture, and stock purchase rights granted under our 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of assumptions regarding a number of variables
that are complex, subjective and generally require significant judgment to determine. The assumptions used to calculate the fair value of our stock options were:
Fair Value of Common Stock
The fair value of our common stock is determined by the closing price, on the date of grant, of its common stock, which is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market. The board of directors of the Joint Venture has determined the fair value of common stock of the Joint Venture. The grant date fair value of the Joint Venture’s common stock was determined using valuation methodologies which utilizes certain assumptions including probability weighting of events, volatility, time to liquidation, a risk-free interest rate and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability. In determining the fair value of the Joint Venture’s common stock, the methodologies used to estimate the enterprise value of the Joint Venture were performed using methodologies, approaches, and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Expected term
Our expected term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding. After the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting on January 1, 2019, the expected term of stock options issued to employees, directors and nonemployee consultants is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term), as we do not have sufficient historical data to use any other method to estimate expected term.
Expected volatility
Prior to the commencement of trading of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on October 4, 2018 in connection with the IPO, there was no active trading market for our common stock. Due to limited historical data for the trading of our common stock, expected volatility is estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded peer group companies in the same industry plus our expected volatility for the available periods. The comparable companies are chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
The Joint Venture derived the expected volatility from the average historical volatility over a period approximately equal to the expected term of comparable publicly traded companies within its peer group that were deemed to be representative of future stock price trends as the Joint Venture does not have any trading history for its common stock. The Joint Venture will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of its own stock price becomes available.
Risk-free interest rate
The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the stock option grants.
Expected dividend yield
We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Black-Scholes assumptions
The weighted-average assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model, including the Joint Venture, were as follows for stock option granted to our employees, directors and nonemployees for the periods presented:
For market-based restricted stock units, we derive the requisite service period using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The estimated fair value of the market-based restricted stock units was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model which requires the use of assumptions regarding a number of variables that are complex,
subjective and generally require significant judgment to determine. Stock-based compensation expense will be recorded regardless of achieving the market conditions or not. If the related market condition is achieved earlier than its expected derived service period, the stock-based compensation expense will be recognized as a cumulative catch-up expense from the grant date to that point in time in achieving the share price goal.
The assumptions used to calculate the fair value of our market-based restricted stock units were as follows:
Fair Value of Common Stock
The fair value of our common stock is determined by the closing price, on the date of grant, of its common stock, which is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
Expected Volatility
Due to limited historical data for the trading of our common stock, expected volatility is estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded peer group companies and implied volatility of publicly traded options in the same industry plus our expected volatility for the available periods. The comparable companies are chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
Expected Term
The expected term represents the derived service period for the respective tranches which has been estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model.
Risk-Free Interest Rate
The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury rate, with maturities similar to the expected term of the market-based restricted stock units.
Risky Rate
The risky rate represents our cost of equity.
Expected Dividend Yield
We do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future and, therefore, uses an expected dividend yield of zero.
Discount for Lack of Marketability
The discount for lack of marketability represents the discount applied for post vest term restrictions and has been derived using the Monte Carlo simulation model.
The following assumptions were used to calculate the stock-based compensation for market-based restricted stock units: a weighted-average expected term of 0.83 - 2.07 years; expected volatility of 65.5%; a risk-free interest rate of 0.53%; a zero dividend yield; a risky rate (cost of equity) of 16%; and a discount for post-vesting restrictions of 10.4% - 14.5%.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense net of forfeitures as they occur.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Convertible Senior Notes
In accounting for the issuance of the convertible senior notes, we separate the notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component is calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature, using a discounted cash flow model with a risk adjusted yield. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option is determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the notes as a whole. This difference represents a debt discount that is amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the term of the notes. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. In accounting for the transaction costs related to the issuance of the notes, we allocated the total amount incurred to the liability and equity components based on their relative fair values. Transaction costs attributable to the liability component are netted with the liability component and amortized to interest expense using the effective interest
method over the term of the notes. Transaction costs attributable to the equity component are netted with the equity component of the notes in additional paid-in capital in the consolidated balance sheets.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.