Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Greenhill is a leading independent investment bank that provides financial and strategic advice on significant domestic and cross-border mergers and acquisitions, divestitures, restructurings, financings, capital raising and other transactions to a diverse client base, including corporations, partnerships, institutions and governments globally. We serve as a trusted advisor to our clients throughout the world on a collaborative, globally integrated basis from our offices in the United States, Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
We were established in 1996 by Robert F. Greenhill, the former President of Morgan Stanley and former Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Smith Barney. Since our founding, Greenhill has grown significantly, by recruiting talented managing directors and other senior professionals, acquiring complementary advisory businesses and training, developing and promoting professionals internally. We have expanded beyond merger and acquisition advisory services to include financing, restructuring, and private capital advisory services, and we have expanded the breadth of our sector expertise to cover substantially all major industries. Since the opening of our original office in New York, we have expanded globally to 15 offices across four continents.
Over our 25 years as an independent investment banking firm, we have sought to opportunistically recruit new managing directors with a range of industry and transaction specialties, as well as high-level corporate and other relationships, from major investment banks, independent financial advisory firms and other institutions. We also have sought to expand our geographic reach both through recruiting managing directors in new locations and through strategic acquisitions, such as our acquisition of Caliburn Partnership Pty Limited (now Greenhill Australia) in Australia in 2010. Additionally, we expanded the breadth of our advisory services through our acquisition in 2015 of Cogent, which extended our services to private capital advisory related to the secondary fund placement market. More recently, we have recruited a number of managing directors focused on financing and restructuring advisory services. Through our recruiting and acquisition activity, we have significantly increased our geographic reach by adding offices in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, Japan, Australia, Sweden, Hong Kong, Spain, Singapore and France.
We intend to continue our efforts to recruit new managing directors with industry sector experience and/or geographic reach who can help expand our advisory capabilities. While we paused our recruiting efforts for most of 2020 due to the uncertainties associated with COVID-19 and the inability of new hires to travel and actively engage in in-person meetings and other business development, we enter 2021 with an active pipeline of prospects with industry sector and regional capabilities. It is our objective to achieve increased productivity by increasing managing director headcount in high fee areas like M&A in the largest markets. We had 70 client facing managing directors as of December 31, 2020.
Business Environment and Outlook /Factors Affecting Our Results
Impact of COVID-19 and Other Recent Developments. During 2020, COVID-19 became a global pandemic of extraordinary proportion and impact. In response, most governmental authorities issued stay-at-home orders, proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of the pandemic. At times these directives were eased in a number of jurisdictions only to have additional directives issued in response to a resurgence of the pandemic in those same jurisdictions. Globally, the response by governmental authorities has differed by jurisdiction with some jurisdictions issuing additional and more restrictive proclamations and/or directives while other jurisdictions are permitting workers back to their workplaces. For us, the majority of our employees worked remotely during the period from March through June 2020. Since then, some of our employees have begun a gradual return to our office locations, in compliance with local government guidelines, while in other jurisdictions our employees continued to work from home. For those employees who have been working remotely, they have successfully utilized technology to employ virtual and secure cloud-based systems to continue communicating, collaborating and conducting client business in this new environment. We continue to monitor local government mandates in determining our office re-openings, re-closures and work-related travel.
As a result of the global pandemic, there was significant disruption and volatility in the domestic and international economies and financial markets from early 2020 until the third quarter. As a financial services firm, we are materially affected by conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions throughout the world. During periods of unfavorable market or economic conditions it is expected, and we have seen, that the volume of global M&A transactions can be volatile and the timing of transaction closings may be extended or disrupted, with some announced transactions being terminated.
In response to the impact that the global pandemic had on global economies both the U.S. federal government and most foreign governmental institutions undertook unprecedented fiscal and monetary stimulus which resulted in a broad recovery of all financial markets by mid year. Although we were impacted beginning in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing into the third quarter by the unfavorable market conditions that COVID-19 caused on our business, starting in the third quarter we have
seen an increase in new assignment activity for M&A as compared to the same period last year. We currently see a favorable environment for our M&A business due to high equity valuations, low borrowing costs, substantial corporate and private equity buying power and a variety of other factors. However, we cannot estimate the speed at which the transactions will occur or the stability of the financial markets given the expected challenges of a recovery from the global pandemic.
Since the early stages of the global pandemic the activity of our financing advisory and restructuring business, which provides financing, restructuring and bankruptcy advice to companies in financial distress or their creditors or other stakeholders, has increased substantially compared to prior years. This increase in activity resulted from both an increase in assignments due to greater market opportunities arising as a result of the pandemic’s impact on many businesses and an increase in the size of our restructuring team, which was significantly expanded over the past two years. While we have realized an increase in restructuring advisory and completion fees in 2020 as compared to the prior year, we have far fewer restructuring bankers than M&A bankers and the additional revenue generated by the restructuring team was not enough to offset the decline in M&A transaction revenue. Although the pace of restructurings has subsided from the frenetic pace in the first half of 2020, as we look forward to 2021 we expect to benefit from the completion of numerous restructuring assignments and expect our activities to be more focused on those industries and companies adversely affected by the continuing pandemic. In addition, we are observing significant opportunities to advise on various kinds of debt and equity financings and expect those assignments to provide meaningful revenue in 2021.
Our private capital advisory business was significantly impacted by the pandemic during 2020 and our transaction volume was far below its level for 2019. The private capital advisory business is typically adversely impacted during periods of market volatility which we experienced in the second and third quarters of 2020. Additionally, in late 2020, a number of managing directors in our private capital advisory group, primarily in the U.S, departed the Firm. Our smaller European and Asian operations, where we have seen a recent increase in activity, remain mostly unaffected by these departures. As we seek to rebuild our U.S. team, we plan to focus on higher value added transactions with financial sponsors. Over the longer term, we cannot be certain whether we will be able to recruit sufficient additional personnel to return the secondary market private capital advisory business to pre-pandemic revenue levels.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the related global economic crisis further adversely affects our business, results of operations and liquidity and financial condition, will depend on the future developments that are highly uncertain and beyond our control. These developments include the duration, spread and severity of the pandemic and any recovery period; the distribution, public acceptance and widespread use and effectiveness of vaccines against COVID-19; the actions taken to contain the spread of the disease or mitigate its impact; and future actions taken by governmental authorities, central banks and other third parties in response to the pandemic. We continue to monitor this dynamic situation, including guidance and regulations issued by U.S. and other governmental authorities.
In mid 2020, we exited Brazil by selling our business there to the local team for a nominal sum. In Brazil, we did not find the kind of larger cross border opportunities we have found in other markets. As a result, particularly given the weakness of the Brazilian currency, we generated modest dollar revenue and proved unable to generate a return on our investment in that market. Accordingly, we expect this move to be modestly accretive to our productivity and profitability statistics going forward.
Global and Regional Transaction Activity. Economic conditions and global financial markets can materially affect our financial performance. We are solely an advisory firm and our revenues are derived from fees we earn on advisory services related to M&A, financing advisory and restructuring, and private capital advisory transactions. Throughout the global pandemic, we have remained fully operational and continue to maintain client dialogues, win new assignments and assist clients in getting to agreement and completion of important transactions.
The volume of global and regional transactional activity typically has a significant impact on our results of operations. During 2020, we benefited from particularly strong results in our European M&A business and our U.S. restructuring business, partially offset by a reduction in private capital advisory fees and lower transaction announcement and opinion fees. We also benefited from a number of financing advisory roles that are neither traditional M&A nor traditional restructuring roles. Our revenue for the year was highly concentrated in a few regions and sectors, as many regions and sectors were heavily impacted by the pandemic and related constraints on economic activity. At the same time, the volume of announced and completed transactions globally decreased by 8% and 5%, respectively, in 2020 as compared to 2019, while the number of announced and completed transactions globally both increased by 6% in the same period, indicating that there was a greater volume of smaller transactions in 2020 as compared to 2019.(1) Although transaction volume was down from last year, it increased significantly as financial markets stabilized in the second half of the year and as we enter 2021 we have a favorable outlook for our business in most of the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Competition. We operate in a highly competitive environment where there are generally no long-term contracted sources of revenue. Each revenue-generating engagement is separately awarded and negotiated. Our list of clients with whom there are
active engagements changes continually. To develop new client relationships, and to develop new engagements from historic client relationships, we maintain, on an ongoing basis, active business dialogues with a large number of clients and potential clients. We gain new clients each year through our business development initiatives, through recruiting additional senior investment banking professionals who bring with them client relationships and expertise in certain industry sectors or geographies, and through referrals from members of boards of directors, attorneys and other parties with whom we have relationships. At the same time, we lose clients each year as a result of the sale or merger of a client, bankruptcy, a change in a client’s senior management team, turnover of our senior banking professionals, competition from other investment banks and other similar reasons.
For 2021, we are aiming to enhance our focus on advising financial sponsors on a wide variety of transactions. Historically we focused heavily on serving public companies, and we have enjoyed great success with that constituency. However, over time we have increased interaction with financial sponsors across our M&A, restructuring and private capital advisory businesses. We are now aiming to organize those efforts in a more systematic way designed to generate more revenue, and we have already put significant resources into this initiative. We are hopeful that it will be at least as successful as the restructuring advisory team expansion that was our primary strategic focus of the past couple years.
_______________
(1) Excludes transactions less than $100,000 and withdrawn/canceled deals. Source: Thomson Financial as of January 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
The results of operations below focuses on the results of 2020 versus 2019. For a discussion of 2019 versus 2018, refer to "Results of Operations" in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues
The following table sets forth data relating to the Firm’s sources of revenues by client location.
Sources of Revenues. Our revenues are derived from both corporate advisory services related to M&A, financings and restructurings and private capital advisory services related to sales or capital raises pertaining to alternative assets. A majority of our revenue is contingent upon the closing of a merger, acquisition, financing, restructuring, or other advisory transaction. While fees payable upon the successful conclusion of a transaction generally represent the largest portion of our corporate advisory fees, we also earn other fees, including on-going retainer fees, substantially all of which relate to non-success-based strategic advisory, financing advisory and restructuring assignments, and fees payable upon the commencement of an engagement or upon the achievement of certain milestones (such as the announcement of a transaction or the rendering of a fairness opinion). Additionally, we generate private capital advisory revenues from sales of alternative assets in the secondary market and from capital raises.
We do not allocate our revenue by type of advice rendered (M&A, financing advisory and restructuring, strategic advisory, or other) because of the complexity of the assignments for which we earn revenue and because a single transaction can encompass multiple types of advice. For example, a restructuring assignment can involve, and in some cases end successfully in, a sale of all or part of the financially distressed company. Likewise, an acquisition assignment can relate to a financially distressed target involved in or considering a restructuring, and an M&A assignment can develop from a relationship that we had on a prior restructuring assignment, and vice versa. Further, debt and equity financing assignments can include participation of both M&A and restructuring personnel. While we do separately allocate private capital advisory revenue, we expect involvement of our M&A team as we increase our focus to higher value added assignments.
2020 versus 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues were $311.7 million compared to $301.0 million in 2019, an increase of $10.7 million, or 4%. The increase in our 2020 revenues, as compared to 2019, resulted from an increase in the number and scale of merger and acquisition transaction completion fees, particularly in Europe, and restructuring
advisory fees, partially offset by a reduction in private capital advisory fees and lower transaction announcement and opinion fees.
By geographic region in 2020, North America, where we generated 61% of our revenues, remained our largest contributor. Revenue from our North American clients decreased year over year on an absolute dollar basis and decreased as a percentage of total revenues as a result of stronger performance in Europe in 2020 as compared to 2019. We derived 35% of our revenues in Europe in 2020, and our absolute revenues in Europe more than doubled from 2019. We generated 4% of our revenues from clients located in the rest of the world, reflecting decreases in both the percentage and absolute dollar amount of total revenues due to both the impact of the pandemic in the Australian market and to a lesser exit from our exit of South America with our sale of our Brazilian business in June 2020.
The ten largest fee-paying clients contributed 43% of our total revenues in 2020 and 35% in 2019. In 2020 one client represented greater than 10% of our revenues. In 2019, a different client represented greater than 10% of our revenues.
Operating Expenses
We classify operating expenses as employee compensation and benefits expenses and non-compensation operating expenses. Non-compensation operating expenses include the costs for occupancy and equipment rental, communications, information services, professional fees, recruiting, travel and entertainment, insurance, depreciation and amortization, and other operating expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total operating expenses were $256.4 million compared to $255.2 million in 2019. The slight increase of $1.2 million principally resulted from an increase in our compensation and benefits expenses, nearly offset by a decrease in our non-compensation expenses, both as described in more detail below. Our operating profit margin was 18% for 2020 as compared to 15% in 2019.
The following table sets forth information relating to our operating performance metrics.
Compensation and Benefits Expenses
The largest component of our operating expenses is employee compensation and benefits expenses, which we determine annually based on a percentage of revenues. The actual percentage of revenues, which we refer to as our compensation ratio, is determined by management in consultation with the Compensation Committee at each year end and is based on factors such as the relative level of revenues, anticipated compensation requirements to retain and reward our employees, the cost to recruit and exit employees, the charge for amortization of restricted stock and deferred cash compensation awards and related forfeitures, among others.
Our compensation and benefits expenses principally consist of base salary and benefits, annual incentive compensation payable as cash bonus awards, including certain amounts that may be subject to clawback, and amortization of long-term incentive compensation awards of restricted stock units and deferred cash compensation. Base salary and benefits are paid ratably throughout the year. Annual cash bonuses, which are accrued throughout the year, are discretionary and dependent upon a number of factors, including our financial performance, and are generally paid in the first quarter in respect of the preceding year. Awards of restricted stock units and deferred cash compensation are discretionary and are amortized into compensation expense (based upon the fair value of the award at the time of grant) during the service period over which the
award vests, which is generally three to five years for the majority of the awards. We estimate forfeitures as part of our amortized deferred compensation cost based on an estimated rate of forfeitures which we periodically adjust to the actual rate of forfeited awards. As we expense the restricted stock awards, the portion of the restricted stock units amortized is recorded within stockholders’ equity in the consolidated statements of changes in stockholders' equity. The expense associated with our annual and long-term incentive compensation can have a significant impact on compensation expense and may vary from year to year.
2020 versus 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our employee compensation and benefits expenses were $194.1 million, which reflected a 62% ratio of compensation to revenues. This amount compared to $178.9 million for 2019, which reflected a 59% ratio of compensation to revenues. The increase in expense of $15.2 million, or 8%, was principally attributable to higher incentive compensation. The increase in the ratio of compensation to revenues for 2020 as compared to 2019 principally resulted from an increase in the amount of accrued year-end bonuses.
As our compensation expense can fluctuate materially in any particular year depending upon the changes in headcount, amount of revenues recognized, as well as other factors, the amount of compensation expense we recognize in any particular year may not be indicative of compensation expense in future years.
Non-Compensation Operating Expenses
Our non-compensation operating expenses such as occupancy, depreciation, and information services are relatively fixed year to year although they may vary depending upon changes in headcount, geographic locations and other factors. Other expenses such as travel, professional fees and other operating expenses vary dependent on the level of business development, recruitment, foreign currency movements and the amount of reimbursable client expenses, which are reported in full in both our revenues and our operating expenses. It is management's objective to maintain consistent comparable non-compensation cost year over year for each jurisdiction in which we operate. We monitor costs based on actual costs incurred in prior periods and on headcount and seek to gain operating efficiencies when possible.
In 2020, we had minimal travel expenditures beginning in March and through year-end due to travel restrictions imposed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that our travel spend will continue at a reduced level of travel for most of 2021. Over the longer term we expect an increase in our aggregate travel spend but at a reduction from pre-COVID-19 levels and with a higher rate of recovery through reimbursed client expenses. Effective January 2021, we relocated our New York headquarters' location, which provided us with higher quality, more efficient, yet lower cost space. During the build out period in 2020, we incurred rental expense on both our former space and our new space, which increased our aggregate occupancy costs. Taking into account both the redundant rent costs and the rent expense reduction we incurred in 2020, we expect our occupancy expense will decrease by approximately $7.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020.
2020 versus 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our non-compensation operating expenses of $62.3 million compared to $76.2 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $13.9 million, or 18%. The decrease in non-compensation expenses charges principally resulted from lower travel costs as a result of the global pandemic, lower recruiting costs as we paused recruiting and the benefit of foreign currency gains, partially offset by the duplicate rent charge for new headquarters' space during a portion of 2020 and a loss on the sale of our Brazilian business. Non-compensation operating expenses as a percentage of revenues for 2020 decreased to 20% as compared to 25% in 2019 as a result of spreading lower non-compensation operating costs over moderately higher revenues.
Non-compensation operating expenses can fluctuate as a result of a variety of factors referred to above. Accordingly, the non-compensation operating expenses in any particular year may not be indicative of the non-compensation operating expenses in future years.
Interest Expense
As part of our 2017 recapitalization plan we substantially increased our leverage and interest expense through the borrowing of $350.0 million under a secured term loan facility, which bore interest at LIBOR plus 3.75%. On April 12, 2019, we refinanced the term loan facility and increased the borrowing amount to $375.0 million and lowered our borrowing rate by 50 basis points to LIBOR plus 3.25% and eliminated the LIBOR floor.
2020 versus 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred interest expense of $15.5 million as compared to $27.4 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense of $11.9 million during 2020 related to decreases in the market borrowing rate and our interest rate spread (which was reduced as part of our term loan refinancing in April 2019) and lower average borrowings outstanding. Additionally, in 2019 we also incurred a non-recurring refinancing charge of $4.8 million.
The rate of interest on our borrowing is based on LIBOR and is variable. Accordingly, the amount of interest expense in any particular year may not be indicative of the amount of interest expense in future years. After, 2021, the FCA will no longer compel panel banks to contribute to LIBOR and there cannot be any assurance that the LIBOR phase out will not increase our borrowing costs, see “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Provision for Income Taxes
We are subject to federal, state and local corporate income taxes in the United States. In addition, our non-U.S. subsidiaries are subject to income taxes in their local jurisdictions.
Since 2018 our U.S. federal income tax rate has been 21%. In addition to U.S. federal taxes, our effective tax rate is comprised of foreign, state and local taxes. While state and local taxes generally increase our effective tax rate nominally, foreign taxes can more substantially increase or decrease our effective tax rate depending on the amount of earnings we generate in each jurisdiction. We have historically generated substantial earnings in low tax jurisdictions such as the United Kingdom, and we have historically generated a smaller portion of our annual earnings in high tax jurisdictions such as Australia, Germany and Japan.
Our effective rate is also impacted positively or negatively upon the vesting of restricted stock awards by a charge or benefit for the tax effect of the difference between the grant price value and market price value at vesting of the awards. Based on the market price on the date of the vesting of our annual awards, which represent a substantial portion of our awards vesting during each year, the average grant price of the awards vesting in 2020 and 2019 exceeded the market price of our shares and we incurred income tax charges of $3.3 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Further, during the first quarter of 2021, we incurred an income tax charge of approximately $0.8 million related to the vesting of restricted stock units at a market price less than the average grant price. We are not able to predict our future share price, as a consequence, we are not able to estimate the impact that this benefit or charge will have on our provision for income taxes in future periods.
Although we cannot predict our estimated effective tax rate for future periods primarily due to the jurisdiction and amount of earnings, which varies year over year, we expect that our effective tax rate will be around 25% over the next few years, assuming our historical mix of foreign earnings and no changes in the existing tax law, and excluding the impact of the tax charge/benefit resulting from the vesting of restricted stock awards.
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the “CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and included temporary changes to income and non-income based tax laws relating to net operating loss carrybacks, increased interest deductibility and the timing of certain tax payments. We benefited from certain provisions of the CARES Act in 2020, which slightly reduced our effective tax rate, but since these changes are temporary we do not expect the CARES Act to impact our effective rate in future years.
2020 versus 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for income taxes was $8.4 million, reflecting an effective rate of 21%, as compared to a provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $7.4 million, reflecting an effective rate of 40%. Our effective tax rate for 2020 benefited from the generation of a substantial portion of our earnings from the U.K., which is a lower tax jurisdiction, and certain provisions of the CARES Act, partially offset by charges related to the vesting of restricted stock unit awards vesting at a value less than the grant price. For 2019, our effective tax rate was negatively impacted by our relatively low amount of pre-tax income, charges related to the vesting of restricted stock unit awards vesting at a value less than the grant price, and the generation of a larger proportion of our earnings than usual from foreign jurisdictions subject to higher tax rates.
The effective tax rate can fluctuate as a result of variations in the relative amounts of income earned and the tax rate imposed in the tax jurisdictions in which we operate, among other factors. Accordingly, the effective tax rate in any particular year may not be indicative of the effective tax rate in future years.
Geographic Data
For a summary of the total revenues, income before taxes and total assets by geographic region, see “Note 18 - Business Information” to the consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity position, which consists of cash and cash equivalents, other significant working capital assets and liabilities, debt and other matters relating to liquidity requirements and current market conditions, is monitored by management on a regular basis. We retain our cash in financial institutions with high credit ratings and/or invest in short-term investments that are expected to provide liquidity and as permitted under our credit facility. It is our objective to retain a global cash balance adequate to service our forecast operating and financing needs. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $112.7 million.
We generate substantially all of our cash from advisory fees. We use our cash primarily for recurring operating expenses, the service of our debt, the repurchase of our common shares and other capital needs. Our recurring monthly operating disbursements principally consist of base compensation expense, occupancy, travel and entertainment, and other operating expenses. In addition, we generally make interest payments on our debt on a monthly basis. Our recurring quarterly and annual disbursements consist of cash bonus payments, tax payments, debt service payments, dividend payments, and repurchases of our common stock from our employees in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities incurred on vesting of restricted stock units. These amounts vary depending upon our profitability and other factors.
Because a portion of the compensation we pay to our employees is distributed in annual cash bonus awards (usually in the first quarter of each year), our net cash balance is typically at its lowest level during the first quarter of each year and generally accumulates from our operating activities throughout the remainder of the year. Our current liabilities primarily consist of accounts payable, which are generally paid monthly, accrued compensation, which includes accrued cash bonuses that are generally paid in the first quarter of the following year to the large majority of our employees, and current taxes payable. Our current assets include accounts receivable, which we generally collect within 60 days, except for certain restructuring transactions, where collections may take longer due to court-ordered holdbacks. At December 31, 2020, we had fees receivable of $80.9 million.
In 2017, we announced a leveraged recapitalization to put in place a capital structure designed to enhance long term shareholder value. In 2019, we refinanced the credit facility that was put in place at the time of the recapitalization and entered into a $375.0 million five-year term loan B facility (“TLB”). We used a portion of the proceeds to repay in full the outstanding principal balance of the existing credit facility of $319.4 million and pay fees and expenses, and received remaining net proceeds of $48.3 million. We did not incur a prepayment premium in conjunction with the refinancing.
Borrowings under the TLB bear interest at either the U.S. Prime Rate plus 2.25% or LIBOR plus 3.25%. Our borrowing rates in 2020 ranged from 3.4% to 5.0%. The FCA, which regulates LIBOR, has announced that it will not compel panel banks to contribute to LIBOR after 2021. In November 2020, the ICE Benchmark Administration Limited announced a plan to extend the date as of which most U.S. LIBOR values would cease being computed from December 31, 2021 to June 30, 2023. Although financial regulators and industry working groups have suggested alternative reference rates, global consensus on alternative rates is lacking. It is not possible to predict whether LIBOR will continue to be viewed as an acceptable market benchmark or what rate or rates may become accepted alternatives to LIBOR. Although our credit agreement includes alternative rate fallback provisions, there can be no assurance the LIBOR phase out will not increase the cost of capital.
The TLB requires quarterly principal amortization payments of $4.7 million (or $18.8 million annually), which began on September 30, 2019 and continue through March 31, 2024, with the remaining balance ($285.9 million assuming the payment of only quarterly principal amortization payments during the term) due at maturity on April 12, 2024. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company made aggregate principal payments on the TLB of $38.8 million. Such payments were applied to and made in advance of the quarterly installments due in 2020 and 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the TLB had an outstanding principal balance of $326.9 million. The next quarterly principal installment payment is due on March 31, 2022. In addition to the required quarterly principal amortization we may be required to make annual repayments of principal on the TLB within 90 days of year-end of up to 50% of our excess cash flow as defined in the credit agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2020, an excess cash flow payment was not required. Such payment, if any, would be applied to the next quarterly principal installment payment. We are also required to repay certain amounts of the TLB in connection with the non-ordinary course sale of assets, receipt of insurance proceeds, and the issuance of debt obligations, subject to certain exceptions.
All repayments of the TLB will be applied without penalty or premium. Subject to market conditions and other relevant factors, we may seek to reprice, modify and/or amend the loan facility to further reduce our borrowing rate, modify restricted payment covenants and take other actions to increase our flexibility with respect to our uses of free cash flow.
In 2017, as part of the recapitalization we also entered into a three-year secured revolving credit facility (“Revolving Loan Facility”) for $20.0 million. The Revolving Loan Facility matured in October 2020. During the three year period that the Revolving Loan Facility was outstanding, there were no drawings on it and based on our forecast future needs for the facility we elected not to renew or extend it.
The TLB is guaranteed by our existing and subsequently acquired or organized wholly-owned U.S. restricted subsidiaries (excluding any registered broker-dealers) and secured with a first priority perfected security interest in certain domestic assets, 100% of the capital stock of each U.S. subsidiary and 65% of the capital stock of each non-U.S. subsidiary, subject to certain exclusions which, for the avoidance of doubt, such security interest shall not include any assets of regulated subsidiaries that are not permitted to be pledged by law, statute or regulation, including cash held by regulated subsidiaries and any other capital required to meet and maintain regulatory capital requirements. The credit facility contains certain covenants that limit our ability above certain permitted amounts to incur additional indebtedness, make certain acquisitions, pay dividends and repurchase shares. The TLB does not have financial covenants, however, we are subject to certain non-financial covenants such as repayment obligations, restricted payment limitations, financial reporting requirements and others. Our failure to comply with the terms of these covenants may adversely affect our operations and could permit lenders to accelerate the maturity of the debt and to foreclose upon any collateral securing the debt. At December 31, 2020, we were compliant with all loan covenants under the credit agreement and we expect to continue to be compliant with all loan covenants in future periods.
Since we announced our recapitalization in 2017 through December 31, 2020, we have repurchased 15,040,528 common shares through open market purchases (including pursuant to 10b5-1 plans) and tender offers at an average price of $21.03 per share, for a total cost of $316.3 million. This included 489,704 shares of our common stock we repurchased in the open market during 2020 for $8.4 million, which was less than we typically repurchase in an annual period given the uncertainly on the financial markets created by the global pandemic. In addition to open market purchases, we also repurchase common stock equivalents from employees at the time of vesting of RSUs to settle withholding tax liabilities subject to limits imposed by our credit agreement. During 2020, we are deemed to have repurchased 764,529 shares of common stock equivalents in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in respect of stock delivered to our employees in settlement of restricted stock units that vested for $14.8 million. In February 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of our common stock and common stock equivalents of up to $50.0 million for the period ended January 31, 2022. There can be no assurances of the price at which we may be able to repurchase our shares or that we will repurchase the full amount authorized for the period ending January 31, 2022 or the amount authorized in any future period. Since our Board authorization in 2021 (as of February 22, 2021), we have repurchased 337,739 shares of our common stock for $5.0 million and we are deemed to have repurchased 635,027 shares of common stock equivalents in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in respect of stock delivered to our employees in settlement of restricted stock units that vested for $9.6 million and have $35.4 million remaining and authorized for repurchase through January 2022.
Under our credit agreement, we are restricted in the amount of cash we may use to repurchase our common stock and common stock equivalents and/or to make dividend distributions. As we generate cash from operations and subject to our expected operating needs, we intend to focus the use of our cash generated primarily on deleveraging, along with prudent share (and share equivalent) repurchases subject to market conditions and other factors, such as our results of operations, financial position and capital requirements, general business conditions, legal, tax and regulatory constraints or restrictions, any contractual restrictions and other factors deemed relevant. There can be no assurances of the price at which we may be able to repurchase our shares or that we will repurchase the full amount authorized for the period ending January 31, 2022 or the amount authorized in any future period.
Since we announced the recapitalization in 2017, we have made quarterly dividend payments of $0.05 per share. Under the credit agreement we are permitted to make aggregate annual dividend distributions of up to $10.0 million, with any amounts not distributed in any particular year available for carryover to future years. We intend to continue to pay quarterly dividends and may increase the dividend payment amount, subject to capital availability and periodic determinations that cash dividends are in the best interest of our stockholders. Future declaration and payment of dividends on our common stock is at the discretion of our Board of Directors and depends upon, among other things, our future operations and earnings, capital requirements and surplus, general financial condition, restrictions under the credit agreement, and other factors as our Board of Directors may deem relevant.
As part of our long term incentive award program, we may award restricted stock units to managing directors and other employees at the time of hire and/or as part of annual compensation. Awards of restricted stock units generally vest over a three to five-year service period, subject to continued employment on the vesting date. Each restricted stock unit represents the holder’s right to receive one share of our common stock (or at our election, a cash payment equal to the fair value thereof) on the vesting date. Under the terms of our equity incentive plan, we generally repurchase from our employees that portion of restricted stock unit awards used to fund income tax withholding due at the time the restricted stock unit awards vest and pay the remainder of the award in shares of our common stock. Based upon the number of restricted stock unit grants outstanding at February 22, 2021, which takes into account both the early February 2021 vesting of annual awards and the grant of new awards made as part of our 2020 compensation, we estimate repurchases of our common stock from our employees in conjunction with the cash settlement of tax liabilities incurred on vesting of restricted stock units of approximately $48.0 million (as calculated based upon the closing share price as of February 22, 2021 of $15.10 per share and assuming a withholding tax rate of 41% consistent with our recent experience) over the next five years, of which an additional $3.1 million
will be payable in 2021, $17.5 million will be payable in 2022, $11.3 million will be payable in 2023, $7.7 million will be payable in 2024, $6.4 million will be payable in 2025, and $2.0 million will be payable in 2026. In addition, we expect to make additional restricted stock unit awards related to 2020 in late March 2021 and the estimated repurchase amount for 2022 and beyond will increase. We will realize a corporate income tax deduction concurrently with the vesting of the restricted stock units. While we expect to fund future repurchases of our common stock equivalents (if any) with operating cash flow, we are unable to predict the price of our common stock, and as a result, the timing or magnitude of our share repurchases, which may be limited under the credit agreement. To the extent future repurchases are expected to exceed the amount permitted under the credit agreement we may seek to modify the credit agreement to increase the amount or seek other means to settle the withholding tax liability incurred on the vesting of the restricted stock units.
Also, as part of our long-term incentive award program, we may also award deferred cash compensation to managing directors and other employees at the time of hire and/or as part of annual compensation. Awards of deferred cash compensation generally vest over a three to four year service period, subject to continued employment. Each award provides the employee with the right to receive future cash compensation payments, which are non-interest bearing, on the vesting date. Based upon the value of the deferred cash awards outstanding at February 22, 2021, which takes into account both the early February 2021 vesting of annual awards and the grant of new awards made as part of our 2020 compensation, we estimate payments of $23.9 million over the next four years, of which $0.9 million remains payable in 2021, $8.3 million will be payable in 2022, $6.7 million will be payable in 2023, $4.8 million will be payable in 2024, and $3.3 million will be payable in 2025. We will realize a corporate income tax deduction at the time of payment.
Our capital expenditures relate primarily to technology systems and periodic refurbishment of our leased premises, which generally range from $2.0 million to $3.0 million annually. During 2020, we relocated our headquarters office to new office space in New York City and incurred build out costs, net of the tenant improvement allowance, of approximately $8.4 million.
As a result of U.S. tax law change in 2017, we can repatriate foreign cash with minimal or no incremental U.S. tax burden. Subject to any limitations imposed by the Treasury Department and any future changes made to current tax law, we intend to repatriate our foreign cash subject to our estimated operating needs in our foreign jurisdictions, our needs for additional cash in the U.S. and other global cash management purposes.
While we believe that the cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our expected operating needs, which include, among other things, our tax obligations, interest and principal payments on our loan facilities, dividend payments, share repurchases related to the tax settlement payments upon the vesting of the restricted stock units, deferred cash compensation payments, we may adjust our variable expenses and other disbursements, if necessary, to meet our liquidity needs. However, there is no assurance that our cash flow will be sufficient to allow us to meet our operating obligations and make timely principal and interest payments under the credit agreement. Further, while we do not anticipate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material effect on our business we will continue to evaluate its impact on our business and make adjustments as may be necessary to preserve capital and maintain business operations. If we are unable to fund our operating and debt obligations, we may need to consider taking other actions, including issuing additional securities, seeking strategic investments, reducing operating costs or a combination of these actions, in each case on terms which may not be favorable to us. Further, failure to make timely principal and interest payments under the credit agreement could result in a default. A default of our credit agreement would permit lenders to accelerate the maturity for the debt and to foreclose upon any collateral securing the debt. In addition, the limitations imposed by the financing agreements on our ability to incur additional debt and to take other actions might significantly impair our ability to obtain other financing.
Cash Flows
2020. Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $1.3 million from December 31, 2019, including a decrease of $1.0 million resulting from the effect of the translation of foreign currency amounts into U.S. dollars at the year-end foreign currency conversion rates. We generated $84.0 million from operating activities, which consisted of $68.3 million from net income after giving effect to the non-cash items, $9.7 million of tenant incentive reimbursement received from a landlord, and a net decrease in working capital of $6.1 million, principally due to increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses and compensation payable. We used $18.1 million for investing activities, principally to fund equipment purchases and leasehold improvements. We used $66.1 million for financing activities, including $8.4 million for market purchases of our common stock, $14.8 million for the repurchase of our common stock from employees in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in settlement of restricted stock units, $38.8 million for the repayments of term loans, and $4.1 million for the payment of dividends.
2019. Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $42.4 million from December 31, 2018, including an increase of $1.6 million resulting from the effect of the translation of foreign currency amounts into U.S. dollars at the year-end foreign currency conversion rates. We generated $14.3 million from operating activities, which consisted of $64.4 million from net income after giving effect to the non-cash items partially offset by a net increase in working capital of $50.1 million, principally due to a
decrease in compensation payable. We used $1.4 million for investing activities, principally to fund equipment purchases and leasehold improvements. We used $56.9 million for financing activities, including $55.5 million for market purchases of our common stock, $14.0 million for the repurchase of our common stock from employees in conjunction with the payment of tax liabilities in settlement of restricted stock units, $13.1 million for the payment of the contingent obligation due selling unitholders of Cogent (an additional $5.7 million is classified as an operating outflow for a total payment of $18.9 million), $18.1 million for the quarterly principal term loan payments and $4.4 million for the payment of dividends, offset, in part, by net proceeds of $48.3 million from the refinancing of the 2017 TLB.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth information relating to our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not invest in any off-balance sheet vehicles that provide financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support, or engage in any leasing or hedging activities that expose us to any liability that is not reflected in our consolidated financial statements, except for those as described under “Contractual Obligations” above.
Market Risk
Our business is not capital-intensive and as such, is not subject to significant market or credit risks. Notwithstanding, the COVID-19 global health crisis and its impact on the U.S. and global economies could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Risks Related to Cash and Short-Term Investments
Our cash and cash equivalents are principally held in depository accounts and money market funds and other short-term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. We maintain our depository accounts with financial institutions with high credit ratings. Although these deposits are generally not insured, management believes we are not exposed to significant credit risk due to the financial position of the depository institutions in which those deposits are held. Further, we do not believe our cash equivalent investments are exposed to significant credit risk or interest rate risk due to the short-term nature and high quality of the underlying investments in which the funds are invested.
Credit Risk
We regularly review our accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts by considering factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the accounts receivable, and the current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay such amounts owed to the Company. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts that, in our opinion, provides for an adequate reserve to cover losses that may be incurred.
Exchange Rate Risk
We are exposed to the risk that the exchange rate of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies may have an adverse effect on the reported value of our non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Non functional currency related transaction gains and losses are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
In addition, the reported amounts of our revenues may be affected by movements in the rate of exchange between the currency in which an invoice is issued and paid and the U.S. dollar, in which our financial statements are denominated. We do not currently hedge against movements in these exchange rates through the use of derivative instruments or other methods. We analyze our potential exposure to a decline in exchange rates by performing a sensitivity analysis on our net income in those jurisdictions in which we have generated a significant portion of our foreign earnings, which generally include the United Kingdom, Europe, and Australia. During the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, the average value of the U.S. dollar weakened relative to the pound sterling, euro and Australian dollar. In aggregate, there was a slight positive impact on our revenues in 2020 as compared to 2019 as a result of the timing of recognition of foreign revenues. Even if the currency
rates had changed more materially, the impact would not have been significant to our foreign operations because our operating costs in foreign jurisdictions are denominated in local currency, and consequently we are effectively internally hedged to some extent against the impact in the movements of foreign currency relative to the U.S. dollar. While our earnings are subject to volatility from changes in foreign currency rates, we do not believe we face any material risk in this respect.
Interest Rate Risk
Our TLB bears interest at the U.S. Prime Rate plus 2.25% or LIBOR plus 3.25%. Because we have indebtedness which bears interest at variable rates, our financial results will be sensitive to changes in prevailing market rates of interest. As of December 31, 2020, we had $326.9 million of indebtedness outstanding, all of which bears interest at floating rates. The rate of interest varies from period to period and our interest rate exposure is not currently hedged to mitigate the effect of interest rate fluctuations. Depending upon future market conditions and our level of outstanding variable rate debt, we may enter into interest rate swap or other hedge arrangements (with counterparties that, in our judgment, have sufficient creditworthiness) to hedge our exposure against interest rate volatility. As of December 31, 2020, a 100 basis point increase in LIBOR would have increased our annual borrowing expense by $3.3 million.
The FCA, which regulates LIBOR, has announced that it will not compel panel banks to contribute to LIBOR after 2021. In November 2020, the ICE Benchmark Administration Limited announced a plan to extend the date as of which most U.S. LIBOR values would cease being computed from December 31, 2021 to June 30, 2023. Although financial regulators and industry working groups have suggested alternative reference rates, global consensus on alternative rates is lacking. It is not possible to predict whether LIBOR will continue to be viewed as an acceptable market benchmark or what rate or rates may become accepted alternatives to LIBOR. Although our credit agreement includes alternative rate fallback provisions, there can be no assurance the LIBOR phase out will not increase the cost of capital.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of its results of operation and financial condition is based on our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with GAAP in the United States, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions regarding future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. Management employs judgment in making these estimates in consideration of historical experience, currently available information and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements. Descriptions of our critical accounting policies and estimates, which we believe are those that are most important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, are set forth below in “Part IV - Item 15 - Notes to consolidated financial statements, Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and are incorporated by reference herein.