ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to highlight and supplement data and information presented elsewhere in this Annual Report, including the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Item 8. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and assumptions and involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report. See also “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Future results could differ significantly from the historical results presented in this section.
Business and Executive Overview
We started our business in 1960 and are among the longest-operating seller servicers in the United States. We are a growth-oriented mortgage company that employs a relationship-based loan sourcing strategy to execute our mission of delivering the promise of home ownership in neighborhoods and communities across the United States. Our business model is centered on providing a personalized mortgage-borrowing experience that is delivered by our knowledgeable loan officers and supported by our diverse product offerings. Throughout these individualized interactions, we work to earn our clients’ trust and confidence as a financial partner that can help them find their way through life’s changes and build for the future. Through steady organic growth and a series of targeted acquisitions, we grew our annual origination volume from $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2007 to $35.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 and grew our servicing portfolio from $2.5 billion of UPB as of December 31, 2007 to $60.0 billion of UPB as of December 31, 2020. Unless otherwise indicated, the UPB of our servicing portfolio excludes any subserviced loans. The historical information below is provided to show compounded annual growth since 2007, when Guild Mortgage Company was purchased from its founder by a management-led partnership that included a majority investment from MCMI.
Guild’s Annual Origination Volume and Market Share
Source: Inside Mortgage Finance Publications, Inc. Copyright © 2020. Used with permission.
(1)
CAGR is equal to the compound annual growth rate of Guild’s annual origination volume for the year ended December 31, 2007 through the year ended December 31, 2020.
Servicing Portfolio Growth
(UPB as of period end)(1)
(1)
Excludes subservicing portfolio of $844.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
Executive Summary of Results of Operations for Periods Presented
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Summary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated $35.3 billion of mortgage loans compared to $21.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $13.5 billion or 61.4%. This increase was primarily due to decreased interest rates, which led to an increase in origination volume across the U.S. mortgage market. Our servicing portfolio as of December 31, 2020 was $60.0 billion of UPB compared to $49.3 billion of UPB as of December 31, 2019, with the average size of the portfolio increasing 15.3% over that time. We generated $370.6 million of net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We generated $523.8 million of Adjusted Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $139.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a 276.6% increase, and we generated $714.3 million of Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $201.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a 254.5% increase. Please see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding our use of Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA, including limitations related to such non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation of such measures to net income, the nearest comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
The above-described increase in Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to the increase in loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net of $939.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net was driven by the increase in origination volume described above, as well as an increase in gain on sale margins on originated loans, which increased 122 basis points or 32.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in gain on sale margins was primarily due to an increase in the secondary marketing spread because of market volatility and low interest rates, which caused industry capacity constraints. Our increased origination volume also resulted in an increase in variable salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense of $375.6 million or 65.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Income includes a loss of $296.3 million due to a decrease in the fair value of our MSRs resulting from a decrease in projected duration of cash flow collections during the period. Comparatively, for the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a loss of $255.2 million due to a decrease in the fair value of MSRs. According to the Mortgage Finance Forecast from the Mortgage Bankers Association (the “MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast”), average 30-year mortgage rates declined by 90 basis points from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. A decline of this nature generally results in higher prepayment speeds and a subsequent downward adjustment to the fair value of our MSRs for the loans that still exist in our portfolio. However, when rates decline, our origination volume generally increases as refinance opportunities increase.
Management believes that maintaining both an origination segment and a servicing segment provides us with a more balanced business model in both rising and declining interest rate environments, compared to other industry participants that predominately focus on either origination or servicing, instead of both. In addition, one of our business strategies is to seek to recapture mortgage transactions when our borrowers prepay their loans. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a 26% purchase recapture rate, a 66% refinance recapture rate and a 60% overall recapture rate, compared to 26%, 64% and 56%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Purchase recapture is calculated based on those clients who originate a new mortgage for the purchase of a home, and refinance recapture is calculated based on those clients who originate a new mortgage to refinance an existing mortgage. Overall recapture rate is calculated as the total UPB of our clients that originated a new mortgage with us
in a given period, divided by the total UPB of our clients that paid off their existing mortgage and originated a new mortgage in the same period. This calculation excludes clients to whom we did not actively market due to contractual prohibitions or other business reasons.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
Business Operations and Liquidity
We continue to closely monitor the economic impact resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we experienced record origination volume and increased profit margins in our origination segment during the year ended December 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a slight negative impact on the financial results of our servicing segment. The federal government enacted the CARES Act, which allowed borrowers with federally backed loans to request a temporary mortgage forbearance. In February 2021, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Department of Agriculture announced an extension of the forbearance period of three to six months depending on the loan type. As a result of the CARES Act forbearance requirements and the subsequent extension of federal forbearance programs, we have recorded and expect to record additional increases in delinquencies in our servicing portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, the 60-plus day delinquency rate on our servicing portfolio was 3.5%, compared to a 60-plus day delinquency rate of 1.6% as of December 31, 2019. The 60-plus day delinquency rate in the U.S. mortgage market as of December 31, 2020 was 5.0%, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association. This increased delinquency rate on our servicing portfolio may require us to finance substantial amounts of advances of principal and interest, property taxes, insurance premiums and other expenses to protect investors’ interests in the properties securing the loans. We have increased our provision for foreclosure losses due to this increased delinquency rate, as described further below. These advances and payments, coupled with increased servicing costs and lower servicing revenue, have negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our cash position. We continuously monitor the requirements around these advances and how, if at all, they impact our liquidity. Additionally, we are currently prohibited from collecting certain servicing-related fees, such as late fees, and initiating foreclosure proceedings. As a result, we expect the effects of the CARES Act forbearance requirements and the subsequent federal forbearance programs to reduce our servicing income and increase our servicing expenses.
As of February 28, 2021, approximately 3.2% of the loans in our servicing portfolio had elected the forbearance option compared to the industry average of 5.2%, as reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association and, as of December 31, 2020, approximately 3.5% of the loans in our servicing portfolio had elected the forbearance option compared to the industry average of 5.5%, as reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association. Of the 3.2% of the loans in our servicing portfolio that had elected forbearance as of February 28, 2021, approximately 8.0% remained current on their February payments and, of the 3.5% of the loans in our servicing portfolio that had elected forbearance as of December 31, 2020, approximately 10.9% remained current on their December payments. We believe our portfolio has performed better than the industry average because of our in-house servicing capabilities and timely response to the COVID-19 pandemic and that our performance is a testament to the strength of our client relationships. Our in-house servicing team and local loan officers continue to work with our clients to understand forbearance plans and determine the best paths forward for their unique circumstances. By maintaining relationships with our clients throughout the loan lifecycle, and supporting our clients during times of uncertainty, we position ourselves to capture future business.
Servicing Portfolio Forbearance
(as of period end)
Source: Mortgage Bankers Association.
Increased Liquidity
During 2020, to support our increased loan origination volume, we increased the capacity of our existing loan funding facilities by $905.0 million, of which $180.0 million represented a temporary increase in capacity. We
added one additional loan funding facility during the second quarter of 2020 with a total facility size of $100.0 million, for which we subsequently increased the capacity by $100.0 million during the third quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate available amount under our loan facilities was approximately $3.0 billion. In January 2021, we added one additional loan funding facility with a total facility size of $250.0 million.
During 2020, we renewed two of our MSR notes payable and increased the aggregate committed amounts under those MSR notes payable by $42.0 million. See “-Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows” for further information regarding our funding facilities.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our business, results of operations and financial condition will ultimately depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic and actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic. See “Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and will likely continue to have, an adverse effect on our business, and its ultimate effect on our business and financial results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic and actions taken or to be taken by government authorities in response to the pandemic.”
Description of Certain Components of Financial Data
The primary components of our revenue and expenses are described below.
Our Components of Revenue
Loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net - This represents all income recognized from the time when a loan is originated until the time when a loan is subsequently sold to an investor and includes cash and non-cash components. Each component is described below:
•
Gain (loss) on sale of loans - Net proceeds from the difference between the quoted loan price committed to the client and the price received from the investor at loan sale, net of miscellaneous investor fees charged.
•
Loan origination fees - Fees collected from the client, which typically include processing, underwriting, funding, credit report, tax service, flood certification and appraisal fees, net of any associated third-party costs.
•
The fair value of the MSRs at time of sale - After a loan for which we continue to act as the servicer is sold to an investor, we record the value of the MSR at fair value. Fair value is estimated based on the present value of future cash flows. We utilize a third-party valuation service to determine this estimated value based on variables such as contractual servicing fees, ancillary fees, estimated prepayment speeds, discount rate and the cost to service.
•
Changes in the fair value of IRLC and MLHS - When the client accepts an interest rate lock, we record the estimated fair value of the loan. We also evaluate several factors to determine the likelihood of the loan closing and discount the value of any interest rate lock commitments (“IRLCs”) we consider having a lower probability of closing. The probability of the loan ultimately closing changes as the stage of the loan progresses from application to underwriting submission, loan approval and funding. Loans that close and are held for sale are commonly referred to as mortgage loans held for sale or “MLHS.” MLHS are also recorded at fair value. We typically determine the fair value of our MLHS based on investor committed pricing; however, we determine the fair value of any MLHS that is not allocated to a commitment based on current delivery trade prices.
•
Changes in the fair value of forward delivery commitments - We enter into forward delivery commitments to hedge against changes in the interest rates associated with our IRLCs and MLHS. Our hedging policies are set by our risk management function and are monitored daily. Typically, when the fair value of an IRLC or MLHS increases, the fair value of any related forward contract decreases.
•
Provision for investor reserves - At the time a loan is sold to an investor, we make certain representations and warranties. If defects are subsequently discovered in these representations and warranties that cause a loan to no longer satisfy the applicable investor eligibility requirements, we may be required to repurchase that loan. We are also required to indemnify several of our investors for borrowers’ prepayments and defaults. We estimate the potential for these losses based on our recent and historical loan repurchase and indemnification experience and our success rate on appeals. We also screen market conditions for any indications of a rise in delinquency rates, which may result in a heightened exposure to loss.
•
Early pay-off fees - The amount of gain on sale premium received from the investors who purchase our loans that we must return to those investors when loans sold to them are repaid before a specified point in time.
Loan servicing and other fees - Loan servicing and other fees consist of:
•
Loan servicing income - This represents the contractual fees that we earn by servicing loans for various investors. Fees are calculated based on a percentage of the outstanding principal balance and are recognized into revenue as related payments are received.
•
Other ancillary fees - We may also collect other ancillary fees from the client, such as late fees and nonsufficient funds fees.
•
Impound interest - We are required to pay interest to our clients annually based on the average escrow account balances that we hold in trust for the payment of their property taxes and insurance.
Valuation adjustment of mortgage servicing rights - We have elected to recognize MSRs at fair value. This requires that we periodically reevaluate the valuation of our MSRs following our initial analysis at the time of sale. A third party conducts a monthly valuation of our MSRs, and we record any changes to the fair value of our MSRs that result from changes in valuation model inputs or assumptions and collections of servicing cash flows in accordance with such third-party analysis. Changes in the fair value of our MSRs result in an adjustment to the value of our MSRs. See “Critical Accounting Policies-Mortgage Servicing Rights” for additional information regarding the valuation of our MSRs.
Interest income - Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on MLHS.
Interest expense - Interest expense consists primarily of interest paid on funding and non-funding debt facilities collateralized by our MLHS and MSRs. We define funding debt as all other debt related to operations, such as warehouse lines of credit and our early buyout facility, which we use to repurchase certain delinquent GNMA loans. Non-funding debt includes the note agreements collateralized by our MSRs (our “MSR notes payable”). We also record related bank charges and payoff interest expense as interest expense. Payoff interest expense is equal to the difference between what we collect in interest from our clients and what we remit in interest to the investors who purchase the loans that we originate. For loans sold through Agency MBS, we are required to remit a full month of interest to those investors, regardless of the date on which the client prepays during the payoff month, resulting in additional interest expense.
Other income, net - Other income, net typically includes dividend and fair value adjustments related to marketable securities that are generally immaterial to our operating results.
Our Components of Expenses
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits - Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense includes all payroll, incentive compensation and employee benefits paid to our employees, as well as expenses incurred in connection with our use of employment and temporary help agencies. Our loan officers are paid incentive compensation based on origination volume, resulting in a variable pay structure that fluctuates.
General and administrative - General and administrative expense primarily includes costs associated with professional services, attendance at conferences and meetings, office expenses, liability insurance, business licenses and other miscellaneous costs.
In addition, within general and administrative expense, we record any adjustments to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our completed acquisitions, commonly known as “earn-out payments.” These payments are estimated based on the present value of future cash flows during the earn-out period. The earn-out periods for our acquisitions span from three to five years, and the earn-out periods for two of our acquisitions are still ongoing.
Occupancy, equipment and communication - Occupancy, equipment and communication includes expenses related to the commercial office spaces we lease, as well as telephone and internet service and miscellaneous leased equipment used for operations.
Depreciation and amortization - We depreciate furniture and equipment on a straight-line basis for a period of up to five years and we record amortization expense related to our leasehold improvements on rented space. That amortization expense is recognized over the shorter of the lease term or the useful life of the asset. We also record costs related to the maintenance of software, which consist of both internal and external costs incurred in connection with software development and testing, as well as any costs associated with the implementation of new software. These costs are amortized over a three-year period.
Provision for foreclosure losses - We may incur a loss on government loans related to unreimbursed interest and costs associated with foreclosure. We reserve for government loans based on historical loss experience as well as for loan-specific issues related to foreclosure.
Income tax expense - We are subject to federal and state income tax. We record this expense based on our statutory federal and state tax rates. These statutory rates are adjusted for permanent non-deductible differences and reconciliation differences from prior years. We also evaluate material temporary differences to determine whether any additional adjustments to this expense are required.
Future Public Company Expenses
In connection with our having become and being a public company, we expect our expenses to increase, including, but not limited to, our legal, accounting and insurance expenses. Although we do not anticipate any increase in these expenses to have a material effect on our overall results of operations, our historical results of operations may not be indicative of our future results of operations. If we fail to manage these additional costs or to maintain or increase our revenue, we may incur losses in the future.
Key Performance Indicators
Management reviews several key performance indicators to evaluate our business results, measure our performance and identify trends to inform our business decisions. Summary data for these key performance indicators is listed below. Please refer to “Results of Operations” for additional metrics that management reviews in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements.
(1)
Includes retail and correspondent loans and excludes brokered loans.
(2)
Brokered loans are defined as loans we originate in the retail channel that are processed by us but underwritten and closed by another lender. These loans are typically for products we choose not to offer in-house.
(3)
Represents the components of loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net described under “-Our Components of Revenue” divided by total in-house origination to derive basis points. Our gain-on-sale margin based on pull-through adjusted lock volume was 449 basis points and 359 basis points for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Gain-on-sale margin based on pull-through adjusted lock volume represents the components of loan origination fees and gain on sales of loans, net described under “-Our Components of Revenue” divided by pull-through adjusted lock volume. Pull-through adjusted lock volume is equal to total locked volume multiplied by pull-through rates of 87.8% and 89.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We estimate the pull-through rate based on changes in pricing and actual borrower behavior using a historical analysis of loan closing data and “fallout” data with respect to the number of commitments that have historically remained unexercised. For additional information regarding our total locked volume and pull-through adjusted lock volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, see “-Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019-Revenue-Loan Origination Fees and Gain on Sale of Loans, Net.”
(4)
Represents the 30-year average conventional conforming note rate published monthly according to the MBA Mortgage Monthly Finance Forecast.
(5)
Excludes subserviced portfolio of $844.6 million and $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
(6)
Represents a metric used to determine the relative value of our MSRs in relation to our annualized retained servicing fee. It is calculated by dividing (a) the fair market value of our MSRs as of a specified date by (b) the weighted average annualized retained servicing fee for our servicing portfolio as of such date. We exclude purchased MSRs from this calculation because our servicing portfolio consists primarily of originated MSRs and, consequently, purchased MSRs do not have a material impact on our weighted average service fee.
(7)
Represents the gross amount of UPB paid off from our servicing portfolio.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP and to provide investors with additional information regarding our GAAP financial results, we have presented in this Annual Report Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Return on Equity, which are non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Adjusted Net Income. We define Adjusted Net Income as earnings before the change in the fair value measurements related to our MSRs, contingent liabilities related to completed acquisitions due to changes in valuation assumptions and stock-based compensation. The fair value of our MSRs is estimated based on a projection of expected future cash flows and the fair value of our contingent liabilities related to completed acquisitions is estimated based on a projection of expected future earn-out payments. Adjusted Net Income is also adjusted by applying an implied tax effect to these adjustments. The Company excludes the change in the fair value of its MSRs due to changes in model inputs and assumptions from Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA because the Company believes this non-cash, non-realized adjustment to total revenues is not indicative of the Company’s operating performance or results of operation but rather reflects changes in model inputs and assumptions (e.g., prepayment speed, discount rate and cost to service assumptions) that impact the carrying value of the Company’s MSRs from period to period.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest (without adjustment for net warehouse interest related to loan fundings and payoff interest related to loan prepayments), taxes, depreciation and amortization exclusive of any change in the fair value measurements of the MSRs due to valuation assumptions, contingent liabilities from business acquisitions and stock-based compensation. The Company excludes the change in the fair value of its MSRs due to changes in model inputs and assumptions from Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA because the Company believes this non-cash, non-realized adjustment to total revenues is not indicative of the Company’s operating performance or results of operation but rather reflects changes in model inputs and assumptions (e.g., prepayment speed, discount rate and cost to service assumptions) that impact the carrying value of the Company’s MSRs from period to period.
Adjusted Return on Equity. We define Adjusted Return on Equity as Adjusted Net Income as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders’ equity during the period. For periods of less than one year, Adjusted Return on Equity is shown on an annualized basis.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets and to develop operational goals for managing our business. These non-GAAP financial measures are designed to evaluate operating results exclusive of fair value adjustments that are not indicative of management’s operating performance. Accordingly, we believe that these financial measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects.
Our non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of these non-GAAP financial measures rather than net income (loss), which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP for Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA, and return on equity, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP for Adjusted Return on Equity. These limitations include that these non-GAAP financial measures are not based on a comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles and many of the adjustments to the GAAP financial measures reflect the exclusion of items that are recurring and may be reflected in the Company’s financial results for the foreseeable future. In addition, other companies may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison.
The following tables reconcile Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) and Adjusted Return on Equity to return on equity, the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
(1)
Implied tax rate used is 25.0% and 25.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table reconciles the valuation adjustment of mortgage servicing rights from the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income to the change in fair value of MSRs due to model inputs and assumptions included in the reconciliation tables above.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net income totaled $370.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by increased revenue from loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans. This increase in gain on sale of loans was primarily due to an increase in the secondary marketing spread because of market volatility and low interest rates, which caused industry capacity constraints. According to the MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast, average 30-year mortgage rates declined approximately 90 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020, which led to an increase in refinance activity. Refinance activity represented 61.4% of origination volume in the U.S. mortgage market during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 41.5% of origination volume during the year ended December 31, 2019, according to the MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast. As consumer demand for refinancing increased, our gain on sale margins increased. Our origination volume increased by $13.5 billion, or 62.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, our income from loan servicing and other fees increased by $17.5 million or 12.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases in loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net and loan servicing and other fees were partially offset by a loss associated with the decrease in the fair value of our MSRs resulting from the valuation model impact of a decrease in projected duration of cash flow collection during the period, as described further below. In a declining mortgage interest rate environment, it is typical for us to experience downward MSR valuation adjustments due to the increased likelihood of prepayments for the loans that still exist in our MSR portfolio. However, when rates decline, originations tend to increase as refinance opportunities increase.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense increased by $375.6 million or 65.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase primarily resulted from increased variable incentive compensation paid to our origination teams and our hiring of additional employees to support the increases in our origination and servicing volume. General and administrative expense increased by $38.0 million or 59.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to an upward adjustment to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our completed acquisitions. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $31.7 million of expense related to earn-out valuation adjustments compared to $7.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, there was an increase in professional fees paid to third party vendors to support the growth in our origination volume during the period and additional legal, accounting, and other costs related to becoming a public company.
Revenue
Loan Origination Fees and Gain on Sale of Loans, Net
The table below provides additional detail regarding the loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net for the periods presented.
The table below provides additional detail regarding the composition of our origination volume and other key performance indicators for the periods presented.
(1)
Includes retail and correspondent loans and excludes brokered loans.
(2)
Represents loans sold for which we continue to act as the servicer.
(3)
Represents loans sold for which we do not continue to act as the servicer.
(4)
Represents the components of loan origination fees and gain on sales of loans, net described under “-Our Components of Revenue” divided by total in-house origination to derive basis points. Our gain-on-sale margin based on pull-through adjusted lock volume was 449 basis points and 359 basis points for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Gain-on-sale margin based on pull-through adjusted lock volume represents the components of loan origination fees and gain on sales of loans, net described under “-Our Components of Revenue” divided by pull-through adjusted lock volume.
(5)
Total locked volume represents the aggregate dollar value of the potential loans for which the Company has agreed to extend credit to consumers at specified rates for a specified period of time, subject to certain contingencies that are described in the IRLCs between the Company and each of those consumers. The total locked volume for a given period is representative of the IRLCs that the Company has initially entered into during that period.
(6)
Pull-through adjusted lock volume equal to total locked volume multiplied by pull-through rates of 87.8% and 89.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We estimate the pull-through rate based on changes in pricing and actual borrower behavior using a historical analysis of loan closing data and “fallout” data with respect to the number of commitments that have historically remained unexercised.
Gain on sale of loans increased by $628.2 million or 104.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a $13.2 billion or 62.3% increase in loan sales for the same period. Additionally, gain on sale margins on originated loans increased by 122 basis points or 32.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The initial fair value recorded for our originated MSRs increased by $166.3 million or 117.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily caused by an increase in our origination volume, which increased $13.5 billion or 62.1% for the same period, as well as an increase in the percentage of our loans sold for which we continued to act as the servicer (i.e., on a “service retained” basis). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we retained 90.4% of our origination volume compared to 66.5% of our origination volume for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjustments to the recorded fair value of our MLHS and IRLCs, net of any related changes in the recorded fair value of our forward delivery commitments, resulted in a gain of $118.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This gain partially resulted from increased origination volume for the same time period as described above. Additionally, total volume of IRLCs during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.7 billion compared to $25.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $19.1 million or 74.5%. Lastly, this increase is due in part to the increased gain on sale margins on originated loans of 122 basis points or 32.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and increased gain on sale margins on pull-through adjusted lock volume of 90 basis points or 25.1% during the same time period.
In response to our increased origination volume, origination fee income increased by $42.9 million or 63.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our provision for investor reserves decreased by $3.1 million or 30.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. An assessment of trending historical and current claims showed that current claim activity in relation to origination volume is lower than previously anticipated, and as such we reduced a portion of our reserve in the year ended December 31, 2020. We continue to monitor investor reserves and potential losses regularly to assess if further changes are needed.
Loan Servicing and Other Fees
The table below provides additional details regarding our loan servicing and other fees for the periods presented.
The table below provides additional details regarding our servicing portfolio composition and key performance indicators for the period presented.
(1)
We previously purchased two servicing portfolios that totaled $844.6 million and $1.3 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, that are currently being subserviced by a third party and are excluded from these numbers.
(2)
Includes all in-house loans originated in period, irrespective if it is eventually sold, service retained or service released.
(3)
Represents loans sold for which we do not continue to act as the servicer of the loan.
(4)
Represents the percentage of UPB that will pay off ahead of time in each period, calculated as an annual rate.
(5)
Represents a metric used to determine the relative value of our MSRs in relation to our annualized retained servicing fee. It is calculated by dividing (a) the fair market value of our MSRs as of a specified date by (b) the weighted average annualized retained servicing fee for our servicing portfolio as of such date. We exclude purchased MSRs from this calculation because our servicing portfolio consists primarily of originated MSRs and, consequently, purchased MSRs do not have a material impact on our weighted average service fee.
Total loan servicing and other fees increased $17.5 million or 12.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the increase in our average servicing portfolio, which increased 15.3% over the same time period. Although the increase in loan servicing and other fees is directionally consistent with our average servicing portfolio growth over the same time period, we are earning slightly lower than normal servicing and ancillary fee income due to the inability to collect late charges and servicing fees for customers who have elected to accept forbearance relief under the CARES Act. Those clients are currently not required to make their mortgage payments. In February 2021 the federal government announced an extension of the loan forbearance relief program of three to six months depending on loan type.
Valuation Adjustment of Mortgage Servicing Rights
The table below presents our MSR valuation adjustment for the periods presented.
Year Ended
December 31,
($ in thousands)
$ Change
% Change
MSR valuation adjustment
$
(296,307
)
$
(255,219
)
$
(41,088
)
16.1
%
The fair value of our MSRs declined by $296.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a decline of $255.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The fair value of our MSRs generally declines as interest rates decline and prepayments increase. Average 30-year mortgage rates declined by 90 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our refinance recapture rate was 66% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 64% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The weighted average coupon rate of loans for which we have an MSR decreased from 4.2% at December 31, 2019 to 3.6% at December 31, 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $1.1 million or 1.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily due to a decrease in interest income earnings credits of $8.1 million or 71.2%. Additionally, there was a decrease in the weighted average note rate of originated loans, which were held for sale for an average of 15 days before being sold to an investor, from 4.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in interest income, funding of $5.1 million or 11.9%. Although the increase in interest income, funding is directionally consistent with our increase in origination volume of 62.1%, we are earning lower than normal interest income due to the decreased interest rates described above.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $4.8 million or 8.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Payoff interest expense increased by $4.2 million or 69.3% for the same time period, primarily due to increased payoff volume. When a client pays off their loan with us, the client pays interest only up until the date of payoff. As a seller-servicer, however, for loans sold through Agency MBS we are required to remit the full month of interest to the investors who purchase the loans we originate, even though the client will not pay a full month of interest for that month. Our loan prepayments increased by $10.2 billion or 109.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, bank servicing charges and collateral handling fees increased $1.7 million or 24.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to increased origination volume for the same time period. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in interest expense related to warehouse lines of credit of $2.1 million or 6.4% for the same time period. Our warehouse lines of credit costs are generally aligned with LIBOR and therefore, as these rates decreased by 1.6% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, our cost of funds decreased accordingly.
Other Income, Net
Changes in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 were immaterial to the overall results of operations.
Summary of Expenses:
Salaries, Incentive Compensation and Benefits
A breakdown of the components of salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense is provided below.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense increased by $375.6 million or 65.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Incentive compensation expense increased by $254.5 million or 83.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to an increase in variable incentive compensation paid to sales teams based on the increase in our origination volume during that period.
Salaries expense increased by $67.6 million or 31.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This is primarily because we hired additional permanent and temporary employees and paid increased variable bonus and overtime to support the increase in our origination and servicing volumes during the year.
Benefits expense increased by $53.5 million or 85.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in the fair value of the deferred compensation plan for certain executive employees of the Company of $30.3 million. Prior to becoming a public company, this deferred compensation plan was tied to the Company’s net worth, which increased from $406.0 million at December 31, 2019 to $688.9 million at September 30, 2020. Additionally, employee profit sharing, a portion of which is tied to the Company’s net income, increased $9.5 million. Lastly, employment taxes increased due to increased personnel expenses.
General and Administrative
A breakdown of general and administrative expense is provided below.
General and administrative expense increased by $38.0 million or 59.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Approximately $23.8 million of this increase in general and administrative expense resulted from an adjustment to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our completed acquisitions.
Professional fees increased by $13.2 million or 56.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in professional fees arose primarily from an increase of $7.2 million in fees paid to third party vendors to support the growth in our origination volume during the period. We also incurred additional legal, accounting, and other costs related to becoming a public company.
Miscellaneous expense increased by $3.3 million or 72.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher miscellaneous loan level costs arising from our increased origination and servicing volume during the period.
Occupancy, Equipment and Communication
A breakdown of the components of occupancy, equipment and communication expense is provided below.
Occupancy, equipment and communication expense increased by $3.4 million or 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Occupancy costs generally consist of fixed
costs and remain consistent except for the typical increase in building rental expense each year, which is usually aligned with inflation, and except for any increases associated with new acquisitions, expansion into new territories and entry into new material building leases. Communication expense increased $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the needs of a remote working environment because of COVID-19-related restrictive measures.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of leasehold improvements including technology upgrades to support our growth.
Provision for Foreclosure Losses
Provision for foreclosure losses expense increased by $3.8 million or 97.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Although we have experienced a decrease in overall foreclosure starts and sales due to the CARES Act’s foreclosure moratorium and the federal government’s subsequent extension of its mortgage forbearance programs, we have increased our foreclosure loss reserves due to increases in significant delinquencies, which are associated with higher costs. Additionally, we anticipate an increase in the time needed to complete a foreclosure due to expected delays and backlogs throughout the foreclosure process. We continue to monitor foreclosure reserves and potential losses regularly to assess if further changes are needed.
Summary Results by Segment for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Our operations are comprised of two distinct but related reportable segments that we refer to as our origination and servicing segments. We operate our origination segment from approximately 202 office locations. Our licensed sales professionals and support staff cultivate deep relationships with our referral partners and clients and provide a customized approach to the loan transaction, whether it is a purchase or a refinance. Although our origination and servicing segments are separated for this presentation, management sees the two segments as intricately related and interdependent. We believe that our servicing segment provides a steady stream of revenue to support our origination segment and that, more importantly, our servicing segment positions us to build longstanding client relationships that drive repeat and referral business back to the origination segment to recapture our clients’ future mortgage transactions. In particular, the growth of our servicing segment is dependent on the continued growth of our origination volume because our servicing portfolio consists primarily of originated MSRs.
We measure the performance of our segments primarily based on their net income (loss). See below for an overview and discussion of each of our segments’ results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. These results do not include unallocated corporate costs.
Origination
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The origination segment’s net income increased by $583.9 million or 321.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily driven by increased revenue earned from loan origination fees and gain on sale of loans, net of $936.2 million or 114.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Average 30-year mortgage rates declined approximately 90 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020, which led to an increase in refinance activity. Refinance activity represented 61.4% of origination volume in the U.S. mortgage market during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 41.5% of origination volume during the year ended December 31, 2019. As consumer demand for refinancing increased, our gain on sale margins increased. Our origination volume increased 62.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, gain on sale margins on originated loans increased 122 basis points or 32.3% for the same time period.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits expense increased by $316.3 million or 57.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to increased variable incentive compensation paid to our origination teams and our hiring of additional employees to support the increase in our
origination volume. General and administrative expense increased by $40.6 million or 166.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $23.8 million increase in the adjustment to the fair value of the contingent liabilities related to our completed acquisitions.
Servicing
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Our servicing segment incurred a net loss of $184.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $138.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in net loss was primarily driven by $296.3 million in adjustments to the fair value of our MSRs during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $255.2 million in adjustments to the fair value of our MSRs during the year ended December 31, 2019. The fair value of our MSRs generally declines as interest rates decline and as prepayments increase. Average 30-year mortgage rates declined by 90 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020. Although loan servicing and other fees increased by $17.5 million or 12.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, we are earning slightly lower than normal servicing and ancillary fee income due to the inability to collect late charges and servicing fees for customers who have elected to accept forbearance relief under the CARES Act. The increase in loan servicing and other fees was partially offset by interest expense of $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to interest income of $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in interest expense is due to a decrease in interest income earnings credits of $8.1 million or 71.2% for this time period. Additionally, there was an increase in payoff interest expense of $4.2 million or 69.3% due to an increase of $10.2 billion or 109.1% in loan prepayments for this time period.
Salaries, incentive compensation and benefits increased by $9.5 million or 61.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to our hiring of additional employees to support the increase in our servicing volume and to support the needs of clients who elected to accept forbearance relief under the CARES Act. Additionally, our foreclosure loss provisions increased by $3.8 million or 97.7% due to increases in significant delinquencies, which are associated with higher costs, as well as an anticipated increase in the time needed to complete a foreclosure due to expected delays and backlogs throughout the foreclosure process.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have included:
•
cash flows from our operations, including:
•
sale of whole loans into the secondary market;
•
loan origination fees;
•
servicing fee income; and
•
interest income on MLHS;
•
borrowings on warehouse lines of credit to originate mortgage loans; and
•
borrowings on our MSR notes payable.
Historically, our primary uses of funds have included:
•
cash flows from our operations, including but not limited to:
•
origination of MLHS;
•
payment of interest expense; and
•
payment of operating expenses;
•
repayments on warehouse lines of credit;
•
distributions to shareholders prior to our IPO; and
•
acquisitions of other mortgage businesses.
We are also subject to contingencies which may have a significant effect on the use of our cash. We believe that our cash flows from operations and other available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months.
In order to originate and aggregate loans for sale into the secondary market, we use our own working capital and borrow or obtain money on a short-term basis, primarily through committed and uncommitted loan funding facilities that we have established with large national and global banks.
Our loan funding facilities are primarily in the form of master repurchase agreements, which we refer to as “warehouse lines of credit.” Loans financed under these facilities are generally financed at approximately 97% to 98% of the principal balance of the loan (although certain types of loans are financed at lower percentages of the principal balance of the loan), which requires us to fund the balance from cash generated from our operations. Once closed, the underlying residential mortgage loan that is held for sale is pledged as collateral for the borrowing or advance that was made under these loan funding facilities. In most cases, the loans will remain in one of the loan funding facilities for only a short time, generally less than one month, until the loans are pooled and sold. During the time the loans are held for sale, we earn interest income from the borrower on the underlying mortgage loan. This income is partially offset by the interest and fees we must pay under the loan funding facilities.
When we sell a pool of loans in the secondary market, the proceeds received from the sale of the loans are used to pay back the amounts we owe on the loan funding facilities. We rely on the cash generated from the sale of loans to fund future loans and repay borrowings under our loan funding facilities. Delays or failures to sell loans in the secondary market could have an adverse effect on our liquidity position.
As discussed in Note 12, Warehouse Lines of Credit to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, as of December 31, 2020, we had eight different loan funding facilities in different amounts and with various maturities. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate available amount under our loan facilities was approximately $3.0 billion, with combined outstanding balances of approximately $2.1 billion.
As discussed in Note 13, Notes Payable to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, as of December 31, 2020, we had three different MSR notes payable in different amounts with different maturities. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate available amount under our MSR notes payable was $415.0 million, with combined outstanding balances of $145.8 million and unutilized capacity of $70.9 million, based on total committed amounts and our borrowing base limitations. The borrowing capacity under our MSR notes payable is restricted by the valuation of our servicing portfolio.
The amount of financing advanced on each individual loan under our loan funding facilities is determined by agreed upon advance rates but may be less than the stated rate due to fluctuations in the market value of the mortgage loans securing the financings. If the lenders providing the funds under our loan funding facilities determine that the value of the loans serving as collateral for our borrowings under those facilities has decreased, they can initiate a margin call to require us to provide additional collateral or reduce the amount outstanding with respect to those loans. Our inability or unwillingness to satisfy such a request could result in the termination of the related facilities and a potential default under our other loan funding facilities. In addition, a large unanticipated margin call could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity.
The amount owed and outstanding under our loan funding facilities fluctuates significantly based on our origination volume, the amount of time it takes us to sell the loans we originate and the amount of loans we are self-funding with cash. We may from time to time post surplus cash as additional collateral to buy-down the effective interest rates of certain loan funding facilities or to self-fund a portion of our loan originations. As of December 31, 2020, we had posted $15.6 million in cash as additional collateral. We have the ability to draw back this additional collateral at any time unless a margin call has been made or a default has occurred under the relevant facilities.
We also have an early buyout facility that allows us to purchase certain delinquent GNMA loans that we service and finance them on the facility until the loan is cured or subsequently sold. The capacity of this uncommitted facility is $75.0 million and, at December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on the facility was $25.2 million.
Our loan funding facilities and MSR notes payable generally require us to comply with certain operating and financial covenants and the availability of funds under these facilities are subject to, among other conditions, our continued compliance with these covenants. These financial covenants include, but are not limited to, maintaining a certain (i) minimum tangible net worth, (ii) minimum liquidity and (iii) a maximum ratio of total liabilities or total debt to tangible net worth and satisfying certain pre-tax net income requirements. A breach of these covenants could result in an event of default under our funding facilities, which would allow the related lenders to pursue certain remedies. In addition, each of these facilities includes cross default or cross acceleration provisions that could result in all of our funding facilities terminating if an event of default or acceleration of maturity occurs under any one of them. We believe we were in compliance with all of these covenants as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Our debt obligations are summarized below by facility as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, this facility was amended with a maturity date of 30 days from written notice by either the financial institution or the Company.
(2)
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, this facility was reduced to $500.0 million and amended with a maturity date of February 2022.
(3)
Amounts drawn on the MSR notes payable with this lender reduce the facility size available under the warehouse line of credit with this lender by an equal and offsetting amount.
(4)
Each buyout transaction carries a maximum term of four years from the date of repurchase.
(5)
Facility provides for committed amount of $100.0 million, which can be increased up to $150.0 million.
(6)
Facility provides for committed amount of $135.0 million, which can be increased up to $200.0 million.
The investors to whom we sell mortgage loans we originate in the secondary market require us to abide by certain operating and financial covenants. These covenants include maintaining (i) a certain minimum net worth, (ii) a certain minimum liquidity, (iii) a certain minimum of total liquid assets, (iv) a certain maximum ratio of adjusted net worth to total assets and (v) fidelity bond and mortgage servicing errors and omissions coverage. A breach of these covenants could result in an event of default and could disallow us to continue selling mortgage loans to one or all of these investors in the secondary market which, in turn, could have a significant impact on our liquidity and results of operations. We believe we were in compliance with all of these covenants as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
When we sell loans in the secondary market, we have the option to sell them service released or service retained. The decision whether to sell a loan that we originated service released or service retained is based on factors such as execution and price, liquidity needs and the desire to retain the related client relationship. When we sell a loan service retained, we continue to act as the servicer for the life of the loan. We rely on income from loan servicing and other fees over the life of the loan to generate cash. Certain investors have different rules for the servicer to follow should a loan go into default. As the servicer, we may be legally obligated to make cash payments to the investor who purchased the loan, should the borrower discontinue making payments on the loan. This could have a negative impact to our cash and liquidity; however, we may be able to use other borrower prepayments to cover delinquencies. Should delinquencies significantly increase, or prepayments significantly decrease, we could be forced to use our own cash or borrow on other types of financing in order to make the required monthly payments to the investors who have purchased loans from us. We may also be contractually required to repurchase or indemnify loans with origination defects.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are summarized below.
Operating activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by changes in the levels of inventory of loans held for sale, as shown below.
Cash used in operating activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year period, consistent with the increase in loan origination volume for the same time period. The increase in cash used for loans held for sale was partially offset by cash provided by other operating sources, which was primarily due to an increase in the projected duration of the cash flows to be earned with respect to our MSRs.
Investing activities
Our investing activities primarily consist of purchases of property and equipment and acquisitions. Cash used in investing activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year period, which was primarily due to $8.2 million invested in leasehold improvements, equipment and technology upgrades, and $9.8 million used for certain payments made to Guild Mortgage Company LLC’s parent entity prior to our restructuring and IPO.
Financing activities
Our cash flows from financing activities are primarily influenced by changes in the levels of warehouse lines of credit used to fund loan originations, which were consistent with the increase in loan origination volume.
Cash provided by other financing sources decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year period, which was primarily driven by the increase in repayments on our MSR notes payable of $110.0 million and a decrease in borrowings on our MSR notes payable of $20.0 million.
Balance Sheet Analysis
The following is a summary of key balance sheet items as of the dates presented.
December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total assets increased by $2.2 billion from $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2019 to $4.8 billion as of December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the increase in MLHS of $0.9 billion and the increase in GNMA loans for which we have repurchase rights of $0.9 billion. The increase in MLHS was the result of an increase in our origination volume of 113.4% for December 2020 compared to December 2019. The increase in our inventory of loans for which we have repurchase rights resulted from increased delinquency on loans in forbearance under the CARES Act. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $0.9 billion of our inventory of loans for which we have repurchase rights was related to loans in forbearance under the CARES Act.
Total liabilities increased by $1.9 billion from $2.2 billion as of December 31, 2019 to $4.1 billion as of December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $0.8 billion increase in the balances under our warehouse lines of credit and a $0.9 billion increase in GNMA loans for which we have repurchase rights. This $0.9 billion increase in GNMA loans for which we have repurchase rights resulted from increased delinquency on loans in forbearance under the CARES Act. The increase of 64.5% in the balances under our warehouse lines of credit resulted from the increase in our origination volume in December 2020 compared to December 2019.
Contractual Obligations
Repurchase and indemnification obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we are exposed to liability with respect to certain representations and warranties that we make to the investors who purchase the loans that we originate. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to repurchase mortgage loans, or indemnify the purchaser of such loans for losses incurred, if there has been a breach of these representations and warranties, or in the case of early payment defaults. In addition, in the event of an early payment default, we are contractually obligated to refund certain premiums paid to us by the investors who purchased the related loan. See Note 17, Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
Interest rate lock commitments, loan sale and forward commitments
We enter into IRLCs with clients who have applied for residential mortgage loans and who meet certain credit and underwriting criteria. These commitments expose us to market risk if interest rates change during the period of time in which the loan is not economically hedged or committed to be sold to an investor. We are also exposed to credit loss if a loan for which we entered into an IRLC is originated and is not sold to an investor and the related client does not perform. The collateral upon extension of credit typically consists of a first deed of trust in the mortgagor’s residential property. Commitments to originate loans do not necessarily reflect future cash requirements as some commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon. Total commitments to originate loans, adjusted for pull-through, were approximately $4.5 billion and $1.5 billion as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Certain of these estimates significantly influence the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and they require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments. Although we believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements were appropriate given the circumstances at the time they were made, actual results could materially differ from those estimates. Our critical accounting policies primarily relate to the fair value estimates of our MLHS, MSRs, IRLCs and forward delivery commitments. See Note 2, Fair Value Measurements to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for additional information. Below is a summary of our assets recorded at fair value compared to our total assets and stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As shown above, our consolidated balance sheet is substantially comprised of assets and liabilities that are measured at or based on their fair values. The decreases in the percentage of assets carried at fair value compared to total assets from 2019 to 2020 is due to the increase in GNMA loans subject to repurchase right at December 31,
2020. These loans, which are not measured at fair value, increased $871.5 million over December 31, 2019. Changes in the inputs used to measure the fair value of these assets can have significant effects on their reported balances.
As a result of the difficulty in observing certain significant inputs affecting our fair value assets and liabilities, we are required to make subjective judgments regarding the fair values of these items. Different persons in possession of the same facts may reasonably arrive at different conclusions as to the inputs used in valuing these assets and liabilities and their fair values. Such differences may result in significantly different fair value measurements. Likewise, due to the general illiquidity of some of these assets, subsequent transactions with respect to them may be at values significantly different from those we record.
Due to the difficulty and complexity in measuring certain of our fair value assets and liabilities, we engage third parties to assist management in determining their values. We have also established controls in which management reviews and discusses these valuations with our accounting department and any third parties that we have engaged for this purpose to ensure accuracy over financial reporting. We re-measure the fair value of these assets and liabilities on a monthly or quarterly basis by evaluating certain observable information, which may include current market pricing, recent trade activity, and industry data.
Mortgage Loans Held for Sale
MLHS are classified within “Level Two” of the valuation hierarchy because we determine their fair value based on secondary market pricing for loans with similar characteristics. We determine the fair value of our MLHS based on either: (i) the fair value of securities backed by similar mortgage loans, adjusted for certain other factors, including credit risk and the value attributable to the related servicing rights, (ii) our investors’ current commitments to purchase loans or (iii) recent observable market trades for similar loans, adjusted for credit risk and other individual loan characteristics.
Mortgage Servicing Rights
MSRs are classified within Level Three of the valuation hierarchy because we determine their fair value based on unobservable inputs and because there is no active market for MSRs. To determine the fair value of our MSRs when they are created, we use our valuation model that calculates the present value of the future cash flows related to them. Our MSR valuation model incorporates assumptions that market participants would use in estimating future net servicing income, including estimates of contractual service fees, ancillary income and late fees, the cost of servicing, the discount rate, float value, the inflation rate, estimated prepayment speeds and default rates. A third party conducts a monthly valuation of our MSRs, and we record any changes to the fair value of our MSRs that result from changes in valuation model inputs or assumptions and collections of servicing cash flows in accordance with such third-party analysis and GAAP. Changes in economic and other relevant conditions could cause the assumptions used in valuing our MSRs, such as those with respect to prepayment speeds, to be incorrect and such changes could result in fluctuations in the recorded value of our MSRs.
Derivative Instruments
IRLCs are classified within Level Three of the valuation hierarchy because we determine their value based upon unobservable inputs and because there is no active market for IRLCs. We determine the fair value of our IRLCs based upon the estimated fair value of the underlying mortgage loan, including the expected net future cash flows related to servicing that mortgage loan, net of estimated incentive compensation, and adjusted for: (i) estimated costs to complete and originate the loan and (ii) an adjustment to reflect the estimated percentage of IRLCs that will result in a closed mortgage loan under the original terms of the agreement (the “pull-through rate”). We estimate the pull-through rate based on changes in pricing and actual borrower behavior using a historical analysis of loan closing data and “fallout” data with respect to the number of commitments that have historically remained unexercised.
Forward delivery commitments
Forward delivery commitments are classified within Level Two of the valuation hierarchy. We determine the fair value of our forward delivery commitments based upon the current agency mortgage-backed security market TBA pricing specific to the related loan program, delivery coupon and delivery date of the trade. We also enter into best efforts sales commitments for certain loans at the time the borrower commitment is made. These best-efforts sales commitments are valued by comparing the committed price to the counterparty against the current market price of the IRLC or MLHS.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Business, Basis of Presentation, and Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting developments and their expected effects on Guild.