ITEM 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a global packaged foods company. We develop distinctive value-added food products and market them under unique brand names. We work continuously to improve our core products and to create new products that meet consumers’ evolving needs and preferences. In addition, we build the equity of our brands over time with strong consumer-directed marketing, innovative new products, and effective merchandising. We believe our brand-building approach is the key to winning and sustaining leading share positions in markets around the globe.
Our fundamental financial goal is to generate competitively differentiated returns for our shareholders over the long term. We believe achieving that goal requires us to generate a consistent balance of net sales growth, margin expansion, cash conversion, and cash return to shareholders over time.
Our long-term growth objectives are to deliver the following performance on average over time:
 2 to 3 percent annual growth in organic net sales;
 mid-single-digit annual growth in adjusted operating profit;
 mid- to high-single-digit annual growth in adjusted diluted earnings per share (EPS);
 free cash flow conversion of at least 95 percent of adjusted net earnings after tax; and
 cash return to shareholders of 80 to 90 percent of free cash flow, including an attractive dividend yield.
We are executing our Accelerate strategy to drive sustainable, profitable growth and top-tier shareholder returns over the long term. The strategy focuses on four pillars to create competitive advantages and win: boldly building brands, relentlessly innovating, unleashing our scale, and being a force for good. We are prioritizing our core markets, global platforms, and local gem brands that have the best prospects for profitable growth and we are committed to reshaping our portfolio with strategic acquisitions and divestitures to further enhance our growth profile.
We expect that changes in consumer behaviors driven by the COVID-19 pandemic will result in ongoing elevated consumer demand for food at home, relative to pre-pandemic levels. These changes include more time spent working from home and increased consumer appreciation for cooking and baking. We plan to capitalize on these opportunities, addressing evolving consumer needs through our leading brands, innovation, and advantaged capabilities to generate profitable growth.
In fiscal 2021, we executed well amid the uncertain environment caused by the pandemic, delivering strong growth in organic net sales, adjusted operating profit, and adjusted diluted EPS. We achieved each of the three priorities we established at the beginning of the year:
We competed effectively, everywhere we play, highlighted by market share gains across each of our five global platforms: cereal, pet food, ice cream, snack bars, and Mexican food. Our positive market share performance amid pandemic-driven elevated demand for food at home helped drive organic net sales growth in our North America Retail, Europe & Australia, and Asia & Latin America segments. Conversely, lower away-from-home food demand stemming from the pandemic resulted in a decline in organic net sales for our Convenience Stores & Foodservice segment. For our Pet segment, which was largely unaffected by the pandemic, we were able to generate organic net sales growth despite the comparison against an extra month of results in the prior year.
We drove efficiency to fuel investment in our brands and capabilities. We generated strong levels of Holistic Margin Management (HMM) cost savings and were able to meaningfully increase our investment in brand building activities and in strategic capabilities such as E-commerce, Digital, Data & Analytics, and Strategic Revenue Management.
We reduced our debt leverage and increased our financial flexibility. As a result of our continued cash discipline, we were able to reduce our debt and generate a reduction in our leverage ratio. Due to our improved balance sheet position, we were able to resume dividend growth and share repurchase activity during fiscal 2021.
We also announced important transactions during fiscal 2021 intended to reshape our portfolio for growth, in line with our Accelerate strategy. In March 2021, we announced the proposed sale of our European Yoplait operations to Sodiaal, in exchange for full ownership of the Canadian Yoplait business and a reduced royalty rate for the use of the Yoplait and Liberté brands in the United States and Canada. The proposed transaction would be anticipated to close by the end of calendar 2021, subject to appropriate labor consultations, regulatory filings, and other customary closing conditions. In May 2021, we reached a definitive agreement to acquire Tyson Foods’ pet treats business for $1.2 billion in cash. The acquisition is expected to close in the first quarter of fiscal 2022, subject to regulatory approval and other customary closing conditions.
Our consolidated net sales for fiscal 2021 rose 3 percent to $18.1 billion. On an organic basis, net sales increased 4 percent compared to year-ago levels. Operating profit of $3.1 billion increased 6 percent. Adjusted operating profit of $3.2 billion increased 2 percent on a constant-currency basis. Diluted EPS of $3.78 was up 6 percent compared to fiscal 2020 results. Adjusted diluted EPS of $3.79 increased 4 percent on a constant-currency basis (See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)).
Net cash provided by operations totaled $3.0 billion in fiscal 2021 representing a conversion rate of 127 percent of net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests. This cash generation supported capital investments totaling $531 million, and our resulting free cash flow was $2.4 billion at a conversion rate of 103 percent of adjusted net earnings, including earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests. We returned cash to shareholders through dividends totaling $1.2 billion and share repurchases totaling $301 million, and we reduced total debt outstanding by $928 million. Our ratio of net debt-to-operating cash flow was 3.7 in fiscal 2021, and our net debt-to-adjusted earnings before net interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (net debt-to-adjusted EBITDA) ratio was 2.9 (See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
A detailed review of our fiscal 2021 performance compared to fiscal 2020 appears below in the section titled “Fiscal 2021 Consolidated Results of Operations.” A detailed review of our fiscal 2020 performance compared to our fiscal 2019 performance is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Fiscal 2020 Results of Consolidated Operations,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
In fiscal 2022, we expect to continue to compete effectively in a dynamic environment, work aggressively to navigate a turbulent cost environment, and successfully execute our portfolio and organization reshaping actions. We expect the largest factors impacting our performance will be the relative balance of at-home versus away-from-home consumer food demand and the inflationary cost environment, both of which remain uncertain. We expect at-home food demand will decline year over year across most of our core markets, though will remain above pre-pandemic levels. Conversely, we expect away-from-home food demand to continue to recover, though not fully to pre-pandemic levels. With roughly 85 percent of our net sales representing at-home food occasions, we expect these dynamics to result in lower aggregate consumer demand in our categories in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 levels.
Total input cost inflation is expected to be approximately 7 percent of cost of goods sold in fiscal 2022. We are addressing the inflationary environment with strong HMM cost savings expected to total roughly 4 percent of cost of goods sold and with positive net price realization generated through our Strategic Revenue Management capability.
Based on these assumptions, our key full-year fiscal 2022 targets are summarized below:
 Organic net sales are expected to decline 1 to 3 percent, which is generally in line with the expected level of aggregate category demand in fiscal 2022.
 Constant-currency adjusted operating profit is expected to decline 2 to 4 percent from the base of $3.2 billion reported in fiscal 2021.
 Constant-currency adjusted diluted EPS are expected to range between flat and down 2 percent from the base of $3.79 earned in fiscal 2021.
 Relative to pre-pandemic levels in fiscal 2019, the midpoints of these fiscal 2022 guidance ranges equate to 3-year compound annual growth rates of approximately 2 percent for organic net sales, approximately 2 percent for constant-currency adjusted operating profit, and approximately 5 percent for constant-currency adjusted diluted EPS.
 Free cash flow conversion is expected to be approximately 95 percent of adjusted after-tax earnings.
See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP.
Certain terms used throughout this report are defined in a glossary in Item 8 of this report.
FISCAL 2021 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal 2021 had 52 weeks compared to 53 weeks in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2020 included 13 months of Pet operating segment results as we changed the Pet operating segment’s reporting period from an April fiscal year end to a May fiscal year end to match our fiscal calendar.
In fiscal 2021, net sales increased 3 percent compared to fiscal 2020 and organic net sales increased 4 percent compared to last year. Operating profit margin of 17.3 percent was up 50 basis points from year-ago levels primarily driven by favorable net price realization and mix, a favorable change to the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, and favorable net corporate investment activity, partially offset by higher input costs, higher restructuring charges, and the loss on the sale of our
Laticínios Carolina business in Brazil. Adjusted operating profit margin increased 10 basis points to 17.4 percent, primarily driven by favorable net price realization and mix and lower selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses, partially offset by higher input costs. Diluted earnings per share of $3.78 increased 6 percent compared to fiscal 2020. Adjusted diluted earnings per share of $3.79 increased 4 percent on a constant-currency basis (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
A summary of our consolidated financial results for fiscal 2021 follows:
Consolidated net sales were as follows:
The 3 percent increase in net sales in fiscal 2021 reflects favorable net price realization and mix and favorable foreign currency exchange.
Components of organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Organic net sales in fiscal 2021 increased 4 percent compared to fiscal 2020, driven by an increase in contributions from organic volume growth and favorable organic net price realization and mix.
Cost of sales increased $182 million in fiscal 2021 to $11,679 million. The increase was primarily driven by a $366 million increase attributable to product rate and mix and a $43 million increase due to higher volume. We recorded a $139 million net decrease in cost of sales related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories in fiscal 2021, compared to a net increase of $25 million in fiscal 2020 (please see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for additional information). In fiscal 2021, we recorded $2 million of restructuring charges in cost of sales, compared to $26 million of restructuring charges and $2 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in fiscal 2020 (please see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for additional information). In fiscal 2020, we recorded a $19 million charge related to a product recall in our international Green Giant business. In fiscal 2020, we recorded an $18 million increase in certain compensation and benefits expenses.
Gross margin increased 5 percent in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020. Gross margin as a percent of net sales increased 80 basis points to 35.6 percent compared to fiscal 2020.
SG&A expenses decreased $72 million to $3,080 million in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in SG&A expenses primarily reflects favorable net corporate investment activity and decreased administrative expenses, partially offset by higher media and advertising expenses. SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales in fiscal 2021 decreased 90 basis points compared to fiscal 2020.
Divestiture loss totaled $54 million in fiscal 2021 due to the sale of our Laticínios Carolina business in Brazil (please see Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report).
Restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs totaled $170 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $24 million in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, we approved restructuring actions designed to better align our organizational structure and resources with strategic initiatives. As a result, we recorded $157 million of charges in fiscal 2021. We also recorded $11 million of charges related to Asia & Latin America segment route-to-market and supply chain optimization actions in fiscal 2021. We did not undertake any new restructuring actions in fiscal 2020. Please see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for additional information.
Benefit plan non-service income totaled $133 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $113 million in fiscal 2020, primarily reflecting lower interest costs, partially offset by lower expected returns on plan assets (please see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report for additional information).
Interest, net for fiscal 2021 totaled $420 million, $46 million lower than fiscal 2020, primarily driven by lower rates and lower average debt balances.
Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 22.0 percent compared to 18.5 percent in fiscal 2020. The 3.5 percentage point increase was primarily due to the net benefit related to the reorganization of certain wholly owned subsidiaries in fiscal 2020, the non-deductible loss associated with the sale of our Laticínios Carolina business in Brazil in fiscal 2021, and certain nonrecurring discrete tax benefits in fiscal 2020. Our adjusted effective tax rate was 21.1 percent in fiscal 2021 compared to 20.7 percent in fiscal 2020 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP).
After-tax earnings from joint ventures increased 29 percent to $118 million in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by higher net sales at CPW and HDJ. On a constant-currency basis, after-tax earnings from joint ventures increased 26 percent (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for a description of our use of measures not defined by GAAP). The components of our joint ventures’ net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Net earnings attributable to redeemable and noncontrolling interests decreased 79 percent to $6 million primarily due to the redeemable interest’s 49 percent share of the loss on sale of the Laticínios Carolina business in Brazil.
Average diluted shares outstanding increased by 6 million in fiscal 2021 from fiscal 2020 primarily due to option exercises.
RESULTS OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS
Our businesses are organized into five operating segments: North America Retail; Europe & Australia; Convenience Stores & Foodservice; Pet, and Asia & Latin America. Fiscal 2020 includes 13 months of Pet operating segment results as we changed the Pet operating segment’s reporting period from an April fiscal year end to a May fiscal year end to match our fiscal calendar.
The following tables provide the dollar amount and percentage of net sales and operating profit from each segment for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020:
Segment operating profit as reviewed by our executive management excludes unallocated corporate items, net gain/loss on divestitures, and restructuring, impairment, and other exit costs that are centrally managed.
NORTH AMERICA RETAIL SEGMENT
Our North America Retail operating segment reflects business with a wide variety of grocery stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, natural food chains, drug, dollar and discount chains, and e-commerce grocery providers. Our product categories in this business segment are ready-to-eat cereals, refrigerated yogurt, soup, meal kits, refrigerated and frozen dough products, dessert and baking mixes, frozen pizza and pizza snacks, snack bars, fruit snacks, savory snacks, and a wide variety of organic products including ready-to-eat cereal, frozen and shelf-stable vegetables, meal kits, fruit snacks, snack bars, and refrigerated yogurt.
North America Retail net sales were as follows:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 2 percent increase in North America Retail net sales for fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by favorable net price realization and mix and an increase in contributions from volume growth. The 53rd week in fiscal 2020 contributed 2 percentage points of net sales decline in fiscal 2021, reflecting 2 percentage points of decline from volume.
The components of North America Retail organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
North America Retail organic net sales increased 4 percent in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by an increase in contributions from organic volume growth and favorable organic net price realization and mix.
Net sales for our North America Retail operating units are shown in the following table:
(a) On a constant currency basis, Canada operating unit net sales increased 3 percent in fiscal 2021. See the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure not defined by GAAP.
Segment operating profit of $2,623 million in fiscal 2021 essentially matched fiscal 2020 levels, as higher input costs were offset by favorable net price realization and mix and an increase in contributions from volume growth. Segment operating profit was flat on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure not defined by GAAP).
EUROPE & AUSTRALIA SEGMENT
Our Europe & Australia operating segment reflects retail and foodservice businesses in the greater Europe and Australia regions. Our product categories include refrigerated yogurt, meal kits, snack bars, super-premium ice cream, refrigerated and frozen dough products, shelf stable vegetables, and dessert and baking mixes. Revenues from franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the franchisee is located.
Europe & Australia net sales were as follows:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 8 percent increase in Europe & Australia net sales in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by favorable foreign currency exchange and favorable net price realization and mix, partially offset by a decrease in contributions from volume growth. The 53rd week in fiscal 2020 contributed 2 percentage points of net sales decline in fiscal 2021, reflecting 2 percentage points of decline from volume.
The components of Europe & Australia organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 3 percent increase in Europe & Australia organic net sales growth in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by favorable organic net price realization and mix.
Segment operating profit increased 33 percent to $151 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $114 million in 2020, primarily driven by favorable net price realization and mix, partially offset by higher input costs. Segment operating profit increased 24 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure not defined by GAAP).
CONVENIENCE STORES & FOODSERVICE SEGMENT
Our major product categories in our Convenience Stores & Foodservice operating segment are ready-to-eat cereals, snacks, refrigerated yogurt, frozen meals, unbaked and fully baked frozen dough products, baking mixes, and bakery flour. Many products we sell are branded to the consumer and nearly all are branded to our customers. We sell to distributors and operators in many customer channels including foodservice, convenience stores, vending, and supermarket bakeries in the United States.
Convenience Stores & Foodservice net sales were as follows:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Convenience Stores & Foodservice net sales decreased 4 percent in fiscal 2021 primarily driven by a decrease in contributions from volume growth. The 53rd week in fiscal 2020 contributed 1 percentage point of net sales decline in fiscal 2021, reflecting 1 percentage point of decline from volume.
The components of Convenience Stores & Foodservice organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding
(a) Measured in tons based on the standard weight of our product shipments
The 3 percent decrease in Convenience Stores & Foodservice organic net sales growth in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by a decrease in contributions from organic volume growth and unfavorable organic net price realization and mix.
Segment operating profit decreased 9 percent to $306 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $337 million in fiscal 2020, primarily driven by higher input costs, unfavorable net price realization and mix, and a decrease in contributions from volume growth.
PET SEGMENT
Our Pet operating segment includes pet food products sold primarily in the United States in national pet superstore chains, e-commerce retailers, grocery stores, regional pet store chains, mass merchandisers, and veterinary clinics and hospitals. Our product categories include dog and cat food (dry foods, wet foods, and treats) made with whole meats, fruits, and vegetables and other high-quality natural ingredients. Our tailored pet product offerings address specific dietary, lifestyle, and life-stage needs and span different product types, diet types, breed sizes for dogs, lifestages, flavors, product functions and textures, and cuts for wet foods.
Fiscal 2021 included 12 months of results. Fiscal 2020 included 13 months of Pet operating segment results as we changed the Pet operating segment’s reporting period from an April fiscal year end to a May fiscal year end to match our fiscal calendar.
Pet net sales were as follows:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Pet net sales increased 2 percent in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by an increase in contributions from volume growth.
The components of Pet organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 2 percent increase in Pet organic net sales growth in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in contributions from organic volume growth.
Pet operating profit increased 6 percent to $415 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $391 million in fiscal 2020, primarily driven by an increase in contributions from volume growth, lower SG&A expenses, and favorable net price realization and mix, partially offset by higher input costs. Segment operating profit increased 6 percent on a constant-currency basis in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 (see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for our use of this measure not defined by GAAP).
ASIA & LATIN AMERICA SEGMENT
Our Asia & Latin America operating segment consists of retail and foodservice businesses in the greater Asia and South America regions. Our product categories include super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts, meal kits, dessert and baking mixes, snack bars, salty snacks, refrigerated and frozen dough products, and wellness beverages. We also sell super-premium ice cream and frozen desserts directly to consumers through owned retail shops. Our Asia & Latin America segment also includes products manufactured in the United States for export, mainly to Caribbean and Latin American markets, as well as products we manufacture for sale to our international joint ventures. Revenues from export activities and franchise fees are reported in the region or country where the end customer or franchisee is located.
Asia & Latin America net sales were as follows:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
Asia & Latin America net sales increased 10 percent in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by an increase in contributions from volume growth and favorable net price realization and mix, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange. The 53rd week in fiscal 2020 contributed 2 percentage points of net sales decline in fiscal 2021, reflecting 2 percentage points of decline in volume.
The components of Asia & Latin America organic net sales growth are shown in the following table:
Note: Table may not foot due to rounding.
(a) Measured in tons based on the stated weight of our product shipments.
The 15 percent increase in Asia & Latin America organic net sales in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in contributions from organic volume growth and favorable organic net price realization and mix.
Segment operating profit increased $67 million to $86 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $19 million in fiscal 2020, primarily driven by favorable net price realization and mix, an increase in contributions from volume growth, and favorable foreign currency exchange, partially offset by higher input costs.
UNALLOCATED CORPORATE ITEMS
Unallocated corporate items include corporate overhead expenses, variances to planned domestic employee benefits and incentives, contributions to the General Mills Foundation, asset and liability remeasurement impact of hyperinflationary economies, restructuring initiative project-related costs, and other items that are not part of our measurement of segment operating performance. This includes gains and losses from the mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions until passed back to our operating segments in accordance with our policy as discussed in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
In fiscal 2021, unallocated corporate expense decreased $297 million to $212 million compared to $509 million last year. In fiscal 2021, we recorded a $139 million net decrease in expense related to mark-to-market valuation of certain commodity positions and grain inventories, compared to a $25 million net increase in expense in the prior year. In addition, we recorded $2 million of restructuring charges in cost of sales in fiscal 2021, compared to $26 million of restructuring charges and $2 million of restructuring initiative project-related costs in cost of sales in fiscal 2020. We also recorded a $4 million favorable adjustment related to a product recall in our international Green Giant business in fiscal 2021, compared to a $19 million charge in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, we recorded $76 million of net gains related to valuation adjustments and the gain on sale of certain corporate investments, compared to $8 million of net losses related to valuation adjustments and the loss on sale of certain corporate investments in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, we recorded $10 million of transaction costs related to our non-binding memorandum of understanding to sell our 51 percent controlling interest in our European Yoplait business and our planned acquisition of Tyson Foods’ pet treats business. In addition, we recorded a $9 million gain related to a Brazil indirect tax item in fiscal 2021.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
We experienced input cost inflation of 4 percent in fiscal 2021 and 4 percent in fiscal 2020, primarily on commodity inputs. We expect input cost inflation of approximately 7 percent in fiscal 2022. We attempt to minimize the effects of inflation through HMM, strategic revenue management, planning, and operating practices. Our risk management practices are discussed in