ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows of the Company for the period May 28, 2020 (inception) to September 30, 2020. The discussion and analysis that follows should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Except for historical information, the matters discussed in this section are forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and are based upon judgments concerning various factors that are beyond the Company’s control. Consequently, and because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, the actual results and outcomes may differ materially from the results and outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. You are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report.
Overview
On September 22, 2020, Inspired Builders, Inc., a Nevada corporation (the “Company”) entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Share Exchange Agreement”) with Guskin Gold Corporation, a Nevada limited liability company (“GGC”), and the controlling stockholders of GGC (the “GGC Shareholders”). Pursuant to the Share Exchange Agreement, the Company acquired One Hundred Percent (100%) the issued and outstanding equity interest of GGC from the GGC Shareholders (the “GGC Shares”) and in exchange the Company issued to GGC an aggregate of Twenty-Eight Million Two Hundred Thousand (28,200,000) shares of restricted common stock of the Company.
As a result of the acquisition, we acquired all of the business operations and will continue the existing business operations of GGC as a wholly-owned subsidiary of our publicly-traded company.
As the result of this acquisition and the change in business and operations of the Company, a discussion of the past financial results of the Company is not pertinent, and under applicable accounting principles the historical financial results of GGC, the accounting acquirer, prior to the acquisition are considered the historical financial results of the Company.
The Company’s fiscal year end is September 30.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, and it continues to spread throughout the United States and the rest of the world with different geographical locations impacted more than others. The outbreak of COVID-19 and public and private sector measures to reduce its transmission, such as the imposition of social distancing and orders to work-from-home, stay-at-home and shelter-in-place, have had a minimal impact on our day to day operations. However, this could impact our efforts to enter into a business combination as other businesses have had to adjust, reduce or suspend their operating activities. The extent of the impact will vary depending on the duration and severity of the economic and operational impacts of COVID-19. The Company is unable to predict the ultimate impact at this time.
The following discussion highlights GGC’s results of operations and the principal factors that have affected its financial condition as well as its liquidity and capital resources for the periods described and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements contained in this report, which were prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. You should read the discussion and analysis together with such consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto.
Results of Operations
For the period from May 28, 2020 (inception) to September 30, 2020.
For the period from May 28, 2020 (inception) to September 30, 2020, we incurred operating expenses of $68,144. The operating expenses were attributable to accounting, legal and consulting fees related to the reverse merger.
Net Loss
For the period from May 28, 2020 (inception) to September 30, 2020 we incurred a net loss of $71,150. The net loss is attributable to accounting, legal and consulting fees related to the reverse merger as well as amortization of debt discount of $2,614.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2020, we have $13,767 in current assets and $2,231,316 in current liabilities. We had $13,767 in cash and our working capital deficit was $2,217,549.
Cash Flows:
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
We used $37,127 of cash in our operating activities. These are attributable to our net loss adjusted by the non-cash items of $28,200 for the fair value of shares issued for services and $2,614 for amortization of debt discount. This was also offset by $3,220 of increase in accounts payable and accrued interest.
Cash Flows Provided by Investing Activities
We received $27,500 of cash under the reverse merger.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
We received $23,394 from the issuances of loans payable from related parties totaling $15,894 and a note payable from an unrelated party in the amount of $7,500.
Going Concern and Management’s Liquidity Plans
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has a net loss of $71,150 for the period from May 28, 2020 (inception) to September 30, 2020. In addition, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $71,150 and a working capital deficit of $2,217,549 as of September 30, 2020.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the continuation of the Company as a going concern. The Company has not yet established an ongoing source of revenues sufficient to cover its operating costs and is dependent on debt and equity financing to fund its operations. Management of the Company is making efforts to raise additional funding. While management of the Company believes that it will be successful in its capital formation and planned operating activities, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional equity capital or be successful in the development and commercialization of the products it develops or initiates collaboration agreements thereon. Therefore, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
The COVID-19 pandemic could have an impact on our ability to obtain financing to fund the operations. The Company is unable to predict the ultimate impact at this time.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the year. The more significant areas requiring the use of estimates include asset impairment, stock-based compensation, and future income tax amounts. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions considered to be reasonable under the circumstances. However, actual results may differ from the estimates.
We believe the following is among the most critical accounting policies that impact or consolidated financial statement. We suggest that our significant accounting policies, as described in our consolidated financial statements in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, be read in conjunction with this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.