Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Great Lakes is the largest provider of dredging services in the United States. In addition, the Company has a long history of performing significant international projects. The Company operates in one reportable segment.
Dredging generally involves the enhancement or preservation of the navigability of waterways or the protection of shorelines through the removal or replenishment of soil, sand or rock. Domestically, our work generally is performed in coastal waterways and deep water ports. The U.S. dredging market consists of four primary types of work: capital, coastal protection, maintenance and rivers & lakes. Capital dredging consists primarily of port expansion projects, which involve the deepening of channels and berthing basins to allow access by larger, deeper draft ships and the provision of land fill used to expand port facilities. In addition to port work, capital projects also include coastal restoration and land reclamations, trench digging for pipelines, tunnels, and cables and other dredging related to the construction of breakwaters, jetties, canals and other marine structures. Coastal protection projects generally involve moving sand from the ocean floor to shoreline locations where erosion threatens shoreline assets. Maintenance dredging consists of the re-dredging of previously deepened waterways and harbors to remove silt, sand and other accumulated sediments. Due to natural sedimentation, most channels generally require maintenance dredging every one to three years, thus creating a recurring source of dredging work that is typically non-deferrable if optimal commercial navigability is to be maintained. In addition, severe weather such as hurricanes, flooding and droughts can also cause the accumulation of sediments or severe erosion and drive the need for maintenance and coastal protection dredging. Rivers & lakes dredging and related operations typically consist of lake and river dredging, flood control dredging, inland levee and construction dredging, environmental restoration and habitat improvement and other marine construction projects.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company completed the sale of our historical environmental & infrastructure business. The historical environmental & infrastructure segment has been retrospectively presented as discontinued operations and assets and liabilities held for sale and is no longer reflected in continuing operations. Refer to Note 14, “Business dispositions,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. COVID-19 has since spread worldwide and to every state in the United States. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic and on March 13, 2020 the United States declared a national emergency in response to the coronavirus outbreak. This outbreak has severely impacted global economic activity and many countries and states in the United States have reacted by instituting quarantines, mandating school and business closures and limiting travel.
On March 28, 2020, dredging was specifically listed in the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s “Advisory Memorandum on Identification of Essential Critical Infrastructure Workers During COVID-19 Response” which federally designates the Company as an essential business or “critical infrastructure” company that can maintain operations during the ongoing pandemic. The Company’s largest domestic dredging customer is the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (the “Corps”); the Corps oversees the majority of these critical infrastructure projects and, in this capacity, has continued to follow their bid schedule and prioritize all types of dredging including port maintenance and expansion and coastal protection projects that are necessary to avoid potential storm damage during hurricane season. Despite the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, to date, the Corps is continuing to advertise new projects and the Company’s project work has only experienced minor delays.
Executive Management established a COVID-19 Command Team that meets several times each week to update contingency plans and address the challenges related to maintaining operations in this evolving economic environment. The Company’s primary focus has been the health and safety of its employees. The Company has implemented new paid leave policies and additional sanitary and safety measures to mitigate the risk of infection to employees. On vessels and job sites, the Company has instituted fewer employee shift changes and increased sanitary and social distancing measures. Although we have had crew members on certain of our vessels contract COVID-19, such instances have not to date had a material impact on our business. Since March, the Company’s corporate employees have effectively transitioned to a remote working environment and have discontinued non-essential travel to follow recommended physical and social distancing guidelines in order to reduce the risk of infection. The Company is following the protocols published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization and state and local governments. As the Company’s employees, customers and communities are facing significant challenges, the Company cannot predict how COVID-19 will evolve or the impact it, or actions taken to contain it, will have on future results. As of December 31, 2020, the Company experienced some project delays due to COVID-19 but overall business has not been significantly impacted. Due to the uncertainty that surrounds this virus, the Company will be continually evaluating safety and operational contingency plans and the potential future impact that this evolving environment has on the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
In 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and other legislation which contain tax incentives designed to help businesses deal with the current economic turmoil caused by the pandemic. The coronavirus relief tax acts provide emergency economic stimulus which, among other things, includes various tax provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of the employer side of certain payroll taxes and social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds and modifications to the net interest deduction limitations. The Company has elected to defer the employer side of certain payroll taxes and expects to pay such amounts when due in 2021 and 2022.
In 2020, the Company announced the relocation of its headquarters from Illinois to Houston, Texas, with the new Houston office lease beginning in January 2021. The relocation will place the Company closer to key regional customers and new markets, especially along the Gulf Coast and the Mississippi River.
The Company’s bid market is defined as the aggregate dollar value of domestic dredging projects on which we bid or could have bid if not for capacity constraints or other considerations (“bid market”). We experienced an average combined bid market share in the U.S. of 39% over the prior three years, including 56%, 53%, 16% and 45% of the domestic capital, coastal protection, maintenance and rivers & lakes sectors, respectively.
The Company’s fleet, which includes 20 dredges, 17 material transportation barges, one drillboat, and numerous other support vessels, is the largest and most diverse fleet of any U.S. dredging company. Our fleet of dredging equipment can be utilized on one or many types of work and in various geographic locations. This flexible approach to our fleet utilization, driven by the project scope and equipment, enables us to move equipment in response to changes in demand for dredging services to take advantage of the most attractive opportunities.
As mentioned above, the Company’s largest domestic customer is the Corps, which has responsibility for federally funded projects related to navigation and flood control of U.S. waterways. Multi-jurisdictional cost sharing arrangements are allowing the Corps to utilize funds from sources other than the federal budget to prioritize additional projects where waterway infrastructure improvements can have an impact to large regions. Although some of a project’s funding may ultimately be derived from multiple sources, the Corps maintains the authority over the project and is our customer. In 2020, our revenues earned from contracts with federal government agencies were approximately 79% of total revenue, up from our prior three year average of 74%.
Contract Revenues
Most of the Company’s contracts are obtained through competitive bidding on terms specified by the party inviting the bid. The types of equipment required to perform the specified service, project site conditions, the estimated project duration, seasonality, location and complexity of a project affect the cost of performing the contract and the price that contractors will bid.
Fixed-price contracts, which comprise substantially all of the Company’s revenue, will most often represent a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct. We capitalize certain pre-contract and pre-construction costs, and defer recognition over the life of the contract. Our performance obligations are satisfied over time and revenue is recognized using contract fulfillment costs incurred to date compared to total estimated costs at completion, also known as cost-to-cost, to measure progress towards completion. Contract modifications are changes in the scope or price (or both) of a contract that are approved by the parties to the contract. We recognize a contract modification when the parties to a contract approve a modification that either creates new, or changes existing, enforceable rights and obligations of the parties to the contract. Contract modifications are included in the transaction price only if it is probable that the modification estimate will not result in a significant reversal of revenue. Revisions in estimated gross profit percentages are recorded in the period during which the change in circumstances is experienced or becomes known. As the duration of most of our contracts are one year or less, the cumulative net impact of these revisions in estimates, individually and in the aggregate across our projects, does not significantly affect our results across annual reporting periods. Provisions for estimated losses on contracts in progress are made in the period in which such losses are determined.
Costs and Expenses
The components of costs of contract revenues include labor, equipment (including depreciation, maintenance, insurance and long-term rentals), subcontracts, fuel, supplies, short-term rentals and project overhead. Hourly labor generally is hired on a project-by-project basis. The Company is a party to numerous collective bargaining agreements in the U.S. that govern our relationships with our unionized hourly workforce.
Primary Factors that Determine Operating Profitability
The Company’s results of operations for a calendar or quarterly period are generally determined by the following three factors:
•
Bid wins and dredge employment- The Company recognizes backlog upon a project being awarded. We begin to recognize revenues when a dredging contract commences a major activity on the project. The period prior to the commencement of a major activity for dredging projects can range from 45 days to six months depending on the complexity of the project and environmental work windows. Although our dredging fleet is subject to downtime for scheduled periodic maintenance and regulatory dry dockings, we seek to maximize our revenues by employing our dredging fleet on a full-time basis. If a dredge is idle (i.e., the dredge is not employed on a dredging project or undergoing scheduled periodic maintenance and repair), we do not earn revenue with respect to that dredge during the time period for which it is idle.
•
Project and dredge mix - The Company’s domestic dredging projects generally involve capital, maintenance, coastal protection and rivers & lakes work, while our foreign dredging projects generally involve capital work. In addition, our projects vary in duration which is generally driven by the type of work undertaken. In general, projects of longer duration result in less dredge downtime in a given period. For example, capital deepening projects generally span several years due to their complexity and environmental windows. Moreover, our dredges have different physical performance capabilities and typically work on certain types of dredging projects. Accordingly, our dredges have different daily revenue generating capacities.
We generally expect to achieve different levels of gross profit margin (i.e., gross profit divided by revenues) for work performed on the different types of dredging projects and for work performed by different types of dredges. Our expected gross margin for a project is based upon our estimates at the time of the bid. Although we seek to bid on and win projects that will maximize our gross margin, we cannot control the type of dredging projects that are available for bid from time to time, the type of dredge that is needed to complete these projects, the competitive landscape at the time of bid or the time schedule upon which these projects are required to be completed. As a result, in some quarters the Company works on a mix of dredging projects that, in the aggregate, have relatively high expected gross margins (based on project type and dredges employed) and in other quarters, we work on a mix of dredging projects that, in the aggregate, have relatively low expected gross margins (based on project type and dredges employed).
•
Project execution-The Company seeks to execute all of our projects consistent with or at a higher production than our as-bid project estimates. In general, our ability to achieve our project estimates depends upon many factors including soil conditions, weather, variances from estimated project conditions, equipment mobilization time periods, unplanned equipment downtime or other events or circumstances beyond our control. If we experience any of these events and circumstances, the completion of a project will often be accelerated or delayed, as applicable, and, consequently, we will experience project results that are better or worse than our estimates. We do our best to estimate for events and circumstances that are not within our control; however, these situations are inherent in dredging.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company’s significant accounting policies are discussed in the Notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The application of certain of these policies requires significant judgments or an estimation process that can affect our results of operations, financial position and cash flows, as well as the related footnote disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable. If actual amounts are ultimately different from previous estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known. The following accounting policies comprise those that management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition- Revenue is recognized using contract fulfillment costs incurred to date compared to total estimated costs at completion, also known as cost-to-cost, to measure progress towards completion. Additionally, we capitalize certain pre-contract and pre-construction costs, and defer recognition over the life of the contract. In preparing estimates, we draw on our extensive experience in the dredging businesses. We use this experience in conjunction with the project specifications to select equipment and to design a production technique for a project. We also utilize our database of historical dredging information which includes daily costs, mobilization and dredge production references on the same or similar projects to ensure that our estimates are as accurate as possible, given current circumstances. The daily costs and project duration are significant factors in our cost estimates to complete the project. Weather events, mechanical delays or other unplanned downtime instances may cause the actual costs to complete the project to differ from these estimates.
Contract modifications are changes in the scope or price (or both) of a contract that are approved by the parties to the contract. We recognize a contract modification when the parties to a contract approve a modification that either creates new, or changes existing, enforceable rights and obligations of the parties to the contract. Contract modifications are included in the transaction price
only if it is probable that the modification estimate will not result in a significant reversal of revenue. Contract modifications are routine in the performance of the Company’s contracts. In most instances, contract modifications are for services that are not distinct, and, therefore, are accounted for as part of the existing contract. Revisions in estimated gross profit percentages are recorded in the period during which the change in circumstances is experienced or becomes known. As the duration of most of the Company’s contracts is one year or less, the cumulative net impact of these revisions in estimates, individually and in the aggregate across projects, does not significantly affect results across annual reporting periods. Provisions for estimated losses on contracts in progress are made in the period in which such losses are determined.
Impairment of goodwill-Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying value. The Company believes that this estimate is a critical accounting estimate because: (i) goodwill is a material asset and (ii) the impact of an impairment could be material to the consolidated balance sheet and consolidated statement of operations. We perform our annual impairment test as of July 1 each year.
When conducting the annual impairment test for goodwill, the Company can choose to assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is below its carrying value. If a qualitative assessment determines an impairment is more likely than not, the Company is required to perform a quantitative impairment test. Otherwise, no further analysis is required. The Company also may elect to forego this step and just perform the quantitative impairment test.
In the current year, the Company assessed the fair value of our reporting unit using both a market-based approach and an income-based approach. Under the income approach, the fair value of the reporting unit is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. The income approach is dependent on a number of factors, including estimates of future market growth trends, forecasted revenues and expenses, appropriate discount rates and other variables. The estimates are based on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, but such assumptions are subject to unpredictability and uncertainty. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value, and may result in the impairment of goodwill in the event that actual results differ from those estimates.
The market approach measures the value of a reporting unit through comparison to comparable companies. Under the market approach, the Company uses the guideline public company method by applying estimated market-based enterprise value multiples to the reporting unit’s estimated revenue and Adjusted EBITDA. We analyze companies that perform similar services or are considered peers. Due to the fact that there are no public companies that are direct competitors, we weigh the results of this approach less than the income approach.
The Company has one operating segment which is also our one reportable segment and reporting unit. The historical environmental & infrastructure segment has been retrospectively presented as discontinued operations and assets and liabilities held for sale and is no longer reflected in continuing operations. We performed our annual goodwill impairment test as of July 1, 2020 with no indication of impairment as of the test date. As of the test date, the fair value of the reporting unit was substantially in excess of its carrying value. We will perform the next scheduled annual test of goodwill in the third quarter of 2021 should no triggering events occur which would require a test prior to the next annual test. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our goodwill was $76.6 million.
Results of Operations-Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth the components of net income attributable to common stockholders of Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Corporation and Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations, as defined below, as a percentage of contract revenues for the years ended December 31 2020, 2019 and 2018. The selected financial data presented below have been derived from the Company’s consolidated financial statements; items may not sum due to rounding.
Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations
Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations, as provided herein, represents net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders of Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Corporation, adjusted for net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, debt extinguishment, accelerated maintenance expense for new international deployments, goodwill or asset impairments and gains on bargain purchase acquisitions. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations is not a measure derived in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The Company presents Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations as an additional measure by which to evaluate our operating trends. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations is a measure frequently used to evaluate performance of companies with substantial leverage and that our primary stakeholders (i.e., its stockholders, bondholders and banks) use Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations to evaluate our period to period performance. Additionally, management believes that Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations provides a transparent measure of our recurring operating performance and allows management to readily view operating trends, perform analytical comparisons and identify strategies to improve operating performance. For this reason, we use a measure based upon Adjusted EBITDA to assess performance for purposes of determining compensation under our incentive plan. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations should not be considered an alternative to, or more meaningful than, amounts determined in accordance with GAAP including: (a) operating income as an indicator of operating performance; or (b) cash flows from operations as a measure of liquidity. As such, the Company’s use of Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations, instead of a GAAP measure, has limitations as an analytical tool, including the inability to determine profitability or liquidity due to the exclusion of accelerated maintenance expense for new international deployments, goodwill or asset impairments, gains on bargain purchase acquisitions, net interest expense and income tax expense and the associated significant cash requirements and the exclusion of depreciation and amortization, which represent significant and unavoidable operating costs given the level of indebtedness and capital expenditures needed to maintain our business. For these reasons, we use operating income to measure our operating performance and use Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations only as a supplement. The following is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations to net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders of Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Corporation (in thousands):
Components of Contract Revenues
The following table sets forth, by type of work, the Company’s contract revenues for the years ended December 31, (in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total revenue was $733.6 million in 2020, an increase of $22.1 million, or 3.1%, from 2019 total revenue of $711.5 million. The increase was largely attributable to increases in domestic capital, coastal protection and maintenance revenues as compared to the prior year. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in rivers & lakes and foreign capital revenues during the current year as compared to the prior year. The Company categorizes revenue by service type to understand the market in which we operate and to assess how we are performing on bidding work or projects and are generating revenue from backlog.
Domestic capital dredging revenues increased $36.5 million, or 12.2%, to $336.2 million in 2020 when compared to 2019 revenues of $299.7 million. The increase in domestic capital dredging revenue was primarily driven by greater revenue earned from
deepening projects in Charleston and Jacksonville and a coastal restoration project in Mississippi in the current year when compared to the prior year period. This increase was partially offset by a greater amount of revenue earned on deepening projects in Tampa, Corpus Christi and on the Delaware River during the prior year. We earned 78% of backlog relating to our capital dredging operations that had been carried forward from December 31, 2019.
Revenues from foreign dredging operations in 2020 totaled $25.9 million, a decrease of $22.7 million, or 46.7%, from 2019 revenues of $48.6 million. The decrease in foreign dredging revenue was driven by decreased revenue earned on a project in Bahrain in 2020 as compared to 2019. We earned 78% of backlog relating to our foreign dredging operations that had been carried forward from December 31, 2019.
Coastal protection revenues were $201.4 million in 2020, an increase of $19.0 million, or 10.4%, from $182.4 million in 2019. The increase in coastal protection revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mostly attributable to a greater amount of revenue earned on projects in Florida, Louisiana and Georgia in the current year as compared to the prior year. This increase was partially offset by a greater amount of revenue earned on projects in North Carolina and Delaware during the prior year when compared to the current year. We earned 100% of backlog relating to coastal protection operations that had been carried forward from December 31, 2019.
Revenues from maintenance dredging projects in 2020 were $148.8 million, an increase of $44.0 million, or 42.0%, from $104.8 million in 2019. The increase in maintenance revenue during the current year was mostly attributable to revenue earned on projects in Maryland, Virginia, New York and New Jersey. This increase was partially offset by greater revenue earned on projects in Texas, North Carolina and South Carolina in the prior year when compared to the current year. We earned 100% of backlog relating to maintenance dredging projects that had been carried forward from December 31, 2019.
Rivers & lakes revenues were $21.4 million for 2020, a decrease of $54.7 million, or 71.9%, from $76.1 million in 2019. The decrease in rivers & lakes revenue during the current year was mostly attributable to a greater amount of revenue earned during the prior year on a large flood mitigation project in Texas as a result of Hurricane Harvey, as well as a project in Louisiana, when compared to the current year. This decrease was partially offset by revenue earned on projects in Mississippi and Nebraska in the current year. We earned 97% of backlog relating to rivers & lakes operations that had been carried forward from December 31, 2019.
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $17.4 million, or 11.3%, to $171.2 million from $153.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit margin (gross profit divided by revenue) for the full year 2020 was 23.3%, higher than prior year gross profit margin of 21.6%. The higher gross profit for 2020 was driven by an increase in the profitability of the Company’s domestic capital, coastal protection and maintenance projects in the current year. This increase in profitability was partially offset by lower gross profit results in the rivers & lakes dredging projects during the prior year.
General and administrative expenses totaled $62.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, up from $59.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense for the full year 2020 as compared to 2019 was attributable to an increase in payroll and benefits, mostly related to an increase in severance pay, increases in technical and consulting fees and increases in legal fees of $1.1 million, $0.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively. Additionally, there were increases related to relocation costs and office expenses in the current year when compared to the prior year.
Operating income was $111.8 million and $98.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in operating income during the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of higher gross profit, as described above. This increase was partially offset by higher general and administrative expense compared to the prior year, as described above. Additionally, there was a $1.6 million gain on sale of assets as well as $2.9 million lower proceeds from loss of use claims for the year ended December 31, 2020 when comparing to the prior year.
The Company’s net interest expense for 2020 totaled $26.6 million compared to $27.5 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense was attributable to a decrease of $0.5 million in extinguishment of debt and $0.6 million of amortization of deferred financing fees when compared to the prior year period. Additionally, $0.6 million of capitalized interest contributed to the decrease in the current year when compared to the prior year. These decreases were offset by a $1.0 million decrease in interest income when comparing the current year to the prior year.
Income tax provision in 2020 was $20.2 million, compared to an income tax provision of $15.3 million in 2019. The change in income tax provision is primarily related to higher pretax income during the current year, as described above. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 23.4%, above the effective tax rate of 21.5% for the same period of 2019. The lower effective tax rate in the prior year was due to a change in deferred state tax rate that did not repeat in the current year.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income from continuing operations was $66.1 million compared to net income of $55.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by the increase to gross profit, as described above, a $1.6 million gain on sale of assets, a decrease of interest expense, as described above, and an increase to other income of $0.8 million. This increase was partially offset by an increase
to general and administrative expense, as described above, a $4.9 million increase in income tax provision and a decrease in proceeds of a loss of use claim of $2.9 million, during the current year when compared to the prior year.
Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations (as defined and reconciled on page 40) was $151.1 million and $135.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations of $15.5 million, up 11.4% from 2019 was attributable to higher gross profit, excluding depreciation, a $1.6 million in gain on sale of assets, and an increase to other income of $0.8 million. This increase was partially offset by an increase to general and administrative expense, as described above and a decrease in proceeds of a loss of use claim of $2.9 million, during the current year when compared to the prior year.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a discussion comparing our consolidated operating results from the year ended December 31, 2019 with the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the Commission on February 26, 2020.
Bidding Activity and Backlog
The following table sets forth, by type of work, the Company’s backlog as of the dates indicated (in thousands):
The Company’s contract backlog represents our estimate of the revenues that will be realized under the portion of the contracts remaining to be performed. These estimates are based primarily upon the time and costs required to mobilize the necessary assets to and from the project site, the amount and type of material to be dredged and the expected production capabilities of the equipment performing the work. However, these estimates are necessarily subject to variances based upon actual circumstances. Because of these factors, as well as factors affecting the time required to complete each job, backlog is not always indicative of future revenues or profitability. Also, 70% of our 2020 backlog relates to federal government contracts, which can be canceled at any time without penalty to the government, subject to our contractual right to recover our actual committed costs and profit on work performed up to the date of cancellation. Our backlog may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter based upon the type and size of the projects we are awarded from the bid market. A quarterly increase or decrease of our backlog does not necessarily result in an improvement or a deterioration of our business. Our backlog includes only those projects for which we have obtained a signed contract with the customer.
Approximately 90% of the Company’s backlog at December 31, 2020 is expected to be completed and converted to revenue in 2021.
The 2020 domestic dredging bid market totaled $1,792 million, which is in line with the 2019 domestic dredging bid market of $1,786 million. Total domestic dredging bid market for the current year period included awards for additional phases of the Jacksonville, Charleston and Corpus Christi deepening projects, two coastal restoration projects in Louisiana, maintenance work on the Ohio and Mississippi River, hopper maintenance work on the West Coast and a liquefied natural gas (“LNG”) capital project in Louisiana. There were increases in domestic capital, maintenance and rivers and lakes projects let to bid in the current period and decreases in coastal protection projects. The Company won 39% of the overall 2020 domestic bid market, up from a 26% win rate of the overall 2019 domestic bid market. Variability in contract wins from period to period is not unusual. We believe trends in our win rate over the prior three year periods provide a historical background against which current year results can be compared.
The Company’s December 31, 2020 contracted backlog was $559.4 million. This represents a decrease of $30.0 million, or 5.1%, over our December 31, 2019 backlog of $589.4 million. These amounts do not reflect approximately $472.3 million of domestic low bids pending formal award and additional phases (“options”) pending on projects currently in backlog, including two large LNG projects. At December 31, 2019, the amount of domestic low bids pending award was $201.3 million. Backlog at December 31, 2020
and 2019 includes deepening projects in Charleston and Jacksonville totaling approximately $216 million and $254 million, respectively.
The Company won 49%, or $308.7 million, of the domestic capital dredging projects awarded in 2020, compared to 20%, or $65.4 million, in the prior year. During 2020, the Company was awarded an additional phase of the Jacksonville Deepening project for $105 million, an additional phase of the Charleston Deepening project for $53 million, three projects in Louisiana which consisted of two coastal restoration projects of $30 million and $28 million, respectively, and an LNG project for a private client. Domestic capital dredging work made up $320.9 million, or 57%, of our December 31, 2020 contracted backlog. During 2020, we continued to earn revenue on deepening projects in Charleston, Jacksonville and Corpus Christi and a coastal restoration project in Mississippi, which were in backlog at December 31, 2019. We expect 85% of our domestic capital backlog at December 31, 2020 to be performed in 2021, with the remainder to be performed in 2022. Government funded projects coming into the pipeline include additional phases of the Boston, Charleston, Jacksonville and Corpus Christi deepenings, as well as new deepenings for ports in Mobile, Alabama and the Everglades in Florida. These deepenings continue the trend of ensuring all East Coast and Gulf of Mexico ports will be able to accommodate the deeper draft vessels currently used on several trade routes. The nation’s governors continue to show commitment to their respective ports through engagement and funding. Finally, Congress has also shown a commitment to ports and waterways, providing record annual budgets for the Corps for port deepening and channel maintenance. In addition to this port work, a greater amount of coastal restoration and rehabilitation projects are being funded in the Gulf Coast region as the states utilize available monies for ecosystem priorities, a portion of which is allocated to dredging.
Foreign capital dredging backlog decreased to $6.9 million at December 31, 2020 from $30.6 million at the end of 2019. During 2020, the Company continued to earn revenue on a project in the Middle East which was in backlog at December 31, 2019. We expect substantially all of our foreign capital backlog at December 31, 2020 to be performed in the first half of 2021.
The Company won 65%, or $152.3 million, of the coastal protection projects awarded in 2020, compared to 47%, or $247.4 million, in the prior year. During 2020, the Company was awarded coastal protection projects of $31 million in North Carolina, $24 million in New Jersey and $21 million in Florida. We have contracted backlog related to coastal protection of $98.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $141.0 million at the end of 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company continued to earn revenue on coastal protection projects in New York, North Carolina, and Florida which were in backlog at December 31, 2019. We expect substantially all of our coastal protection backlog at December 31, 2020 to be performed in 2021. Coastal protection and storm impacts continue to provide the major impetus for coastal project investment at federal and state levels. As a result of the extreme storm systems in prior years involving Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria, the U.S. Congress passed supplemental appropriations for disaster relief and recovery which includes $17.4 billion for the Corps to fund projects that will reduce the risk of future damage from flood and storm events. The Corps is beginning to provide visibility on its plans for this money, and it is expected that approximately $1.8 billion will be allocated to dredging-related work. Most of this work is anticipated to be coastal protection related, but some funding may be provided for channel maintenance. During 2019, an additional $3.3 billion of supplemental appropriations was approved for disaster relief funding as a result of Hurricane Florence and Hurricane Michael.
The Company won 27%, or $199.7 million, of the maintenance dredging projects awarded in 2020 compared to 16%, or $142.6 million, in 2019. During 2020 we were awarded maintenance projects of $45 million in Louisiana, $22 million in Florida and $18 million in Maryland and Virginia. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we continued to work on projects in Maryland, North Carolina and Florida which were in backlog at December 31, 2019. Our contracted maintenance dredging backlog at December 31, 2020 of $125.1 million is $64.2 million higher than the backlog of $60.9 million at December 31, 2019. We expect substantially all of our maintenance dredging backlog at December 31, 2020 to be performed in 2021. Past Water Resources Development Act (“WRDA”) bills called for full use of the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund (“HMTF”) for its intended purpose of maintaining future access to the waterways and ports that support our nation’s economy. On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the CARES Act which includes a provision that lifts caps on the HMTF, thereby allowing full access to future annual revenues. The 2020 Water Resources Development Act (WRDA) legislation was included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021 signed into law on December 27, 2020. This continues the trend of WRDA legislation in each session of Congress since 2014. The legislation provides access to the $9.3 billion in unspent HMTF tax collections, establishes a funds distribution process for HMTF funding and approves projects to proceed to construction. Through the increased appropriation of HMTF monies, the Company anticipates increased funding for harbor maintenance projects to be let for bid.
The Company won 17%, or $32.1 million, of the rivers & lakes projects in the markets where the group operates during the current year, compared to 48%, or $11.5 million, in 2019. During the current year, we were awarded new work in Texas, Mississippi and Nebraska. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we continued to earn revenue on a large project in Texas which was in backlog at December 31, 2019. We have contracted dredging backlog related to rivers & lakes of $8.5 million at December 31, 2020, which is $1.0 million lower than the backlog of $9.5 million at December 31, 2019. We expect substantially all of our rivers & lakes backlog at December 31, 2020 to be performed in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s principal sources of liquidity are net cash flows provided by operating activities, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and proceeds from issuances of long-term debt. See Note 6, “Long-term debt,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our principal uses of cash are to meet debt service requirements, finance capital expenditures, and provide working capital and other general corporate purposes.
On August 4, 2020, the Company announced that its board of directors approved a share repurchase program, authorizing, but not obligating, the repurchase of up to an aggregate amount of $75.0 million of its common stock from time to time through July 31, 2021.
The Company’s net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $78.9 million, $201.8 million and $141.7 million, respectively. Normal increases or decreases in the level of working capital relative to the level of operational activity impact cash flow from operating activities. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations during 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year was driven by billings and collections on large projects during the prior period as well as an increase in working capital due to an increase in receivables during the current year when compared to the same period in the prior year. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in net income in the current year when compared to the prior year period. Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was up compared to 2018 due to higher net income during 2019.
The Company’s net cash flows used in investing activities of continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $43.2 million, $43.8 million and $35.5 million, respectively. Investing activities in all periods primarily relate to normal course upgrades and capital maintenance of our dredging fleet. In the second quarter of 2020, the Company announced and made a down payment for a contract to build a 6,500 cubic yard trailing suction hopper dredge with expected delivery in the first quarter of 2023. In 2020 and 2019, we received $4.5 million and $5.6 million, respectively, in proceeds from dispositions of property and equipment. During 2018, we received $4.5 million in cash proceeds from a sale-leaseback of a dredge as well as $9.4 million in proceeds from the sale of underperforming and underutilized assets identified through our strategic review. Further, we bought out two leases for $14.3 million as part of the restructuring initiative of disposing underperforming assets during the year ended December 31, 2018.
The Company’s net cash flows used in financing activities of continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 totaled $6.3 million, $14.1 million and $83.9 million, respectively. The decrease in cash used in financing activities primarily relates to changes in the net repayments on the Company’s revolving credit facility in the prior year of $11.5 million compared to none in the current year. Of the previously announced $75.0 million share repurchase program, the Company repurchased $3.9 million of common stock during 2020. Additionally, we paid $2.3 million in financing fees on the Amended Credit Agreement for the senior secured credit facility during 2019. The Company has the ability to call the bonds at par in May 2021. During 2018, we made net repayments on the Company’s revolving credit facility of $83.5 million.
The Company maintains a favorable cash on hand position and revolver availability and as a result is well positioned for changes in the current economic environment. To date, the Company has not had a significant operational or financial impact as a result of the ongoing coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic but will continue to assess the potential economic impact that the virus and actions taken to contain it could have on the Company’s operations and liquidity.
Commitments, contingencies and liquidity matters
Refer to Note 6, “Long-term debt,” in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of the Company’s Amended Credit Agreement. Additionally, refer to Note 13, “Commitments and contingencies,” in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of the Company’s surety agreements.
Senior notes
In May 2017, the Company issued $325 million in aggregate principal amount of our 8% Senior Notes due May 15, 2022 (“8% Senior Notes”). Approximately $283 million of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 8% Senior Notes were used to prepay all of our 7.375% senior notes due February 2019, including a tender premium and accrued and unpaid interest. Interest on the 8% Senior Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on November 15, 2017. The 8% Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and will be guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by the guarantors and any other subsidiary guarantors that from time to time become parties to the indenture. The terms of the indenture will, among other things, limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries to (i) pay dividends, or make certain other restricted payments or investments; (ii) incur additional indebtedness and issue disqualified stock; (iii) create liens on their assets; (iv) transfer and sell assets; (v) enter into certain business combinations with third parties or into certain other transactions with affiliates; (vi) create restrictions on dividends or other payments by our restricted subsidiaries; and (vii) create guarantees of indebtedness by
restricted subsidiaries. These covenants are subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions that are described in the indenture.
Other
The future declaration and payment of dividends will be at the discretion of the Company’s board of directors and will depend on many factors, including general economic and business conditions, our strategic plans, our financial results and condition and legal requirements, including restrictions and limitations contained in the Amended Credit Agreement, surety bonding agreement and the indenture relating to our senior notes. Accordingly, we cannot make any assurances as to the size of any such dividend or that it will pay any such dividend in future quarters.
The Company believes our cash and cash equivalents, our anticipated cash flows from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital expenditures and the scheduled debt service requirements for the next twelve months. Beyond the next twelve months, our ability to fund our working capital needs, planned capital expenditures, scheduled debt payments and dividends, if any, and to comply with all the financial covenants required under the Amended Credit Agreement, depends on our future operating performance and cash flows, which in turn are subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the Company’s contractual cash obligations at December 31, 2020. Additional information related to these obligations can be found in Note 6, “Long-term debt,” and Note 13, “Commitments and contingencies,” to our consolidated financial statements.
(1)
Includes cash interest payments calculated at stated fixed rate of 8.000%.
Other Off-Balance Sheet and Contingent Obligations
The Company had outstanding letters of credit relating to foreign contract guarantees and insurance payment liabilities totaling $36.4 million at December 31, 2020. We have granted liens on a substantial portion of the owned operating equipment as security for borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement and other indebtedness.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding performance bonds with a notional amount of $1,187.9 million of which $17.4 million relates to projects from our historical environmental & infrastructure businesses. The revenue value remaining in backlog related to the projects in continuing operations totaled $524.4 million.
Certain foreign projects performed by the Company have warranty periods, typically spanning no more than one to three years beyond project completion, whereby we retain responsibility to maintain the project site to certain specifications during the warranty period. Generally, any potential liability of the Company is mitigated by insurance, shared responsibilities with consortium partners, and/or recourse to owner-provided specifications.
The Company considers it unlikely that it would have to perform under any of the aforementioned contingent obligations.