Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For discussion of 2019 results year-over-year comparison with 2018 results refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Organization of Information
Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides a historical and prospective narrative on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. This discussion includes the following sections:
Overview
Results of Operations
Core Performance Measures
Reportable Segments
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Environment
Critical Accounting Estimates
New Accounting Standards
Forward-Looking Statements
OVERVIEW
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing economic uncertainty, including changing market conditions, the Company has and will continue to focus on three core priorities: preserving the financial health of the Company; protecting employees and communities; and delivering on customer commitments.
Strategy & Growth Framework
In 2019, we successfully completed our 2016 - 2019 Strategy and Capital Allocation Framework. Under the Framework, we outlined and demonstrated how Corning’s probability of success increases as we invest in our world-class capabilities. We concentrate approximately 80% of our research, development and engineering investment along with capital spending on a cohesive set of three core technologies, four manufacturing and engineering platforms, and five Market-Access Platforms. This strategy allows us to quickly apply our talents and repurpose our assets across the company, as needed, to capture high-return opportunities.
Building on the success of the 2016 - 2019 Framework, we announced our 2020 - 2023 Strategy & Growth Framework, highlighting significant opportunities to sell more Corning content through each of our Market-Access Platforms. Under this new Framework, our leadership priorities and our fundamental approach to capital allocation remain the same. We continue to focus our portfolio and utilize our financial strength. We expect to generate strong operating cash flow as we move forward. We will continue to use our cash to grow, extend our leadership, and reward shareholders.
While 2020, brought unprecedented challenges to our end markets and operations, driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, economic uncertainty, and social unrest, Corning adapted rapidly and remained resilient. We executed well to preserve financial strength, while advancing major innovations with industry leaders. We effectively applied our focused and cohesive portfolio to create value and outperform our underlying markets, contributing to growth in the second half of this year.
‎
Index
2020 Results
Net sales in the year ended December 31, 2020 were $11.3 billion, a net decrease of $200 million, or 2%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by lower sales in the Display Technologies, Optical Communications, Environmental Technologies and Life Sciences segments partially offset by higher sales the Specialty Materials segment and “All Other”.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated net income of $512 million, or $0.54 per share, compared to a net income of $960 million, or $1.07 per share, for 2019. When compared to 2019, the $448 million decrease in net income was primarily due to the following items (amounts presented after tax):
The negative impact of mark-to-market translated earnings contract losses of $226 million;
Higher costs of $170 million for an asset impairment loss related to investments in research and development programs within “All Other”;
Higher costs for litigation and environmental reserves of $133 million;
Higher expenses of $117 million, primarily driven by severance costs for the Display Technologies segment;
The negative impact of a cumulative adjustment recorded during the first quarter of 2020 to reduce revenue in the amount of $105 million. The adjustment was associated with a previously recorded commercial benefit asset, reflected as a prepayment, to a customer with a long-term supply agreement that is exiting its production of LCD panels; and
Lower segment net income of $73 million mainly driven by lower volumes in the first half of 2020.
Partially offsetting these events were the following items:
Gain on a previously held equity investment in HSG of $387 million; and
An $83 million gain recognized from the initial public offering of an investment in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Diluted earnings per share decreased in 2020 by $0.53 per share, or 50%, when compared to 2019, primarily driven by the decrease in net income described above. The impact of share repurchases did not materially impact the change in diluted earnings per share.
The translation impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, including the impact of hedges realized in the current year, positively impacted Corning’s net income by approximately $51 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019.
2021 Corporate Outlook
We believe 2021 will be a year of growth and we will continue to focus on operational excellence, cash-flow generation and prudent capital allocation. We expect year-over-year sales growth to accelerate in the first quarter of 2021, with approximately $3.0 - $3.2 billion of net sales.
Index
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Selected highlights from our operations follow (in millions):
* Percent change not meaningful.
‎
Index
Segment Net Sales
The following table presents segment net sales by reportable segment (in millions):
(1)This amount primarily represents the impact of foreign currency adjustments in the Display Technologies, Environmental Technologies and Life Sciences segments.
(2)Amount represents the negative impact of a cumulative adjustment recorded during the first quarter of 2020 to reduce revenue in the amount of $105 million. The adjustment was associated with a previously recorded commercial benefit asset, reflected as a prepayment, to a customer with a long-term supply agreement that is exiting its production of LCD panels.
* Percent change not meaningful.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, segment net sales decreased by $204 million, or 2%, when compared to the same period in 2019. The primary sales drivers by segment were as follows:
Display Technologies’ net sales decreased by $82 million, primarily driven by lower sales and production volumes in the first half of the year;
Optical Communications’ net sales declined $501 million, as sales declined for carrier products by $273 million and enterprise products by $228 million, due to general market weakness and capital spending reductions by several major customers;
Net sales for Environmental Technologies decreased $129 million, as production facilities of vehicle manufacturers were temporarily shut down during the first half of 2020 in key markets;
Net sales in the Life Sciences segment decreased by $17 million, primarily driven by lab closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
Net sales increased in the Specialty Materials segment in the amount of $290 million, primarily driven by strong demand for premium cover materials in support of second-half customer launches, growth in IT products due to work and study from home trends, as well as demand for semiconductor equipment products; and
Net sales for “All Other” increased by $235 million, primarily driven by the consolidation of HSG on September 9, 2020, which added sales of $194 million.
Movements in foreign exchange rates positively impacted Corning’s consolidated net sales by $115 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019.
In 2020 and 2019, sales in international markets accounted for 70% and 68%, respectively, of total net sales.
Cost of Sales
The types of expenses included in the cost of sales line item are: raw materials consumption, including direct and indirect materials; salaries, wages and benefits; depreciation and amortization; production utilities; production-related purchasing; warehousing (including receiving and inspection); repairs and maintenance; inter-location inventory transfer costs; production and warehousing facility property insurance; rent for production facilities; and other production overhead.
Index
Gross Margin
In the year ended December 31, 2020, gross margin decreased by $504 million, or 12%. Gross margin as a percentage of sales declined by 4 percentage points. Negative impacts to gross margin were primarily driven by severance charges for the Display Technologies segment and lower volumes in Display Technologies, Optical Communications and Environmental Technologies segments for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Movements in foreign exchange rates had a $91 million positive impact on Corning’s consolidated gross margin in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
When compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $162 million, or 10%, in the year ended December 31, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by 1% as a percentage of sales. The increase was primarily driven by higher litigation, restructuring and share-based compensation costs, partially offset by salary and cost reductions across the Company.
The types of expenses included in the selling, general and administrative expenses line item are: salaries, wages and benefits; stock-based compensation expense; travel; sales commissions; professional fees; and depreciation and amortization, utilities and rent for administrative facilities.
Research, Development and Engineering Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research, development and engineering expenses increased by $123 million, or 12%, when compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily driven by a pre-tax asset impairment loss of $211 million related to the reassessment and reprioritization of research and development programs within “All Other”. Given the current economic environment and market opportunities, Corning has rescoped and significantly reduced its investment in these research and development programs. As a percentage of sales, these expenses were 1% higher when compared to the same period last year.
Restructuring, Impairment, and Other Charges and Credits
For the year ended December 31, 2020, and in response to uncertain global economic conditions, Corning undertook actions to transform the Company’s cost structure and improve operational efficiency. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Corning recorded restructuring, impairment, and other charges and credits of $827 million.
In the second quarter of 2020, the Company implemented a corporate-wide workforce reduction program. Severance charges were primarily incurred to facilitate realignment of capacity in the Asia regions for the Display Technologies segment, optimize the Optical Communications segment and contain corporate costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, severance charges were $148 million. As of December 31, 2020, the unpaid severance liabilities of $45 million are expected to be substantially completed within the next twelve months.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Corning incurred a long-lived asset impairment and disposal loss for an asset group related to the reassessment of research and development programs within “All Other”. Given the economic environment and market opportunities, Corning discontinued its investment in these research and development programs. The impairment analysis and disposition of certain assets resulted in a total pre-tax charge of $217 million, primarily recorded in research, development and engineering expenses, as noted above, which was substantially all the carrying value, inclusive of an insignificant amount of goodwill.
Capacity realignment costs of $304 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily include accelerated depreciation and asset disposals associated with the exit of certain facilities and other exit activities in the Display Technologies and Specialty Materials business segments. Other charges and credits of $158 million, were related to other exit activities.
Refer to Note 2 (Restructuring, Impairment and Other Charges and Credits) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on restructuring activities and impairment.
Index
Equity in (Losses) Earnings of Affiliated Companies
The following provides a summary of equity in (losses) earnings of affiliated companies (in millions):
(1)The year ended December 31, 2020, includes HSG’s results of operations through September 8, 2020. Corning began consolidating HSG on September 9, 2020.
(2)Includes the Company’s share of a loss related to the sale of a business for the year ended December 31, 2020.
HSG acquired DuPont’s Trichlorosilane (“TCS”) manufacturing assets, which was determined to be a business and recorded as a business combination. The fair value of the purchase price was $255 million. In conjunction with this acquisition, HSG settled its pre-existing contract dispute related to a long-term supply agreement with DuPont (“TCS Settlement”) for a contractual amount of $175 million, which was determined to have a fair value of $200 million. See Note 4 (HSG Transactions) to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
HSG’s net income for the period ended September 8, 2020, included a pre-tax gain recorded in the second quarter of 2020, related to the settlement of a long-term supply agreement of approximately $165 million, partially offset by an inventory provision of approximately $44 million associated with the settlement of the agreement. Prior to the Redemption, in the third quarter of 2020, HSG recorded a pre-tax loss of $200 million resulting from the settlement of a pre-existing contract dispute related to a long-term supply agreement with DuPont (“TCS Settlement”). Corning’s share of the pre-tax loss was $81 million. Accordingly, Corning’s share of the net impact was an equity loss of $19 million.
Since September 9, 2020, HSG’s revenue of $194 million has been consolidated in “All Other” in Corning’s consolidated statements of income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The amount of net income is not material to Corning’s consolidated financial statements for the current year.
Additional information about corporate investments is presented in Note 3 (Investments) and Note 4 (HSG Transactions and Acquisitions) to the consolidated financial statements.
Index
Translated earnings contract (loss) gain, net
Included in the line item translated earnings contract (loss) gain, net, is the impact of foreign currency contracts which hedge our translation exposure arising from movements in the Japanese yen, South Korean won, new Taiwan dollar, euro, Chinese yuan and British pound and its impact on our net income.
The following table provides detailed information on the impact of our translated earnings contracts gains and losses for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)Includes pre-tax realized losses related to the expiration of option contracts for the year ended 2020, 2019, 2018 of $20 million, $37 million and $11 million, respectively, and was reflected in operating activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
(2)The impact to income was primarily driven by Japanese yen, South Korean won, and euro-denominated hedges of translated earnings.
Income Before Income Taxes
The translation impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, including the impact of hedges realized in the current year, positively impacted Corning’s income before income taxes by $60 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes and the related effective income tax rates were as follows (dollars in millions):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective income tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the following:
Additional net provision of $73 million from changes to our tax reserves;
A net provision of $45 million due primarily to stronger foreign earnings relative to U.S. earnings in the current year, as well as U.S. income inclusion under the Internal Revenue Code (“Subpart F income”); and
A net benefit of $116 million due to a net operating loss carryback allowed under the CARES Act.
‎
Index
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the effective income tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the following:
Additional net provision of $102 million from changes to our tax reserves;
A net benefit of $45 million due to releases of foreign valuation allowances on foreign deferred tax assets that are now considered realizable; and
Additional net benefit, including a change in estimate from prior year, from the 2017 Tax Act attributable to foreign intangible income (FDII) deduction of $103 million offset by taxes for global intangible low-taxed income (GILTI) of $15 million.
Generally, Corning will indefinitely reinvest the foreign earnings of: (1) any of its subsidiaries located in jurisdictions where Corning lacks the ability to repatriate its earnings, (2) any of its subsidiaries where Corning’s intention is to reinvest those earnings in operations, (3) legal entities for which Corning holds a non-controlling interest, (4) any subsidiaries with an accumulated deficit in earnings and profits, (5) any subsidiaries which have a positive earnings and profits balance but for which the entity lacks sufficient local statutory earnings or stock basis from which to make a distribution, or (6) any of its subsidiaries where a future distribution would trigger a significant net cost to the U.S. shareholder.
During 2020, the Company distributed approximately $914 million from foreign subsidiaries to their respective U.S. parent companies. As of December 31, 2020, Corning has approximately $2 billion of indefinitely reinvested foreign earnings. It remains impracticable to calculate the tax cost of repatriating our unremitted earnings which are considered indefinitely reinvested.
Refer to Note 8 (Income Taxes) to the consolidated financial statements for further details regarding income tax matters.
Net Income Attributable to Corning Incorporated
As a result of the items discussed above, net income and per share data was as follows (in millions, except per share amounts):
(1)Refer to Note 18 (Earnings per Common Share) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Index
Comprehensive Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, comprehensive income increased by $144 million, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the following:
An increase in the gain on foreign currency translation adjustments in the amount of $671 million, largely driven by the Japanese yen, South Korean won and Chinese yuan.
This gain was partially offset by the following:
A decrease in net income of $448 million; and
The negative impact of a change to net unrealized losses on designated hedges of $54 million.
Refer to Note 13 (Employee Retirement Plans) and Note 17 (Shareholders’ Equity) to the consolidated financial statements for additional details.
CORE PERFORMANCE MEASURES
In managing the Company and assessing our financial performance, we adjust certain measures provided by our consolidated financial statements to exclude specific items to report core performance measures. These items include gains and losses on our translated earnings contracts, acquisition-related costs, certain discrete tax items and other tax-related adjustments, restructuring, impairment losses, and other charges and credits, certain litigation-related expenses, pension mark-to-market adjustments and other items which do not reflect on-going operating results of the Company or our equity affiliates. Corning utilizes constant-currency reporting for our Display Technologies, Environmental Technologies, Specialty Materials and Life Sciences segments for the Japanese yen, South Korean won, Chinese yuan, new Taiwan dollar and the euro. Effective January 1, 2019, Corning began using constant-currency reporting for our Environmental Technologies and Life Sciences segments. The Company believes that the use of constant-currency reporting allows investors to understand our results without the volatility of currency fluctuations and reflects the underlying economics of the translated earnings contracts used to mitigate the impact of changes in currency exchange rates on our earnings and cash flows. Corning also believes that reporting core performance measures provides investors greater transparency to the information used by our management team to make financial and operational decisions.
Core performance measures are not prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States (“GAAP”). We believe investors should consider these non-GAAP measures in evaluating our results as they are more indicative of our core operating performance and how management evaluates our operational results and trends. These measures are not, and should not be viewed as a substitute for, GAAP reporting measures. With respect to the Company’s outlook for future periods, it is not possible to provide reconciliations for these non-GAAP measures because the Company does not forecast the movement of foreign currencies against the U.S. dollar, or other items that do not reflect ongoing operations, nor does it forecast items that have not yet occurred or are out of the Company’s control. As a result, the Company is unable to provide outlook information on a GAAP basis.
Index
Effective July 1, 2019, we replaced the term “Core Earnings” with “Core Net Income”. The terms are interchangeable and the underlying calculations remain the same.
For a reconciliation of non-GAAP performance measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, please see “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures”.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CORE PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Selected highlights from our continuing operations, excluding certain items, follow (in millions):
Core Net Sales
Core net sales are consistent with net sales by reportable segment. The following table presents segment net sales by reportable segment (in millions):
(1)This amount primarily represents the impact of foreign currency adjustments in the Display Technologies, Environmental Technologies and Life Sciences segments.
(2)Amount represents the negative impact of a cumulative adjustment recorded during the first quarter of 2020 to reduce revenue in the amount of $105 million. The adjustment was associated with a previously recorded commercial benefit asset, reflected as a prepayment, to a customer with a long-term supply agreement that is exiting its production of LCD panels.
* Percentage change not meaningful
Segment net sales and variances are discussed in detail in the Reportable Segments section of our MD&A.
Core Equity in Earnings of Affiliated Companies
The following provides a summary of core equity in earnings of affiliated companies (in millions):
(1)The year ended December 31, 2020, includes HSG’s results of operations through September 8, 2020. Corning began consolidating HSG on September 9, 2020.
Index
Core Net Income
In the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated core net income of $1,237 million or $1.39 per share, compared to core net income generated in the year ended December 31, 2019 of $1,578 million, or $1.76 per share. The decrease in core net income of $341 million was driven by the following items:
Lower segment net income of $73 million mainly driven by lower volumes in the first half of 2020; and
Lower equity earnings of $151 million.
Core earnings per share decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.39 per share, driven by the decrease in core net income. The impact of share repurchases did not materially impact the change in diluted earnings per share.
Included in core net income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, is net periodic pension expense in the amount of $50 million, $84 million and $52 million, which excludes the annual pension mark-to-market adjustments.
Refer to Note 13 (Employee Retirement Plans) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Core Earnings per Common Share
The following table sets forth the computation of core basic and core diluted earnings per common share (in millions, except per share amounts):
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
We utilize certain financial measures and key performance indicators that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP to assess our financial and operating performance. A non-GAAP financial measure is defined as a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance that (i) excludes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding amounts, that are included in the comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the consolidated statements of income or statement of cash flows, or (ii) includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of including amounts, that are excluded from the comparable measure as calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the consolidated statements of income or statements of cash flows.
Core net sales, core equity in earnings of affiliated companies and core net income are non-GAAP financial measures utilized by our management to analyze financial performance without the impact of items that are driven by general economic conditions and events that do not reflect the underlying fundamentals and trends in the Company’s operations.
Index
The following tables reconcile our non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measure (amounts in millions except percentages and per share amounts):
(a)Based upon statutory tax rates in the specific jurisdiction for each event.
See “Items Excluded from GAAP Measures” below for the descriptions of the footnoted reconciling items.
‎
Index
(a)Based upon statutory tax rates in the specific jurisdiction for each event.
See “Items Excluded from GAAP Measures” below for the descriptions of the footnoted reconciling items.
‎
Index
Items which we exclude from GAAP measures to arrive at core performance measures are as follows:
(1)
Constant-currency adjustment: Because a significant portion of segment revenue and expenses are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, management believes it is important to understand the impact on core net income of translating these currencies into U.S. dollars. Our Display Technologies segment sales and net income are primarily denominated in Japanese yen, but also impacted by the South Korean won, Chinese yuan, and new Taiwan dollar. Environmental Technologies and Life Science segments sales and net income are primarily impacted by the euro and Chinese yuan. Presenting results on a constant-currency basis mitigates the translation impact and allows management to evaluate performance period over period, analyze underlying trends in our businesses, and establish operational goals and forecasts. We establish constant-currency rates based on internally derived management estimates which are closely aligned with the currencies we have hedged.
Constant-currency rates are as follows:
Currency
Japanese yen
Korean won
Chinese yuan
New Taiwan dollar
Euro
Rate
¥107
₩1,175
¥6.7
NT$31
€.81
(2)
Translation loss on Japanese yen-denominated debt: We have excluded the gain or loss on the translation of our yen-denominated debt to U.S. dollars.
(3)
Translated earnings contract loss (gain): We have excluded the impact of the realized and unrealized gains and losses of our Japanese yen, South Korean won, Chinese yuan, euro and new Taiwan dollar-denominated foreign currency hedges related to translated earnings, as well as the unrealized gains and losses of our British pound-denominated foreign currency hedges related to translated earnings.
(4)
Acquisition-related costs: These expenses include intangible amortization, inventory valuation adjustments and external acquisition-related deal costs.
(5)
Discrete tax items and other tax-related adjustments: For 2020 and 2019, these include discrete period tax items such as changes in tax law, the impact of tax audits, changes in tax reserves, changes in judgement about the realizability of certain deferred tax assets, net Subpart F income, and other tax-related adjustments. For 2018, this amount primarily relates to the preliminary IRS audit settlement offset by changes in judgment about the realizability of certain deferred tax assets.
(6)
Litigation, regulatory and other legal matters: Includes amounts that reflect developments in commercial litigation, intellectual property disputes, adjustments to our estimated liability for environmental-related items and other legal matters.
(7)
Restructuring, impairment and other charges and credits: This amount includes restructuring, impairment losses and other charges and credits, as well as other expenses, primarily accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs, which are not related to continuing operations and are not classified as restructuring expense.
(8)
Cumulative adjustment related to customer contract: The negative impact of a cumulative adjustment recorded during the first quarter of 2020 to reduce revenue in the amount of $105 million. The adjustment was associated with a previously recorded commercial benefit asset, reflected as a prepayment, to a customer with a long-term supply agreement that is exiting its production of LCD panels.
(9)
Equity in losses (earnings) of affiliated companies: These adjustments relate to costs not related to continuing operations of our affiliated companies, such as restructuring, impairment losses, inventory adjustments, and other charges and credits and settlements under “take-or-pay” contracts. The year ended December 31, 2020 includes the Company’s share of a loss related to the sale of a business.
(10)
Pension mark-to-market adjustment: Defined benefit pension mark-to-market gains and losses, which arise from changes in actuarial assumptions and the difference between actual and expected returns on plan assets and discount rates.
(11)
Transaction-related gain, net: Amount represents the gain recorded on a previously held equity investment in HSG.
(12)
Bond redemption loss: During the fourth quarter of 2020, Corning redeemed $100 million of 7.0% debentures due 2024 with a carrying amount of $99 million, paying a $21 million make-whole call premium, resulting in a redemption loss of $22 million.
(13)
Gain on investment: Amount represents the gain recognized from the initial public offering of an investment in the fourth quarter of 2020.
‎
Index
REPORTABLE SEGMENTS
Reportable segments are as follows:
Display Technologies - manufactures glass substrates for flat panel liquid crystal displays and other high-performance display panels.
Optical Communications - manufactures carrier network and enterprise network components for the telecommunications industry.
Specialty Materials - manufactures products that provide more than 150 material formulations for glass, glass ceramics and fluoride crystals to meet demand for unique customer needs.
Environmental Technologies - manufactures ceramic substrates and filters for automotive and diesel applications.
Life Sciences - manufactures glass and plastic labware, equipment, media, serum and reagents enabling workflow solutions for drug discovery and bioproduction.
All other segments that do not meet the quantitative threshold for separate reporting have been grouped as “All Other.” This group is primarily comprised of the results of the pharmaceutical technologies, auto glass and new product lines and development projects, as well as other businesses and certain corporate investments.
The Company obtained a controlling interest in HSG during the third quarter of 2020 and has consolidated results in “All Other” as of September 9, 2020. Refer to Note 4 (HSG Transactions and Acquisitions) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on this transaction.
Financial results for the reportable segments are prepared on a basis consistent with the internal disaggregation of financial information to assist the CODM in making internal operating decisions. The impact of changes in the Japanese yen, South Korean won, Chinese yuan and new Taiwan dollar are excluded from segment sales and segment net income for the Display Technologies and Specialty Materials segments. The impact of changes in the euro and Chinese yuan are excluded from segment sales and segment net income for the Environment Technologies segment. The impact of changes in the euro, Chinese yuan and Japanese yen are excluded from segment sales and segment net income for the Life Sciences segment. Certain income and expenses are included in the unallocated amounts in the reconciliation of reportable segment net income (loss) to consolidated net income. These include items that are not used by the CODM in evaluating the results of or in allocating resources to the segments and include the following items: the impact of the translated earnings contracts; acquisition-related costs; discrete tax items and other tax-related adjustments; certain litigation, regulatory and other legal matters; restructuring, impairment losses and other charges and credits; adjustments relating to acquisitions; and other non-recurring non-operational items. Although these amounts are excluded from segment results, they are included in reported consolidated results.
Earnings of equity affiliates that are closely associated with the reportable segments are included in the respective segment’s net income (loss). Certain common expenses among reportable segments have been allocated differently than they would for stand-alone financial information. Segment net income (loss) may not be consistent with measures used by other companies.
Display Technologies
The following table provides net sales and net income for the Display Technologies segment:
Net sales in the Display Technologies segment decreased by $82 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the prior year, primarily driven by lower sales and production volumes in the first half of the year.
Index
Net income in the Display Technologies segment decreased by $69 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven the changes in sales outlined above.
Optical Communications
The following table provides net sales and net income for the Optical Communications segment:
Net sales declined by $501 million, or 12%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to lower sales in carrier products and enterprise products, down $273 million and $228 million, respectively, driven by general market weakness and capital spending reductions by several major customers.
Net income in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $123 million, or 25%, primarily driven by the changes in sales, outlined above. Profitability was impacted by lower sales and production volumes.
Movements in foreign currency exchange rates did not materially impact net income in this segment in the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019.
Specialty Materials
The following table provides net sales and net income for the Specialty Materials segment:
Net sales in the Specialty Materials segment increased by $290 million, or 18%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019. Results were driven by demand for our premium cover materials, strength in the IT market, and demand for semiconductor related materials.
Net income in the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $121 million, or 40%, when compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by the sales increases, outlined above, and good cost performance.
Environmental Technologies
The following table provides net sales and net income for the Environmental Technologies segment:
Net sales decreased $129 million, or 9% in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the temporary shutdown of vehicle manufacturing facilities in key markets that began in the first quarter and continued for much of the second quarter.
Net income in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $66 million, or 25%, driven by the sales decline outlined above. Profitability was impacted by lower sales and production volumes.
Index
Life Sciences
The following table provides net sales and net income for the Life Sciences segment:
Net sales in the Life Sciences segment decreased by $17 million, primarily driven by lab closures during the first half of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net income decreased by $11 million, or 7%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by sales and volume declines.
All Other
“All Other” is a group of segments primarily comprised of the results of pharmaceutical technologies, auto glass, new product lines and development projects, and other businesses or investments that do not meet the quantitative threshold for separate reporting.
The Company obtained a controlling interest in HSG during the third quarter of 2020 and has consolidated results in “All Other” as of September 9, 2020. Refer to Note 4 (HSG Transactions and Acquisitions) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on this transaction.
The following table provides net sales and net loss for “All Other” (in millions):
Net sales of this segment increased by $235 million, or 102%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in 2019, driven primarily by consolidation of HSG on September 9, 2020, which added sales of $194 million in the current year.
The decrease in the net loss of $75 million is primarily driven by increased sales and lowered spending on development projects.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Financing and Capital Structure
The following items discuss Corning’s financing and changes in capital structure during 2020 and 2019:
During the fourth quarter of 2020, Corning redeemed $100 million of 7.0% debentures due in 2024 with a carrying amount of $99 million, paying a $21 million make-whole call premium. The total payment of $121 million is disclosed in financing activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows. The redemption resulted in a loss of $22 million.
Index
In conjunction with the change in control of HSG on September 9, 2020, a variable interest rate loan of $175 million U.S. dollars (“USD”), maturing on September 8, 2021, was made to DC HSC Holdings, LLC, now a consolidated subsidiary of Corning. In December 2020, DC HSC Holdings, LLC repaid $100 million of the loan. The remaining balance of $75 million is reflected in the current portion of long-term debt and short-term borrowings in Corning’s consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 4 (HSG Transactions and Acquisitions) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
During the second quarter of 2020, Corning established an incremental liquidity facility for 25 billion Japanese yen, approximately equivalent to $232 million with a maturity of three years. As of December 31, 2020, the facility has not been drawn upon.
In the first quarter of 2020, Corning established two unsecured variable rate loan facilities for 1,050 million Chinese yuan, equivalent to $150 million, and 749 million Chinese yuan, equivalent to $105 million, each with a maturity of five years. In the fourth quarter of 2020, Corning established a third unsecured variable rate loan facility for 546 million Chinese yuan, equivalent to $84 million, with a maturity of five years. Borrowings under these loan facilities for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled 1,691 million Chinese yuan, or approximately $243 million. These Chinese yuan-denominated proceeds will not be converted into USD and will be used for capital projects. Payments of principal and interest on the Notes will be in Chinese yuan, or should yuan be unavailable due to circumstances beyond Corning’s control, a USD equivalent. These loans are the sole obligations of the subsidiary borrowers and are not guaranteed by any other Corning entity.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, Corning issued two USD-denominated debt securities (the “Notes”), as follows:
$400 million 3.90% senior unsecured notes with a maturity of 30 years; and
$1.1 billion 5.45% senior unsecured notes with a maturity of 60 years.
The net proceeds, after deducting offering expenses, were approximately $1.5 billion and will be used for general corporate purposes. We can redeem these notes at any time, subject to certain terms and conditions.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, Corning redeemed $300 million of 4.25% notes due in 2020, paying a premium of $4.7 million by exercising our make-whole call. The bond redemption resulted in an $8.4 million loss during the same quarter.
In the third quarter of 2019, Corning issued two Japanese yen-denominated debt securities (the “Notes”), as follows:
¥31.3 billion 1.153% senior unsecured notes with a maturity of 12 years; and
¥5.9 billion 1.513% senior unsecured notes with a maturity of 20 years.
The proceeds from the Notes were received in Japanese yen and converted to USD on the date of issuance. The net proceeds received in USD, after deducting offering expenses, were approximately $349 million and will be used for general corporate purposes. Payments of principal and interest on the Notes will be in Japanese yen, or should yen be unavailable due to circumstances beyond Corning’s control, a USD equivalent.
Common Stock Dividends
On February 3, 2021, Corning’s Board of Directors declared a 9% increase in the Company’s quarterly common stock dividend, which increased the quarterly dividend from $0.22 to $0.24 per share of common stock, beginning with the dividend paid in the first quarter of 2021. This increase marks the tenth dividend increase since October 2011.
On February 5, 2020, Corning’s Board of Directors declared a 10% increase in the Company’s quarterly common stock dividend, which increased the quarterly dividend from $0.20 to $0.22 per share of common stock, beginning with the dividend paid in the first quarter of 2020.
Index
On February 6, 2019, Corning’s Board of Directors declared an 11% increase in the Company’s quarterly common stock dividend, which increased the quarterly dividend from $0.18 to $0.20 per share of common stock, beginning with the dividend paid in the first quarter of 2019.
Fixed Rate Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock, Series A
Corning has 2,300 outstanding shares of Fixed Rate Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock, Series A. The preferred stock is convertible at the option of the holder, and by the Company upon certain events, at a conversion rate of 50,000 shares of Corning’s common stock per one share of preferred stock, subject to certain anti-dilution provisions. As of December 31, 2020, the preferred stock had not been converted, and none of the anti-dilution provisions had been triggered. On January 16, 2021, the preferred stock became convertible, in whole or in part, at the option of the holder.
Customer Deposits
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, Corning had customer deposits of approximately $1.4 billion and $1.0 billion. The majority of these were non-refundable cash deposits for customers to secure rights to an amount of glass produced by Corning under long-term supply agreements. The duration of these long-term supply agreements ranges up to 10 years. As glass is shipped to customers, Corning will recognize revenue and reduce the amount of the customer deposit liability. The increase in the balance, when compared to the prior period, was primarily driven by a customer deposit liability of $264 million recorded at the fair value of refundable payments that HSG received from a customer under a long-term supply agreement.
In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, customer deposits used were $140 million and $37 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $1,148 million and $927 million were recorded as other long-term liabilities, respectively. The remaining $211 million and $104 million, respectively, were classified as other current liabilities.
Deferred Revenue
During the third quarter of 2020, Corning obtained a controlling interest in HSG and recorded deferred revenue of $1,070 million at fair value related to the performance obligations of non-refundable consideration previously received by HSG from its customers under long term supply agreements.
The deferred revenue is tracked on a per-customer contract-unit basis. As customers take delivery of the committed volumes under the terms of the contract, a per unit amount of deferred revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to the customer based upon the units shipped compared to the remaining contractual units.
As of December 31, 2020, $872 million was classified as a long-term liability and $152 million remaining was classified as a current liability. These balances reflect reductions in deferred revenue since September 9, 2020.
Capital Spending
Capital spending was approximately $1.4 billion in 2020, a decrease of $601 million when compared to 2019. We expect our 2021 capital expenditures to be approximately $1.4 billion.
Index
Cash Flows
Summary of cash flow data (in millions):
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $149 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period in the prior year. The change was primarily driven by net favorable movements in working capital and the refund of tax assessments from the South Korean government, of $730 million and $101 million, respectively, partially offset by increased pension contributions, increased severance payments, lower dividends received from affiliated companies, and higher asbestos claim payments of $219 million, $119 million, $105 million and $80 million, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $581 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period last year. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in capital expenditures.
Net cash used in financing activities increased by $682 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the same period last year. The increase was primarily driven by lower proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $1,588 million, partially offset by a reduction in repurchases of treasury stock and debt repayments of $835 million and $79 million, respectively.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
We have defined benefit pension plans covering certain domestic and international employees. Our largest single pension plan is Corning’s U.S. qualified plan. At December 31, 2020, this plan accounted for 77% of our consolidated defined benefit pension plans’ projected benefit obligation and 86% of the related plans’ assets.
In 2020, Corning made $180 million in voluntary contributions to our domestic defined benefit pension plan and cash contributions of $41 million to our international pension plans. During 2021, the Company anticipates making cash contributions of $31 million to the international pension plans.
Refer to Note 13 (Employee Retirement Plans) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Key Balance Sheet Data
Balance sheet and working capital measures are provided in the following table (in millions):
(1)Includes trade payables only.
Index
Management Assessment of Liquidity
We ended the fourth quarter of 2020 with approximately $2.7 billion of cash and cash equivalents. Our cash and cash equivalents are held in various locations throughout the world and are generally unrestricted. We utilize a variety of strategies to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. At December 31, 2020, approximately 82% of the consolidated amount was held outside of the United States.
Corning also has a commercial paper program pursuant to which we may issue short-term, unsecured commercial paper notes up to a maximum aggregate principal amount outstanding at any one time of $1.5 billion. Under this program, the Company may issue the paper from time to time and will use the proceeds for general corporate purposes. The Company’s Revolving Credit Agreement is available to support obligations under the commercial paper program, if needed. At December 31, 2020, Corning did not have outstanding commercial paper.
The Company’s $1.5 billion Revolving Credit Agreement is available to support its commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes.
Share Repurchases
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased 4.1 million and 31.0 million shares of common stock, respectively, on the open market for approximately $105 million and $925 million as part of its 2018 Repurchase Program. The Company suspended share buybacks during the first quarter of 2020 and made no share repurchases for the remainder of the year.
Refer to Note 17 (Shareholders’ Equity) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Other
We complete comprehensive reviews of our significant customers and their creditworthiness by analyzing their financial strength at least annually or more frequently for customers where we have identified a measure of increased risk. We closely monitor payments and developments to identify potential customer credit issues. From time to time, we factor or sell accounts receivable. Sales of accounts receivable during 2020 were $402 million, which we believe would have been collected during the normal course of business this year. During 2019, Corning participated in customer-initiated payment programs which resulted in accelerated collections of $143 million in accounts receivable. We currently have not identified any potential material impact on our liquidity resulting from customer credit issues.
Our major source of funding for 2021 and beyond will be our operating cash flow, our existing balances of cash and cash equivalents and proceeds from any issuances of debt. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to fund operations, acquisitions, capital expenditures, scheduled debt repayments, dividend payments and share repurchase programs.
Our Revolving Credit Agreement includes affirmative and negative covenants with which we must comply, including a leverage (debt to capital ratio) financial covenant. The required leverage ratio is a maximum of 60%. At December 31, 2020, our leverage using this measure was approximately 37%. As of December 31, 2020, Corning was in compliance and no amounts were outstanding under the Company’s Revolving Credit Agreement.
Our debt instruments contain customary event of default provisions, which allow the lenders the option of accelerating all obligations upon the occurrence of certain events. In addition, some of our debt instruments contain a cross default provision, whereby an uncured default exceeding a specified amount on one debt obligation of the Company, also would be considered a default under the terms of another debt instrument. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all such provisions.
Management is not aware of any known trends or any known demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in a material decrease in our liquidity. In addition, other than items discussed, there are no known material trends, favorable or unfavorable, in our capital resources and no expected material changes in the mix and relative cost of such resources.
Index
Translated Earnings Contracts
Corning has hedged a significant portion of its projected yen exposure for the period 2020 through 2024, with average rate forwards and options. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a pre-tax net loss of $38 million and a pre-tax net gain of $201 million, respectively, related to changes in the fair value of these instruments. Included in these amounts are realized losses of $31 million and $7 million, respectively. The gross notional value outstanding for these instruments which hedge our exposure to the Japanese yen at December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $6.5 billion and $10.2 billion, respectively.
We have entered into average rate forwards to hedge our translation exposure resulting from movements in the South Korean won and its impact on our net income. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a pre-tax net gain of $24 million and $6 million, respectively, related to changes in the fair value of these instruments. Included in these amounts is a realized gain of $1 million and a realized loss of $1 million, respectively. These instruments had a gross notional value outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019, of $0.4 billion.
We have entered into a portfolio of average rate forwards to hedge against our euro translation exposure. In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded pre-tax loss of $21 million and a pre-tax gain of $37 million, respectively. Included in these amounts are realized gains of $20 million and realized gain of $29 million, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the euro-denominated average rate instruments had a gross notional amount of $0.5 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively.
These derivative instruments are not designated as accounting hedges, and changes in fair value are recorded in earnings in the translated earnings contract (loss) gain, net line of the consolidated statements of income.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off balance sheet arrangements are transactions, agreements, or other contractual arrangements with an unconsolidated entity for which Corning has an obligation to the entity that is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements.
Corning’s off balance sheet arrangements include guarantee and indemnity contracts. At the time a guarantee is issued, the Company is required to recognize a liability for the fair value or market value of the obligation it assumes. In the normal course of our business, we do not routinely provide significant third-party guarantees. Generally, third-party guarantees provided by Corning are limited to certain financial guarantees, including stand-by letters of credit and performance bonds, and the incurrence of contingent liabilities in the form of purchase price adjustments related to attainment of milestones. These guarantees have various terms, and none of these guarantees are individually significant.
Refer to Note 14 (Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
For variable interest entities, we assess the terms of our interest in each entity to determine if we are the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity is the party that absorbs a majority of the entity’s expected losses, receives a majority of its expected residual returns, or both, due to holding variable interests. Variable interests are the ownership, contractual, or other pecuniary interests in an entity, that change with changes in the fair value, of the entity’s net assets excluding variable interest entities.
Corning has identified nine entities that qualify as variable interest entities and are not consolidated. These entities are not considered to be significant to Corning’s consolidated financial statements.
Corning does not have retained interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serve as credit, liquidity or market risk support to that entity.
Index
ENVIRONMENT
Refer to Item 3. Legal Proceedings or Note 14 (Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees) to the consolidated financial statements for information.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported therein. The estimates that required us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments, including future projections of performance and relevant discount rates, are set forth below.
Valuation of the Previously Held Equity Interest from the Consolidation of HSG
We account for the change in controlling interest using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires us to estimate the fair values of the assets and liabilities recorded. Assets recorded include intangible assets such as developed technologies and know-how, tradenames and customer-related intangibles, fixed assets and inventories. Liabilities recorded include contract liabilities such as customer deposits and deferred revenue, debt, and other liabilities. These assets and liabilities recorded are assessed at the time of the change in control and require judgment in ascertaining the fair values. In this business combination, achieved in stages, we also remeasure the previously held equity interest in HSG at the time of the change in control at fair value and recognize the resulting gain in earnings. Independent appraisals assisted the company in the determination of the fair value of certain assets and liabilities. Such appraisals are based on acceptable valuation models as well as inputs and assumptions provided by us. Additional information related to the fair value of the assets and liabilities recorded during the allocation period, not to exceed one year, may result in changes to the recorded values of assets and liabilities, resulting in an offsetting adjustment to the goodwill associated with the business combination. Changes in assumptions and estimates after completing the allocation of the purchase price to the assets and liabilities acquired, as well as differences in actual and estimated results could result in impacts to Corning’s financial results.
In September 2020, HSG redeemed DuPont’s entire ownership interest in HSG for $250 million. Upon completion of the Redemption, Corning recognized a pre-tax gain of $498 million on its previously held equity investment in HSG as a result of the consolidation resulting from the Redemption. The gain was calculated based on the difference between fair value and carrying value of the equity method investment immediately preceding the Redemption. The fair value of Corning’s equity interest in HSG was estimated by applying the income approach, which was based on significant assumptions such as projected revenue and discount rate. The company used a discount rate of 16.5% and terminal growth rate of zero.
Upon completion of the Redemption, we recognized intangible assets consisting primarily of $215 million of developed technologies and know-how, and $70 million of other intangibles that are amortized over the weighted average useful life of approximately 20 and 15 years, respectively. The developed technologies and know-how intangible assets were valued using two appropriate valuation methods. The developed technologies and know-how intangibles asset valued at $125 million utilized the relief from royalty method, which was based on significant inputs such as projected revenue and key assumptions, including a discount rate of 21.0% and a royalty rate of 7.0%. The developed technologies and know-how intangibles asset valued at $90 million utilized the multi-period excess earnings method under the income approach, which was based on significant inputs such as projected revenue and the key assumption of a discount rate of 19.0%.
Valuation of Deferred Revenue and Customer Deposits from the consolidation of HSG
Upon completion of the Redemption and resulting consolidation, we recorded a customer deposit liability and deferred revenue.
Corning recorded a customer deposit of $264 million, at the fair value, of refundable payments that HSG received from a customer under a long-term supply agreement. The discount rates used to calculate the present value of the customer deposit range from 2.54% to 3.23%. The deposits will be repaid from 2029 to 2034 provided that all purchase obligations of this customer under the supply agreement have been satisfied.
Index
We recorded deferred revenue of $1,070 million at fair value related to the performance obligations of non-refundable consideration previously received by HSG from its customers under long term supply agreements. The fair values of deferred revenue were estimated by applying a bottoms-up cost buildup method of the cost approach based on significant inputs such as the cost to fulfill the obligations as well as key assumptions including a normal profit margin.
Refer to Note 3 (Investments) and Note 4 (HSG Transactions and Acquisitions) to the consolidated financial statements for more information.
Impairment of assets held for use
We are required to assess the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets when an indicator of impairment has been identified. We review long-lived assets in each quarter in which impairment indicators are present. We must exercise judgment in assessing whether an event of impairment has occurred.
Manufacturing equipment includes certain components of production equipment that are constructed of precious metals, primarily platinum and rhodium. These metals are not depreciated because they have very low physical losses and are repeatedly reclaimed and reused in our manufacturing process over a very long useful life. Precious metals are reviewed for impairment as part of our assessment of long-lived assets. This review considers all the Company’s precious metals that are either in place in the production process; in reclamation, fabrication, or refinement in anticipation of re-use; or awaiting use to support increased capacity. Precious metals are only acquired to support our operations and are not held for trading or other non-manufacturing related purposes.
Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairments include, but are not limited to:
A significant decrease in the market price of an asset;
A significant change in the use of a long-lived or its physical condition;
A significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate that could affect the value of the asset, including an adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
An accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of an asset;
A current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of an asset; and
A current expectation that, more likely than not, an asset will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life.
For purposes of recognition and measurement of an impairment loss, a long-lived asset or assets is grouped with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. We must exercise judgment in assessing the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Our assessment is performed at the reportable segment level. For the majority of our reportable segments, we concluded that locations or businesses within these segments which share production along the supply chain must be combined to appropriately identify cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities.
For long-lived assets, when impairment indicators are present, we compare estimated undiscounted future cash flows, including the eventual disposition of the asset group at market value, to the assets’ carrying value to determine if the asset group is recoverable. This assessment requires the exercise of judgment in assessing the future use of and projected value to be derived from the assets to be held and used. Assessments also consider changes in asset utilization, including the temporary idling of capacity and the expected timing for placing this capacity back into production.
Index
For an asset group that fails the test of recoverability, the estimated fair value of long-lived assets is determined using an “income approach” that starts with the forecast of all the expected future net cash flows including the eventual disposition at market value of long-lived assets, and considers the fair market value of all precious metals, if applicable. We assess the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. If there is an impairment, a loss is recorded to reflect the difference between the assets’ fair value and carrying value. Our estimates are based upon our historical experience, our commercial relationships, and available external information about future trends. We believe fair value assessments are most sensitive to market growth and the corresponding impact on volume and selling prices and that these are also more subjective than manufacturing cost and other assumptions. The Company believes its current assumptions and estimates are reasonable and appropriate.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the carrying value of precious metals was $3.4 billion and $3.3 billion, respectively, and significantly lower than the fair market value. Most of these precious metals are utilized by the Display Technologies and Specialty Materials segments. Corning believes these precious metal assets to be recoverable due to the significant positive cash flow in both segments. The potential for impairment exists in the future if negative events significantly decrease the cash flow of these segments. Such events include, but are not limited to, a significant decrease in demand for products or a significant decrease in profitability in our Display Technologies or Specialty Materials segments.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Corning incurred a long-lived asset impairment and disposal loss for an asset group related to the reassessment and reprioritization of research and development programs within “All Other”. Given the economic environment and market opportunities, Corning discontinued its investment in these research and development programs. The impairment analysis and disposition of certain assets resulted in a total pre-tax charge of $217 million, which was substantially all the carrying value, inclusive of an insignificant amount of goodwill. The fair value of the asset group for the impairment analysis was measured using unobservable (Level 3) inputs.
Refer to Note 2 (Restructuring, Impairment and Other Charges and Credits) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on restructuring activities and impairment.
Income taxes
We are required to exercise judgment about our future results in assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets. Inherent in this estimation process is the requirement for us to estimate future book and taxable income and possible tax planning strategies. These estimates require us to exercise judgment about our future results, the prudence and feasibility of possible tax planning strategies, and the economic environments in which we do business. It is possible that actual results will differ from assumptions and require adjustments to allowances.
Corning accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which requires that companies only record tax benefits for technical positions that are believed to have a greater than 50% likelihood of being sustained on their technical merits and then only to the extent of the amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. In estimating these amounts, we must exercise judgment around factors such as the weighting of the tax law in our favor, the willingness of a tax authority to aggressively pursue an opposing position, or alternatively, consider a negotiated compromise, and our willingness to dispute a tax authorities’ assertion to the level of appeal we believe is required to sustain our position. As a result, it is possible that our estimate of the benefits we will realize for uncertain tax positions may change when we become aware of new information affecting these judgments and estimates.
Index
Fair value measures
As required, Corning uses two kinds of inputs to determine the fair value of assets and liabilities: observable and unobservable. Observable inputs are based on market data or independent sources, while unobservable inputs are based on the Company’s own market assumptions. Once inputs have been characterized, we prioritize the inputs used to measure fair value into one of three broad levels. Characterization of fair value inputs is required for those accounting pronouncements that prescribe or permit fair value measurement. In addition, observable market data must be used when available and the highest-and-best-use measure should be applied to non-financial assets. Corning’s major categories of financial assets and liabilities required to be measured at fair value are short-term and long-term investments, certain pension asset investments and derivatives. These categories use observable inputs only and are measured using a market approach based on quoted prices in markets considered active or in markets in which there are few transactions.
Derivative assets and liabilities may include interest rate swaps and forward exchange contracts that are measured using observable quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities. Included in our forward exchange contracts are foreign currency hedges that hedge our cash flow and translation exposure resulting from movements in the Japanese yen, South Korean won, euro, new Taiwan dollar, Chinese yuan and British pound. Changes in the fair value of contracts designated as cash flow hedges are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss in shareholders’ equity and reclassified into income when the underlying hedged item impacts earnings. For contracts that are not designated as accounting hedges, changes in fair value are recorded in earnings in the translated earnings contract (loss) gain, net line of the consolidated statements of income. In arriving at the fair value of Corning’s derivative assets and liabilities, we have considered the appropriate valuation and risk criteria, including such factors as credit risk of the relevant party to the transaction. Amounts related to credit risk are not material.
Refer to Note 16 (Fair Value Measurements) to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Probability of litigation outcomes
Corning is required to make judgments about future events that are inherently uncertain. In making determinations of likely outcomes of litigation matters, we consider the evaluation of legal counsel knowledgeable about each matter, case law, and other case-specific issues. See Part II - Item 3. Legal Proceedings for a discussion of Corning’s material litigation matters.
Other possible liabilities
The Company is required to make judgments about future events that are inherently uncertain. In making determinations of likely outcomes of certain matters, including certain tax planning and environmental matters, these judgments require us to consider events and actions that are outside our control in determining whether probable or possible liabilities require accrual or disclosure. It is possible that actual results will differ from assumptions and require adjustments to accruals.
Pension and other postretirement employee benefits (OPEB)
Corning offers employee retirement plans consisting of defined benefit pension plans covering certain domestic and international employees and postretirement plans that provide health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retirees and dependents. The costs and obligations related to these benefits reflect the Company’s assumptions related to general economic conditions (particularly interest rates), expected return on plan assets, rate of compensation increase for employees and health care trend rates. The cost of providing plan benefits depends on demographic assumptions including retirements, mortality, turnover and plan participation. While management believes that the assumptions used are appropriate, differences in actual experience or changes in assumptions may affect Corning’s employee pension and other postretirement obligations, and current and future expense.
Index
Costs for our defined benefit pension plans consist of two elements: 1) on-going costs recognized quarterly, which are comprised of service and interest costs, expected return on plan assets and amortization of prior service costs; and 2) mark-to-market gains and losses outside of the corridor, where the corridor is equal to 10% of the greater of the benefit obligation or the market-related value of plan assets at the beginning of the year, which are recognized annually in the fourth quarter of each year. These gains and losses result from changes in actuarial assumptions and the differences between actual and expected return on plan assets. Any interim remeasurement, such as curtailments, settlements, significant plan changes, or adjustments to the annual valuation, is recognized as a mark-to-market adjustment in the quarter in which such an event occurs.
Costs for OPEB plans consist of on-going costs recognized quarterly, and are comprised of service and interest costs, amortization of prior service costs and amortization of actuarial gains and losses. We recognize the actuarial gains and losses resulting from changes in actuarial assumptions as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss in shareholders’ equity on an annual basis and amortize them into our operating results over the average remaining service period of employees expected to receive benefits under the plans, to the extent such gains and losses are outside of the corridor.
The following table presents our actual and expected return on assets, as well as the corresponding percentages:
As of December 31, 2020, the Projected Benefit Obligation (PBO) for U.S. pension plans was $4.2 billion.
The following information illustrates the sensitivity to a change in certain assumptions for U.S. pension plans:
The above sensitivities reflect the impact of changing one assumption at a time. Note that economic factors and conditions often affect multiple assumptions simultaneously and the effects of changes in key assumptions are not necessarily linear. These changes in assumptions would have no effect on Corning’s funding requirements.
In addition, at December 31, 2020, a 25 basis point decrease in each spot rate would decrease shareholders’ equity by $148 million before tax, and a 25 basis point increase in each spot rate would increase shareholders’ equity by $140 million. In addition, the impact of greater than a 25 basis point decrease in each spot rate would not be proportional to the first 25 basis point decrease in each spot rate.
Index
The following table illustrates the sensitivity to a change in each spot rate assumption related to Corning’s U.S. OPEB plans:
* Accumulated Postretirement Benefit Obligation (APBO).
The above sensitivities reflect the impact of changing one assumption at a time. Note that economic factors and conditions often affect multiple assumptions simultaneously and the effects of changes in key assumptions are not necessarily linear.
Revenue recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when all performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied, and control of the product has been transferred to the customer. If customer acceptance clauses are present and it cannot be objectively determined that control has been transferred, revenue is only recorded when customer acceptance is received and all performance obligations have been satisfied. Sales of goods typically do not include multiple product and/or service elements. Corning also has contractual arrangements with certain customers in which we recognize revenue over time. The performance obligations under these contracts generally require services to be performed over time, resulting in either a straight-line amortization method or an input method using incurred and forecasted expense to predict revenue recognition patterns which follows satisfaction of the performance obligation.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Refer to Note 1 (Summary of Significant Accounting Policies) to the consolidated financial statements.
‎
Index
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, in reports subsequently filed by Corning with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on Form 10-Q and Form 8-K, and related comments by management that are not historical facts or information and contain words such as “will,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “seek,” “see,” “would,” and “target” and similar expressions are forward-looking statements. Such statements relate to future events that by their nature address matters that are, to different degrees, uncertain. These forward-looking statements relate to, among other things, the Company’s future operating performance, the Company’s share of new and existing markets, the Company’s revenue and earnings growth rates, the Company’s ability to innovate and commercialize new products, and the Company’s implementation of cost-reduction initiatives and measures to improve pricing, including the optimization of the Company’s manufacturing capacity.
Although the Company believes that these forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions regarding, among other things, current estimates and forecasts, general economic conditions, its knowledge of its business, and key performance indicators that impact the Company, actual results could differ materially. The Company does not undertake to update forward-looking statements. Some of the risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in or implied by the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to:
the duration and severity of the recent COVID-19 pandemic, and its ultimate impact across our businesses on demand, operations and our global supply chains;
the effects of acquisitions, dispositions and other similar transactions;
global business, financial, economic and political conditions;
tariffs and import duties;
currency fluctuations between the U.S. dollar and other currencies, primarily the Japanese yen, new Taiwan dollar, euro, Chinese yuan and South Korean won;
product demand and industry capacity;
competitive products and pricing;
availability and costs of critical components and materials;
new product development and commercialization;
order activity and demand from major customers;
the amount and timing of our cash flows and earnings and other conditions, which may affect our ability to pay our quarterly dividend at the planned level or to repurchase shares at planned levels;
possible disruption in commercial activities due to terrorist activity, cyber-attack, armed conflict, political or financial instability, natural disasters, or major health concerns;
loss of intellectual property due to theft, cyber-attack, or disruption to our information technology infrastructure;
unanticipated disruption to equipment, facilities, IT systems or operations;
effect of regulatory and legal developments;
ability to pace capital spending to anticipated levels of customer demand;
rate of technology change;
ability to enforce patents and protect intellectual property and trade secrets;
adverse litigation;
product and components performance issues;
retention of key personnel;
customer ability, most notably in the Display Technologies segment, to maintain profitable operations and obtain financing to fund ongoing operations and manufacturing expansions and pay receivables when due;
loss of significant customers;
changes in tax laws and regulations including the 2017 Tax Act;
the impacts of audits by taxing authorities;
the potential impact of legislation, government regulations, and other government action and investigations; and
other risks detailed in Corning’s SEC filings.
Index