ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto. Statements regarding future economic performance, management’s plans and objectives, and any statements concerning assumptions related to the foregoing contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations constitute forward-looking statements. Certain factors, which may cause actual results to vary materially from these forward-looking statements, accompany such statements or appear elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including the factors disclosed under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
OVERVIEW
GameStop Corp. (“GameStop,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company”), a Delaware corporation established in 1996, is a leading specialty retailer offering games and entertainment products through its e-commerce properties and thousands of stores.
We operate our business in four geographic segments: United States, Canada, Australia and Europe. Our fiscal year is composed of the 52 or 53 weeks ending on the Saturday closest to the last day of January. Fiscal year 2020 consisted of the 52 weeks ended on January 30, 2021 ("fiscal 2020"). Fiscal year 2019 consisted of the 52 weeks ended on February 1, 2020 ("fiscal 2019") and fiscal year 2018 consisted of the 52 weeks ended on February 2, 2019 ("fiscal 2018"). The discussion and analysis of our results of operations refers to continuing operations unless otherwise noted.
Impact from COVID-19
At various times throughout fiscal 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed store locations to customer access, across all of our operating regions, the U.S., Canada, Europe and Australia. These temporary store closures began in late March 2020 and by the end of June 2020, following the implementation of the highest level of health and safety protocols recommended by the federal and local health and governmental authorities, 98% of our stores globally were open to the public. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, the substantial majority of our stores were open, with approximately 15% of our stores in Australia temporarily closed for approximately four weeks due to an outbreak of COVID-19. Beginning in late October 2020 and continuing throughout the fiscal fourth quarter, as COVID-19 cases began to escalate in regions around the world, all of our stores in France and Ireland were temporarily closed as required by governmental authorities, while certain other stores in each of our operating segments began more long-term or fluctuating temporary closures as required by the various governmental authorities. Although certain stores remain closed, some of our stores in France, Ireland, and Canada were and are offering curbside pick-up. We remained vigilant in our compliance with COVID-19 regulations across our operating regions, and as such reverted a minor number of store operations in the United States in early November to curbside pick-up only, all of which reopened for customer access in late 2020. In late December 2020 and extending through the end of fiscal 2020, we experienced an increase in temporary store closures in all but the Australian segment, with certain jurisdictions in Canada, US, and Europe allowing for curbside pickup.
During the early stages of the global pandemic and subsequent period of temporary closures, we took steps to continue to serve our customers via our e-commerce platform including, but not limited to enhancing our online capabilities and offering curbside pick-up options while also lowering our purchase and expense levels to correspond with the lower demand.
We continue to prioritize the health and safety of our customers and team members. As a result, during fiscal 2020, we incurred approximately $25 million in costs to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic including incremental wage payments to hourly associates to help offset lost wages due to store closures, enhanced cleaning measures and expanded use of personal protective equipment at our stores, shared service centers and distribution centers across all geographies where we operate. We anticipate that we will continue to incur some or all of these costs well into the fiscal year 2021.
The COVID-19 pandemic remains a rapidly evolving situation and the impact on our business, operating results, cash flows and financial conditions will also depend on many factors that are not within our control, including the following:
•the geographies impacted by the virus;
•changes in consumer confidence and consumer spending habits, including spending for the merchandise that we sell;
•negative trends in consumer purchasing patterns due to changes in consumers' disposable income, credit availability and debt levels;
•the availability of additional economic stimulus programs introduced by the various governments where we operate;
•disruption to our supply chain including the manufacturing, supply, distribution, transportation and delivery of our products;
•delays in the release of key video game titles; and
•a slowdown in the U.S. and global economies, and the timing of the post-pandemic economic recovery.
We continue to take steps to improve cash flows and liquidity, which we believe will enhance our resiliency as we emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic, including:
•reducing inventory receipts to match demand, focusing our purchasing efforts on key hardware, software and accessories products, thereby minimizing late product cycle markdowns;
•concentrating capital spending on required maintenance or near-term high value strategic projects; and
•divesting non-strategic assets to free up cash for deployment to strategic investments and initiatives
In addition, during the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we took the following steps to preserve liquidity while most of our stores were temporarily closed:
•reduced the base salary for our executive leadership team by graduated amounts ranging from 30%-50% for 9 weeks;
•lowered the cash compensation for the members of the Board of Directors by 50% for 9 weeks;
•reduced pay for certain other associates by graduated amounts across most of the worldwide permanent workforce between 10% and 30% for 9 weeks; and
•forewent merit pay increases for the majority of our associates for fiscal 2020.
See Note 3, "COVID-19 Impacts" for further details.
Industry Overview
Growth in the video game industry is generally driven by the introduction of new technology. Gaming consoles have historically launched in five to seven-year cycles as technological developments provide significant improvements in the gaming experience and add other entertainment capabilities. Consumer demand for gaming consoles is typically the highest in the early years of the cycle and the weakest in the latter years. The current generation of consoles includes the Sony PlayStation 5 (launched in November 2020), Microsoft Xbox Series X (launched in November 2020) and the Nintendo Switch (launched in March 2017). The Sony PlayStation 4 and Microsoft Xbox One are nearing the end of their cycle due to the launch of Sony and Microsoft next generation consoles.
The sale of video games delivered through digital channels and other forms of gaming continue to grow and represent an increasing percentage of physical video game sales. We currently sell various types of products that relate to the digital category, including digitally downloadable content (“DLC”), full game downloads, Xbox LIVE, PlayStation Plus and Nintendo network points cards, as well as prepaid digital and prepaid subscription cards. We have made significant investments in our e-commerce and store functionality to enable our customers to access digital content to facilitate the digital sales and delivery process. We plan to continue to invest in these types of processes and channels to grow our digital sales base and enhance our market leadership position in the video game industry.
In our discussion of the results of operations, we refer to comparable store sales, which is a measure commonly used in the retail industry and indicates store performance by measuring the growth or decline in sales for certain stores for a particular period over the corresponding prior year's comparable period.
Our comparable store sales are comprised of sales from our video game stores, including stand-alone collectible stores, operating for at least 12 full months as well as sales related to our websites and sales we earn from sales of pre-owned merchandise to wholesalers or dealers. Comparable store sales for our international operating segments exclude the effect of changes in foreign exchange rates.
Historically, stores with an active lease designation were included in our comparable stores sales even if there were temporary closures because such temporary closures were primarily due to remodeling and relocations and were typically resolved within fewer than 14 days. However beginning in the first quarter of our fiscal year 2020, as a result of COVID-19 related closures, we excluded stores from the comparable sales base that were closed for 14 consecutive days or more and where curbside delivery was not available to customers. Therefore, comparable sales results for fiscal 2020 exclude stores that were closed for periods of 14 consecutive days or more primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic where curbside delivery was not available to customers. These criteria are consistent with the metrics used by management for internal reporting and analysis to measure performance of our stores.
The calculation of comparable store sales compares fiscal 2020 to the most closely comparable prior year period. The method of calculating comparable store sales varies across the retail industry. As a result, our method of calculating comparable store sales may not be the same as other retailers’ methods. We believe our calculation of comparable store sales best represents our strategy as a retailer that provides our consumers several ways to access our products.
BUSINESS STRATEGY
In 2019, we announced our multi-year transformation initiative, which we refer to as GameStop Reboot to position GameStop on a strategic path to fully leverage our unique position and brand in gaming. Our strategic plan is anchored on the following tenets and designed to first stabilize and optimize our core business while at the same time, pursuing strategic initiatives to transform GameStop for the future by expanding our addressable market and product offerings to drive growth in the gaming and entertainment industries.
Stabilize and Optimize the core business. Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of operations across the organization, including cost restructuring, inventory management optimization, adding and growing high margin product categories, and rationalizing the global store base. Prioritizing efforts to optimize the store base and improve the fundamental operations of the business yielded the net closure of 321 stores in fiscal 2019, 693 stores in fiscal 2020, and included both the divestiture of the Simply Mac business and wind down of underperforming operations in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Improved inventory management drove a significant increase in inventory turns and as a result, in working capital, while an intense focus on organization structure and expense reductions yielded a $408.5 million or 21.2% reduction in reported Selling, General and Administrative costs in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. We continue to explore strategic options for our European businesses, which may include further store closings, exiting unprofitable businesses, or investing in e-commerce capabilities.
Transform GameStop into a customer-obsessed technology company to delight gamers. The Company is taking the below steps in fiscal 2021:
•Investing in technology capabilities, including by in-sourcing talent and revamping systems, and evaluating next-generation assets.;
•Building a superior customer experience;
•Expanding product offerings to include PC gaming, computers, monitors, game tables, mobile gaming, and gaming TVs;
•Modernizing U.S. fulfillment operations to improve speed of delivery and service;
•Establishing a U.S.-based customer care operation, and;
•Leveraging the Company’s digital assets, including Game Informer and PowerUp Rewards, to increase market share within the growing online gaming community.
We believe these future transformation efforts are an important aspect of our continued business to enable long-term value creation for our shareholders.
Connected to our transformation efforts, we have incurred and may continue to incur severance, store closure costs and expenses for consultants and advisors. See "Consolidated Results from Operations-Selling, General and Administrative Expenses" for further information.
STORE COUNT INFORMATION
The following table presents the number of stores by segment as of the end of fiscal 2020 compared to the end of fiscal 2019.
SEASONALITY
Our business, like that of many retailers, is seasonal, with the major portion of sales and operating profit realized during the fourth quarter which includes the holiday selling season. Results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be achieved for a full fiscal year. Quarterly results may fluctuate materially depending upon, among other factors, the timing of new product introductions, sales impacts of COVID-19 related temporary store closures, increases or decreases in comparable store sales, the nature and timing of acquisitions, adverse weather conditions, shifts in the timing of certain holidays or promotions and changes in our merchandise mix. During fiscal 2020 and 2019, we generated approximately 42% and 34%, respectively, of our sales during the fourth quarter.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth certain statement of operations items (in millions) and as a percentage of net sales, for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth net sales by significant product category for the period indicated (dollars in millions):
Net sales by reportable segment in U.S. dollars were as follows (in millions):
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Net Sales
Net sales decreased $1,376.2 million, or 21.3%, in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in net sales was primarily attributable to the impact of numerous COVID-19 related temporary store closures across every one of our operating regions, 693 net permanent global store closures and a decrease in comparable store sales of 9.5%. This decrease is consistent with the wind down of the last generation of video game consoles that occurred through three fiscal quarters of
2020 and prior to the launch of Microsoft and Sony new generation video game consoles in the fourth quarter of 2020. The decrease in net sales for the fourth fiscal quarter was primarily attributable to the combined impacts of temporary store closures and suppressed customer traffic due to the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily offset by positive 6.5% comparable store sales, which was led by sales volume attributable to the launch of the new video game consoles from Sony and Microsoft and continued strong sales of the Nintendo gaming product lines. For fiscal 2020, we experienced declines in the United States, Canada, Europe and New Zealand, which were partially offset by the performance in our Australia segment which increased in sales by 24.9% as stores in Australia remained open for the substantial majority of the fiscal year. These declines were partially offset by the increase in our e-commerce sales, which increased 174.5% and 190.8% in the current quarter and fiscal year periods, respectively, compared to the prior year periods. Although our sales have decreased compared to the prior year periods as described above, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic has increased demand for at home entertainment and connectivity products as consumers are spending more time in their homes and seek in-home entertainment options.
In total, net sales during fiscal 2020 in our United States, Canada and Europe segments declined by 24.0%, 24.9% and 28.2%, respectively, while net sales in our Australia segment increased 19.0%, when compared to fiscal 2019. Comparable store sales in the United States, Canada and Europe decreased by 13.9%, 6.2% and 10.0%, respectively, while comparable store sales increased in the Australia segment by 23.5%, primarily due to the same factors described above.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased $649.2 million, or 34.0%, in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, and gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased to 24.7% in fiscal 2020 compared to 29.5% in fiscal 2019. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to the mix of sales into lower margin categories such as new console hardware given the launch of generation 9 consoles, increased freight and credit card fees associated with the shift to e-commerce sales, and a broader promotional stance.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses decreased $408.5 million, or 21.2%, in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 included $9.2 million and $76.3 million of costs with our transformation initiatives, business divestitures, severance and other charges, respectively. Excluding these charges, the decrease in SG&A in the period was primarily due to lower payroll and occupancy costs driven by the extensive cost reduction initiatives we have undertaken. These reductions include permanent store closures as we de-densify our store base. Additionally, and to a lesser extent, there were lower variable expenses as a result of lower sales volume related to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 3, "COVID-19 Impacts" for further details.
Goodwill and Asset Impairments
Goodwill and asset impairments decreased $370.1 million, or 96.0% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 as the Company fully impaired its goodwill in fiscal 2019. In the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we sold our corporate aircraft resulting in an impairment charge of $3.2 million. We also incurred an impairment charge associated with store-level assets of $1.6 million in the 39 weeks ended October 31, 2020, respectively. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we incurred impairment charges of $9.6 million related to store-level, property and equipment and right-of-use asset impairment charges and $1.1 million associated with our Micromania and ThinkGeek trade names. See Note 8, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets,” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. We have no remaining goodwill balances as of January 30, 2021.
Gain on Sale of Assets
During the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we sold, in separate unrelated transactions, to unaffiliated third parties i) our corporate headquarters and ancillary office space in Grapevine, Texas for $28.5 million, net of costs to sell and ii) a nearby refurbishment center for $15.2 million, net of costs to sell. With respect to the leaseback of the corporate headquarters, we agreed to provide a letter of credit to the buyer-lessor within 18 months from the closing date to secure our lease obligation. Upon delivering such letter of credit, we will be entitled to a rent credit of $2.8 million. This variable consideration is included in the total gain on sale of assets recognized during fiscal 2020.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2020, we sold our Australian headquarters in Eagle Farm, Queensland to an unrelated party for approximately $27.0 million, net of costs to sell, and immediately leased back the facility for a term of ten years on market rate terms at an average annual base rent of $1.7 million, plus taxes, utilities, management fees and other operating and maintenance expenses. Additionally, in September 2020, we sold our Canadian headquarters in Brampton, Ontario for approximately $16.7 million, net of costs to sell, and leased back the facility for a term of five years on market rate terms at an average annual base rent of $0.9 million plus taxes, utilities, management fees and other operating and maintenance expenses.
The net proceeds from the sale of these assets are being used for general corporate purposes. As a result of the transactions that occurred during the second and third quarters of fiscal 2020, a gain on sale of assets of $32.4 million was recognized and is included in our consolidated statement of operations for fiscal 2020.
See Note 11, "Leases," for further information regarding the sale and leaseback of these facilities.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased by $4.9 million, or 18.0%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, primarily due to higher interest expense associated with the July 2020 exchange of $216.4 million in aggregate principal amount of 2021 Senior Notes for 2023 Senior Notes. Furthermore, offsets of interest income in 2020 is lower as compared to 2019 primarily due to lower global interest rates earned on cash and cash equivalents.
Income Tax
Income tax benefit was $55.3 million, representing an effective tax rate of 20.5% in fiscal 2020, compared to $37.6 million expense in fiscal 2019, representing a negative effective tax rate of 8.8%. The effective tax rate of 20.5% is primarily driven by the establishment of a full valuation allowance on U.S. deferred tax assets, a change in the tax status of certain foreign entities, and the impact of the CARES Act, including tax benefits associated with the availability of a five-year carryback period for certain current year tax losses. The negative effective tax rate of 8.8% in fiscal 2019 was primarily the result of a permanent difference for non-deductible impairment charges and valuation allowances recognized in the year. See Note 9, "Income Taxes," to our consolidated financial statements.
(Loss) Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, totaled $0.7 million in fiscal 2020 compared to loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, of $6.5 million in fiscal 2019. Refer to Note 2, "Discontinued Operations and Dispositions," to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
For a comparison of our results of operations for 2019 and 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash from operations, cash on hand and our revolving credit facility. We may also fund our growth capital needs, as circumstances warrant, from sales of equity and debt securities. As of January 30, 2021, we had total unrestricted cash on hand of $508.5 million, $126.5 million of restricted cash and an additional $88.4 million of available borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility. On March 15, 2021, we repaid our outstanding borrowings of $25.0 million under the Revolver (as defined below). See Note 19 “Subsequent Events”.
Availability under our revolving credit facilities, which was increased during the third quarter of fiscal 2020, as described in the Sources of Liquidity section below, provides us additional liquidity throughout the course of the year to fund our operations. Based on our current operating plans, we believe that available cash balances, cash generated from our operating activities and net availability under our revolving credit facility will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations for the next 12 months as well as the foreseeable future. While factors related to COVID-19 have negatively impacted our results during fiscal 2020, those negative impacts were generally offset by the positive results generated from our working capital initiatives, primarily inventory management and our expense reduction initiatives which supports an improved liquidity position.
We continually review and prioritize our capital needs and are committed to making investments in our infrastructure to drive our business plans and future transformation initiatives. Key areas of future investment include improving the presentation and content as well as the functionality, general search and navigation across our customer-facing digital channels; improving customer data integration and customer relations management capabilities; focusing on enhancing and optimizing the customer service proposition; continuing to strengthen and deepen our information technology, analytics, marketing and e-commerce teams and capabilities; and creating more flexible fulfillment options designed to improve our delivery capabilities and reduce our delivery times and shipping costs. These and other investments are expected to, among other things, provide a seamless and compelling customer experience across our retail platform.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate and consider certain strategic operating alternatives, including divestitures, restructuring or dissolution of unprofitable business segments, as well as equity and debt financing alternatives that we believe may enhance stockholder value. On July 6, 2020 we issued $216.4 million aggregate principal amount of our 2023 Senior Notes in exchange for an equal aggregate principal amount of our 2021 Senior Notes. See Note 12, "Debt," for further details on this debt exchange. The nature, amount and timing of any strategic operational change, or financing transactions that we might pursue will depend on a variety of factors, including, as of the applicable time, our available cash and liquidity and operating performance; our commitments and obligations; our capital requirements; limitations imposed under our credit arrangements; and overall market conditions.
As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic around the world, many of our vendors have been impacted by the volatility in the supply chain financing market. As we seek to optimize our inventories, including for next generation video game consoles and a number of new software releases, and related payment terms, we have increased the amount of credit support collateral we provide to select vendors for our inventory purchase obligations. Our continued provision of collateral, and the levels of such collateral, will depend on a variety of factors, including our inventory purchase levels, available payment terms for inventories, availability of borrowing capacity under our credit facilities, favorable credit terms and costs of providing collateral. See Note 1, "Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Restricted Cash" for further details.
Cash Flows
In fiscal 2020, cash flow from operating activities was an inflow of $123.7 million, an increase of $538.2 million compared to an outflow of $414.5 million during the same period last year. The increase was primarily due to improvements in working capital as a result of optimizing inventory and accounts payable levels through optimizing the cash conversion cycle and more efficient carrying levels of inventory.
In fiscal 2019, cash provided by operations was an outflow of $414.5 million, compared to an inflow of $325.1 million in fiscal 2018. The decrease in cash provided by operations of $739.6 million from fiscal 2018 to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to timing of vendor payments and lower earnings in fiscal 2019 compared to prior year.
In fiscal 2020, cash from investing activities was an inflow of $36.9 million compared to an outflow of $60.9 million in fiscal 2019 and a cash inflow of $635.5 million in fiscal 2018. The fiscal 2020 cash inflow from investing activities was primarily attributable to the proceeds from the sale and leaseback of five properties including our headquarter facilities in the United States, Australia and Canada as well as a refurbishment center and ancillary office space in Grapevine, Texas, lower capital expenditures in the current year period and $8.6 million net proceeds from the sale of our corporate aircraft. See Note 1, "Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," and Note 11, "Leases" for further information.
In fiscal 2018, cash provided by investing activities included $727.9 million in proceeds from divestitures, primarily from the sale of Spring Mobile. Capital expenditures totaled $60.0 million, $78.5 million and $93.7 million in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In fiscal 2020, our financing activities were a net cash outflow of $55.4 million consisting primarily of the repayment of $130.3 million of our 2021 Senior Notes through a combination of open market transactions and an optional early redemption of $125.0 million of our 2021 Senior Notes, at par, in December 2020, partially offset by a net $25.0 million draw down on our Revolver and $47.1 million in proceeds from term loans entered into by our French subsidiary, Micromania SAS.
In 2019, our financing activities were a net cash outflow of $644.7 million consisting primarily of the redemption of our $350.0 million 2019 senior notes in April 2019, repurchases of our Class A Common Stock totaling $198.7 million, open market repurchases of our 2021 Senior Notes totaling $53.6 million and dividends paid on our Class A Common Stock of $40.5 million. In fiscal 2018, our financing activities were a net cash outflow of $174.7 million consisting primarily of dividends paid of $157.4 million and repayment of acquisition-related debt of $12.2 million.
Sources of Liquidity
We utilize cash generated from operations and have funds available to us under our revolving credit facility to cover seasonal fluctuations in cash flows and to support our various initiatives. Our cash and cash equivalents are carried at cost and consist primarily of time deposits with commercial banks.
We maintain an asset-based revolving credit facility (the “Revolver”) with a borrowing base capacity of $420 million and a maturity date of November 2022. The Revolver also includes a $200 million expansion feature and $100 million letter of credit sublimit, and allows for an incremental $50 million first-in, last-out facility. The applicable margins for prime rate loans range from 0.25% to 0.50% and, for the London Interbank Offered ("LIBO") rate loans, range from 1.25% to 1.50%. The Revolver is secured by substantially all of the assets of GameStop Corp. and the assets of its domestic subsidiaries, such lien being junior to the lien in certain of such assets that secure the 2023 Senior Notes. We are required to pay a commitment fee of 0.25% for any unused portion of the total commitment under the Revolver. As of January 30, 2021, the applicable margin was 0.50% for prime rate loans and 1.50% for LIBO rate loans. As of January 30, 2021, total availability under the Revolver after giving effect to the Availability Reduction (as defined below) was $88.4 million, with outstanding borrowings of $25.0 million and outstanding standby letters of credit of $9.8 million. On March 15, 2021, we repaid our outstanding borrowings of $25.0 million under the Revolver. See Note 19 “Subsequent Events”.
In August 2020, we entered into the fourth amendment (“Fourth Amendment”) to the credit agreement governing our Revolver (“Credit Agreement”) giving effect to certain amendments, which are incorporated above and include, but are not limited to the following:
•Reduced the amount of the excess availability trigger that determines whether the Company is subject to a fixed charge coverage ratio covenant of 1.0:1.0 from the greater of $30 million and 10% of the borrowing base to the greater of $12.5 million and 10% of the borrowing base;
•Increased the sublimit for issuances of letters of credit under the Credit Agreement from $50 million to $100 million; and
•Increased the amount of letters of credit permitted to be issued separately from, and not pursuant to, the Credit Agreement from $25 million to (i) up to $150 million for letters of credit issued by borrowers/guarantors under the Credit Agreement and (ii) up to $75 million for letters of credit issued for the benefit of foreign subsidiaries, subject to the understanding that the outstanding amount of letters of credit issued under the Credit Agreement, combined with the outstanding amount of letters of credit otherwise permitted by the Credit Agreement cannot exceed $275 million in the aggregate.
The agreement governing our Revolver and the indentures governing our 2021 Senior Notes and 2023 Senior Notes place certain restrictions on us and our subsidiaries, including, among others, limitations on asset sales, additional liens, investments, incurrence of additional debt and share repurchases. In addition, the agreement governing our Revolver and the indentures governing our 2021 Senior Notes and 2023 Senior Notes contain customary events of default, including, among others, payment defaults, breaches of covenants and certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency and reorganization. The Revolver is also subject to a fixed charge coverage ratio covenant if excess availability is below certain thresholds (the "Availability Reduction"). We are currently in compliance with all covenants under the indentures governing the 2021 Senior Notes and 2023 Senior Notes and the agreement governing our Revolver.
As of January 30, 2021, the aggregate principal amounts outstanding of our 2021 Senior Notes and 2023 Senior Notes were $73.2 million and $216.4 million, respectively. Additionally, as of January 30, 2021, the aggregate principal balance outstanding under term loans entered into by our French subsidiary, Micromania SAS, was €40.0 million ($48.6 million as of January 30, 2021).
On March 15, 2021, we redeemed the remaining $73.2 million principal amount of our 2021 Senior Notes. See Note 19 “Subsequent events”
Our French subsidiary, Micromania SAS, also maintained a credit facility of €20.0 million ($24.3 million as of January 30, 2021) that allows it to obtain short term loans of 10 to 93 days in duration to support its working capital needs. The credit facility commitments expired in January 2021. No amounts were drawn under this facility through January 30, 2021.
Separately from the asset-based Revolver, we maintain uncommitted letter of credit facilities with certain lenders that provide for the issuance of letters of credit and bank guarantees, at times supported by cash collateral. As of January 30, 2021, we had $133.3 million of outstanding letters of credit and other bank guarantees under facilities outside of the Revolver.
See Note 12, "Debt," for additional information.
We may also fund our growth capital needs, as circumstances warrant, from sales of equity and debt securities. The timing and amount of any equity sales would depend on, among other factors, our capital needs and alternative sources and costs of capital available to us, market perceptions about us, and the then current trading price of our common equity.
In December 2020, we entered into the ATM Program. Sales of our Class A Common Stock under the ATM Program may be made by means of transactions that are deemed to be an "at the market offering" as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act, including block transactions, sales made directly on the NYSE or sales made into any other existing trading markets of our shares of Class A Common Stock. We are under no obligation to offer and sell shares of our Class A Common Stock under the ATM Program. As of January 30, 2021, and through the date of this Form 10-K, we have not sold any shares of our Class A Common Stock under the ATM Program. Since January 2021, we have been evaluating whether to increase the size of the ATM Program and whether to potentially sell shares of our Class A Common Stock under the increased ATM Program during the course of fiscal 2021, primarily to fund the acceleration of our future transformation initiatives. The timing and amount of sales under the ATM Program would depend on, among other factors, our capital needs and alternative sources and costs of capital available to us, market perceptions about us, and the then current trading price of our Class A Common Stock.
Net proceeds from sales of our shares of Class A Common Stock under the ATM Program are expected to be used for working capital and general corporate purposes, which may include funding our ongoing digital-first growth strategy and product category expansion efforts. For additional information, see Item 1. Business - Business and Growth Strategies.
Share Repurchases
On March 4, 2019, our Board of Directors approved a share repurchase authorization allowing us to repurchase up to $300.0 million of our Class A Common Stock. The authorization has no expiration date.
On June 11, 2019, we commenced a modified Dutch auction tender offer for up to 12.0 million shares of our Class A Common Stock with a price range between $5.20 and $6.00 per share. The tender offer expired on July 10, 2019. Through the tender offer, we accepted for payment 12.0 million shares at a purchase price of $5.20 per share for a total of $62.9 million, including fees and commissions. The shares purchased through the tender offer were immediately retired.
In addition to the equity tender offer described above, during the second half of fiscal 2019, we executed a series of open market repurchases for an aggregate of 26.1 million shares of our Class A Common Stock totaling $135.8 million, including fees and commissions. These repurchased shares were immediately retired.
In aggregate, during fiscal 2019, we repurchased a total of 38.1 million shares of our Class A Common Stock, totaling $198.7 million, for an average price of $5.19 per share. We did not repurchase shares during fiscal 2020 or fiscal 2018. As of January 30, 2021, we have $101.3 million remaining under the repurchase authorization.
Tax Withholdings
As of January 30, 2021, our executive officers and other employees held an aggregate of 4.6 million unvested shares of restricted stock, including 0.3 million unvested shares of restricted stock that are scheduled to vest in the ordinary course in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. The vesting of shares of restricted stock may accelerate in connection with certain events (such as the cessation of the grantee’s employment due to death or disability, termination by us without cause or resignation by the grantee with good reason), whether under the terms of employment agreements, our severance plans or policies, or otherwise.
Tax withholding obligations arise upon the vesting of shares of restricted stock and these obligations must be satisfied at the time they arise through cash payments to the applicable taxing authorities. The amount of the tax withholding obligations due upon the vesting of shares of restricted stock is dependent on the price of our shares of Class A Common Stock on the New
York Stock Exchange on the applicable vesting date. The higher the price of the shares of our Class A Common Stock on the vesting date, the higher the tax withholding amount that will be due.
If we were to elect to satisfy tax withholding obligations by withholding and canceling a portion of the shares subject to vesting (sometimes referred to as “share withholding”) and remitting cash to the taxing authorities at the applicable statutory rates on behalf of the holder(s) of applicable awards then, depending on the price of our Class A Common Stock on the vesting date, the amount of these cash payments could be substantial and could have a negative impact on our liquidity and ability to use funds for operational purposes.
We may seek to implement “sell-to-cover” arrangements with one or more holders of shares of restricted stock to minimize our expenditure of cash to satisfy tax withholding obligations. Under such arrangements, a broker would assist the holder to sell, in the open market, all or a portion of the shares subject to vesting and would remit a portion of the sales proceeds to us. We would in turn remit such amounts to the taxing authorities. Such “sell-to-cover” arrangements would enable us to satisfy tax withholding obligations and remain in a net neutral cash position.
Our Class A Common Stock price has recently experienced extreme price fluctuations. Assuming, solely for illustration purposes, a stock price of $209.81 per share (the closing price of our shares of Class A Common Stock on the New York Stock Exchange on March 17, 2021) upon vesting of all of the shares of restricted stock scheduled to vest in the ordinary course during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 (0.3 million shares), we estimate that the aggregate amount of our tax withholdings obligations on account of these awards would be approximately $18.6 million. Accordingly, if we arranged for share withholding for all such awards, we would be required to expend such dollar amount in cash. Alternatively, if we arranged with the applicable employees for “sales-to-cover” for all such awards, then our net cash balances would not change materially and approximately 0.1 million shares of our Class A Common Stock would be sold on the open market (assuming each share were sold at $209.81). The foregoing amounts are illustrative and the actual amount of the tax obligations and the number of shares to be delivered or sold could be higher or lower, depending on the price of our Class A Common Stock upon vesting, the applicable tax withholding rates then in effect, the price at which any sales to cover were to occur and the number (if any) of restricted stock awards that are forfeited prior to vesting.
Dividends
We paid cash dividends of $0.3 million, $40.5 million and $157.4 million in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. On June 3, 2019, our Board of Directors elected to eliminate the Company’s quarterly dividend, effective immediately, in an effort to strengthen the Company's balance sheet and provide increased financial flexibility. Dividends paid in fiscal 2020 represents dividends previously declared on unvested restricted stock awards granted under the 2011 Plan as discussed in Note 14 "Common Stock and Share-Based Compensation". These dividends are paid upon vesting of the restricted stock awards. We believe the decision to eliminate the dividend will enable us to further reduce debt and provide us flexibility as we seek to drive value creation for stockholders.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations as of January 30, 2021 (in millions):
___________________
(1) Purchase obligations represent outstanding purchase orders for merchandise from vendors. These purchase orders are generally cancellable until shipment of the products.
(2) As of January 30, 2021, we had $9.1 million of income tax liability related to unrecognized tax benefits in other long-term liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. At the time of this filing, the settlement period for the noncurrent portion of our income tax liability (and the timing of any related payments) cannot be reasonably determined and therefore these liabilities are excluded from the table above. In addition, certain payments related to unrecognized tax benefits would be partially offset by reductions in payments in other jurisdictions. See Note 9, "Income Taxes," to our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our uncertain tax positions.
We lease retail stores, warehouse facilities, office space and equipment. These are generally leased under noncancelable agreements that expire at various dates with various renewal options for additional periods. The agreements, which have been classified as operating leases, generally provide for minimum and, in some cases, percentage rentals and require us to pay all insurance, taxes and other maintenance costs. Percentage rentals are based on sales performance in excess of specified minimums at various stores.
As of January 30, 2021, we had standby letters of credit outstanding in the amount of $9.8 million and had other bank guarantees outstanding in the amount of $133.3 million, of which $57.6 million is cash collateralized.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of January 30, 2021 other than those disclosed Note 12, "Debt" to our audited consolidated financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. In preparing these financial statements, we have made our best estimates and judgments of certain amounts included in the financial statements, giving due consideration to materiality. Changes in the estimates and assumptions used by us could have a significant impact on our financial results, and actual results could differ from those estimates. Our senior management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies, as well as the significant accounting policies disclosed in Note 1, "Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our consolidated financial statements, with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reporting of transactions and events, and the estimates these policies involve require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments.
Valuation of Merchandise Inventories
Our merchandise inventories are carried at the lower of cost or market generally using the average cost method. Under the average cost method, as new product is received from vendors, its current cost is added to the existing cost of product on-hand and this amount is re-averaged over the cumulative units. Pre-owned video game products traded in by customers are recorded as inventory at the amount of the store credit given to the customer. In valuing inventory, we are required to make assumptions regarding the necessity of reserves required to value potentially obsolete or over-valued items at the lower of cost or market. We consider quantities on hand, recent sales, potential price protections and returns to vendors, among other factors, when making these assumptions.
Our ability to gauge these factors is dependent upon our ability to forecast customer demand and to provide a well-balanced merchandise assortment. Any inability to forecast customer demand properly could lead to increased costs associated with write-downs of inventory to reflect volumes or pricing of inventory which we believe represents the net realizable value. A 10% change in our obsolescence reserve percentage at January 30, 2021 would have affected net earnings by approximately $1.9 million in fiscal 2020.
Customer Liabilities
Our PowerUp Rewards loyalty program allows enrolled members to earn points on purchases in our stores and on some of our websites that can be redeemed for rewards and discounts. We allocate the transaction price between the product and loyalty points earned based on the relative stand-alone selling prices and expected point redemption. The portion allocated to the loyalty points is initially recorded as deferred revenue and subsequently recognized as revenue upon redemption or expiration. The two primary estimates utilized to record the deferred revenue for loyalty points earned by members are the estimated retail price per point and estimated amount of points that will never be redeemed, which is a concept known in the retail industry as "breakage." Additionally, we sell gift cards to our customers in our retail stores, through our website and through selected third parties. At the point of sale, a liability is established for the value of the gift card. We recognize revenue from gift cards when the card is redeemed by the customer and recognize estimated breakage on gift cards in proportion to historical redemption patterns.
The two primary estimates utilized to record the balance sheet liability for loyalty points earned by members are the estimated redemption rate and the estimated weighted-average retail price per point redeemed. We use historical redemption rates experienced under our loyalty program as a basis for estimating the ultimate redemption rate of points earned. The estimated retail price per point is based on the actual historical retail prices of product purchased through the redemption of loyalty points. We estimate breakage of loyalty points and unredeemed gift cards based on historical redemption rates. A weighted-average retail price per point redeemed is used to estimate the value of our deferred revenue associated with loyalty points. The weighted-average retail price per point redeemed is based on our most recent actual loyalty point redemptions and is
adjusted as appropriate for recent changes in redemption values, including the mix of rewards redeemed. Our estimate of the amount and timing of gift card redemptions is based primarily on historical transaction experience.
We continually evaluate our methodology and assumptions based on developments in redemption patterns, retail price per point redeemed and other factors. Changes in the ultimate redemption rate and weighted-average retail price per point redeemed have the effect of either increasing or decreasing the deferred revenue balance through current period revenue by an amount estimated to cover the retail value of all points previously earned but not yet redeemed by loyalty program members as of the end of the reporting period. A 10% change in our customer loyalty program redemption rate or a 10% change in our weighted-average retail value per point redeemed at January 30, 2021, in each case, would have affected net earnings by approximately $2.1 million in fiscal 2020. A 10% change in our gift card breakage rate at January 30, 2021 would have affected net earnings by approximately $11.0 million in fiscal 2020.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes utilizing an asset and liability approach, and deferred taxes are determined based on the estimated future tax effect of differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates. As a result of our operations in many foreign countries, our global tax rate is derived from a combination of applicable tax rates in the various jurisdictions in which we operate.
Additionally, a valuation allowance is recorded against a deferred tax asset if it is not more likely than not that the asset will be realized. We assess the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of the existing deferred tax assets. Several factors are considered in evaluating the realizability of our deferred tax assets, including the remaining years available for carry forward, the tax laws for the applicable jurisdictions, the future profitability of the specific business units, and tax planning strategies. Based on our analysis, we have determined existing deferred tax assets are not more likely than not to be realized. We have therefore established valuation allowances in all jurisdictions. Our valuation allowance increased to $225.7 million as of January 30, 2021, due to cumulative losses in certain foreign jurisdictions. See Note 9, "Income Taxes" to our consolidated financial statements.
We maintain accruals for uncertain tax positions until examination of the tax year is completed by the taxing authority, available review periods expire, or additional facts and circumstances cause us to change our assessment of the appropriate accrual amount. Our liability for uncertain tax positions was $9.1 million as of January 30, 2021. Considerable management judgment is necessary to assess the inherent uncertainties related to the interpretations of complex tax laws, regulations and taxing authority rulings, as well as to the expiration of statutes of limitations in the jurisdictions in which we operate. We base our estimate of an annual effective tax rate at any given point in time on a calculated mix of the tax rates applicable to our operations and to estimates of the amount of income to be derived in any given jurisdiction. We file our tax returns based on our understanding of the appropriate tax rules and regulations. However, complexities in the tax rules and our operations, as well as positions taken publicly by the taxing authorities, may lead us to conclude that accruals for uncertain tax positions are required.
Our judgments and estimates concerning uncertain tax positions may change as a result of evaluation of new information, such as the outcome of tax audits or changes to or further interpretations of tax laws and regulations. Our judgments and estimates concerning realizability of deferred tax assets could change if any of the evaluation factors change. If such changes take place, there is a risk that our effective tax rate could increase or decrease in any period, impacting our net earnings.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS AND PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1, "Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our consolidated financial statements for recent accounting standards and pronouncements.