Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” sections of this Annual Report for a discussion of certain of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements described in the following discussion and analysis. Certain amounts and percentages in this discussion and analysis have been rounded for convenience of presentation.
Overview
We are an engineering-driven company with a history of rapidly developing and commercializing advanced products and procedures to address treatment challenges. With 220 products on the market, we offer a comprehensive portfolio of innovative and differentiated technologies that treat a variety of musculoskeletal conditions. Although we manage our business globally within one operating segment, we separate our products into two major categories: Musculoskeletal Solutions and Enabling Technologies.
COVID-19 Update
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities, regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, and we may need to make changes to our business based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, the Company cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future. However, while the government mandated restrictions, including elective surgeries, are in place, we do expect that it could continue to have a material adverse impact on our revenue growth, operating profit and cash flow and may lead to higher than normal inventory levels, revised payment terms with certain of our customers, and a change in effective tax rate driven by changes in the mix of earnings across the Company’s jurisdictions.
We are focused on navigating these recent challenges presented by COVID-19 and believe we are in a strong position to continue to sustain and grow our business once the restrictions are lifted and elective surgeries fully resume. To date, COVID-19 has not materially affected our supply chain or production schedule, although delays may be possible in the future due to the dynamic nature of the situation.
Product Categories
While we group our products into two categories, Musculoskeletal Solutions and Enabling Technologies, they are not limited to a particular technology, platform or surgical approach. Instead, our goal is to offer a comprehensive product suite that can be used to safely and effectively treat patients based on their specific anatomy and condition, and is customized to the surgeon’s training and surgical preference.
Musculoskeletal Solutions
Our Musculoskeletal Solutions consist primarily of implantable devices, biologics, accessories, and unique surgical instruments used in an expansive range of spinal, orthopedic and neurosurgical procedures. Musculoskeletal disorders are a leading driver of healthcare costs worldwide. Disorders range in severity from mild pain and loss of feeling to extreme pain and paralysis. These disorders are primarily caused by degenerative and congenital conditions, deformity, tumors and traumatic injuries. Treatment alternatives for musculoskeletal disorders range from non-operative conservative therapies to surgical interventions depending on the pathology. Conservative therapies include bed rest, medication, casting, bracing, and physical therapy. When conservative therapies are not indicated, or fail to provide adequate quality of life improvements, surgical interventions may be used. Surgical treatments for musculoskeletal disorders can be instrumented, which include the use of implants, or non-instrumented, which forego the use of hardware but may include biologics.
Enabling Technologies
Our Enabling Technologies are comprised of imaging, navigation and robotics (“INR”) solutions for assisted surgery which are advanced computer-assisted intelligent systems designed to enhance a surgeon’s capabilities, and ultimately improve patient care and reduce radiation exposure for all involved, by streamlining surgical procedures to be safer, less invasive, and more accurate. The market for our Enabling Technologies in spine and orthopedic surgery is still in the infancy stage and consists primarily of imaging, navigation and robotic systems. In spine, a majority of these technologies are limited to surgical planning and assistance in implant placement for increased accuracy and time savings with less intraoperative radiation exposure to the patient and surgical staff. As our Enabling Technologies become more fully integrated with our Musculoskeletal Solutions, a continued rise in adoption is expected.
Furthermore, we believe as new technologies such as augmented reality and artificial intelligence are introduced, Enabling Technologies have the potential to transform the way surgery is performed and most importantly, continue to improve patient outcomes.
Geographic Information
To date, the primary market for our products has been the United States, where we sell our products through a combination of direct sales representatives employed by us and distributor sales representatives employed by exclusive independent distributors, who distribute our products for a commission that is generally based on a percentage of sales. We believe there is significant opportunity to strengthen our position in the U.S. market by increasing the size of our U.S. sales force and we intend to add additional direct and distributor sales representatives in the future.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, international net sales accounted for approximately 15.8% of our total net sales. We have sold our products in approximately 50 countries other than the United States through a combination of sales representatives employed by us and exclusive international distributors. We believe there are significant opportunities for us to increase our presence in both existing and new international markets through the continued expansion of our direct and distributor sales forces and through the commercialization of additional products.
Seasonality
Our business is generally not seasonal in nature. However, sales of Musculoskeletal Solutions products may be influenced by summer vacation and winter holiday periods during which we have experienced fewer surgeries taking place, as well as more surgeries taking place later in the year when patients have met the deductibles under insurance plans. Sales of our Enabling Technologies products may be influenced by longer capital purchase cycles and the timing of budget approvals for major capital purchases.
Components of our Results of Operations
We manage our business globally within one operating segment, which is consistent with how our management reviews our business, makes investment and resource allocation decisions and assesses operating performance.
Net Sales
We sell implants and related disposables, primarily to hospitals, for use by surgeons to treat musculoskeletal disorders. We generally place surgical sets, which contain our implants, disposables, surgical instruments and cases, in the field with our sales representatives, and the surgical sets are maintained either with our sales representatives or at our hospital customers that purchase the surgical sets used in surgeries. We recognize revenue when the implants and related disposables have been implanted or used in a surgery, or for sets that are sold directly, when title to the goods and risk of loss are transferred to the customer and there are no remaining performance obligations which affect the customer’s final acceptance of the sale.
We completed our first sale of ExcelsiusGPS™ in the fourth quarter of 2017. We generally recognize revenue when control transfers to the customer, which occurs at the time the product is shipped or delivered. Depending on the terms of the arrangement, we may also defer the recognition of a portion of the consideration as we satisfy future performance obligations related to the provision of maintenance and support.
Cost of Goods Sold
While we have increased our in-house implant product manufacturing capacity and assemble the ExcelsiusGPS™ system in-house, we also have products manufactured by third-party suppliers. Substantially all of our suppliers manufacture our products in the United States. Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs from our in-house manufacturing, costs of products purchased from third-party suppliers, excess and obsolete inventory charges, depreciation of surgical instruments and cases, royalties, shipping, inspection and related costs incurred in making our products available for sale or use.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of engineering, product development, clinical and regulatory expenses, consulting services, outside prototyping services, internal and external research activities, materials, depreciation, and other costs associated with development of our products. Research and development expenses also include personnel and consultants’ compensation, stock-based compensation expense, and acquired research in process with no alternative future use. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred.
We expect to incur additional research and development costs as we continue to develop new products. These costs will increase in absolute terms as we continue to expand our product pipeline and add personnel.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel employed in sales, marketing, finance, legal, compliance, administrative, information technology, medical education and training, quality and human resource departments. Our selling, general and administrative expenses also include commissions, generally based on a percentage of sales, to direct sales representatives and distributors. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute terms with the continued expansion of our sales force and commercialization of our current and pipeline products. We plan to hire more personnel to support the growth of our business.
Provision for Litigation
We record a provision for litigation settlements when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated and in the case of a favorable settlement, income when realized.
Amortization of Intangibles
We amortize finite lived intangible assets over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method. Indefinite lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. If impairment is indicated, we measure the amount of the impairment loss as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset. Fair value is generally determined using a discounted future cash flow analysis.
Acquisition Related Costs
Acquisition related costs represent: the change in fair value of business-acquisition-related contingent consideration; costs related to integrating recently acquired businesses, including but not limited to costs to exit or convert contractual obligations, severance, and information system conversion; and specific costs related to the consummation of the acquisition process such as banker fees, legal fees, and other acquisition related professional fees.
Income Tax Provision
We are taxed at the rates applicable within each jurisdiction. The composite income tax rate, tax provisions, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities will vary according to the jurisdiction in which profits arise. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by management and the respective governmental taxing authorities, and require us to exercise judgment in determining our income tax provision, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and the valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined using the enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that the future realization of all or some of the deferred tax assets will not be achieved. See “Note 15. Income Taxes” below for further discussion on the impact of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the current year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting periods. Certain of our more critical accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments, including but not limited to those related to inventories, recoverability of long-lived assets and the fair value of our common stock. We use historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for our judgments and making these estimates. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Any changes in those estimates will be reflected in our consolidated financial statements as they occur. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in “Part II; Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” below in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to a full understanding and evaluation of our reported financial results. The critical accounting policies addressed below reflect our most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We have reviewed these critical accounting policies with the audit committee of our Board.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Sales and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. For purposes of disclosure, we disaggregate our revenue into
two categories, Musculoskeletal Solutions and Enabling Technologies. Our Musculoskeletal Solutions products consist primarily of the implantable devices, disposables, and unique instruments used in an expansive range of spine, orthopedic trauma, hip, knee and extremity procedures. The majority of our Musculoskeletal Solutions contracts have a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized at a point in time. Our Enabling Technologies products are advanced hardware and software systems, and related technologies, that are designed to enhance a surgeon’s capabilities and streamline surgical procedures by making them less invasive, more accurate, and more reproducible to improve patient care. The majority of our Enabling Technologies product contracts contain multiple performance obligations, including maintenance and support, and revenue is recognized as we fulfill each performance obligation. When contracts have multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. Our policy is to classify shipping and handling costs billed to customers as sales and the related expenses as cost of goods sold.
Excess and Obsolete Inventory. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined on a first-in, first-out basis. The majority of our inventory is finished goods and we utilize both in-house manufacturing and third-party suppliers to produce our products. We periodically evaluate the carrying value of our inventories in relation to our estimated forecast of product demand, which takes into consideration the estimated life cycle of product releases. When quantities on hand exceed estimated sales forecasts, we record a write-down for such excess inventories. Once inventory has been written down, it creates a new cost basis for inventory that is not subsequently written up.
The need to maintain substantial levels of inventory increases the risk of carrying excess inventory. Many of our Musculoskeletal Solutions products come in sets which feature components in a variety of sizes so that the implant or device may be customized to the patient’s needs. In order to market our Musculoskeletal Solutions products effectively, we must often maintain and provide surgeons and hospitals with surgical sets, back-up products and products of different sizes. For each surgery, fewer than all of the components of the set are used, and therefore certain portions of the set may be considered excess inventory since they are not likely to be used. One of our primary business goals is to focus on continual product innovation. Though we believe this provides us with a competitive advantage, it also increases the risk that our products will become excess or obsolete inventory prior to sale or prior to the end of their anticipated useful lives. When we introduce new products or next-generation products, we may be required to take charges for excess and obsolete inventory that have a significant impact on the value of our inventory or on our operating results.
Fair Value Measurements. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or the liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Additionally, a fair value hierarchy was established that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. The level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Our assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis are classified and disclosed in one of the following three categories:
Level 1-quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets and liabilities;
Level 2-observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities; and
Level 3-unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data available, which require the reporting entity to use significant unobservable inputs or valuation techniques.
The purchase price of business acquisitions is primarily allocated to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition date, with the excess recorded as goodwill. We utilize Level 3 inputs in the determination of the initial fair value.
Contingent consideration represents contingent milestone, performance and revenue-sharing payment obligations related to acquisitions and is measured at fair value, based on significant inputs not observable in the market, which represents a Level 3 measurement within the fair value hierarchy. The valuation of contingent consideration uses assumptions we believe would be made by a market participant. We assess these assumptions on an ongoing basis as additional data impacting the assumptions is obtained. The fair value of contingent consideration is recorded in business acquisition liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets, and the changes in the fair value of contingent consideration are recognized in acquisition related costs in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income. The fair value of contingent restricted stock unit (“RSU”) grants are recorded as additional paid-in capital in the consolidated balance sheet on the day of the grant due to the remote likelihood of forfeiture.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over the fair values of the identifiable assets acquired less the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by comparing the reporting unit’s carrying amount to the fair value of the reporting unit. The fair values are estimated
using an income and discounted cash flow approach. We perform our annual impairment test for goodwill in the fourth quarter of each year. We consider qualitative indicators of the fair value of a reporting unit when it is unlikely that a reporting unit has impaired goodwill. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we did not record any impairment charges related to goodwill.
Intangible assets consist of purchased in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), developed technology, supplier network, patents, customer relationships, re-acquired rights, and non-compete agreements. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method and estimated useful lives ranging from one to sixteen years. Intangible assets are tested for impairment annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate that a carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. If an impairment is indicated, we measure the amount of the impairment loss as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset. Fair value is generally determined using a discounted future cash flow analysis. There were no impairments of finite-lived intangible assets during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, or 2018.
IPR&D has an indefinite life and is not amortized until completion of the project at which time the IPR&D becomes an amortizable asset. If the related project is not completed in a timely manner, we may have an impairment related to the IPR&D, calculated as the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value. There were no impairments of IPR&D during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, or 2018.
Long-Lived Assets. We periodically evaluate the recoverability of the carrying amount of long-lived assets, which include property and equipment, as well as whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be fully recoverable. An impairment is assessed when the undiscounted future cash flows from the use and eventual disposition of an asset group are less than its carrying value. If an impairment is indicated, we measure the amount of the impairment loss as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset group. Our fair value methodology is based on quoted market prices, if available. If quoted market prices are not available, an estimate of fair value is made based on prices of similar assets or other valuation techniques including present value techniques. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we did not record any impairment charges related to long-lived assets.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense. The cost of employee and non-employee director awards is measured at the grant date fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the equity award. Compensation expense for awards includes the impact of forfeiture in the period when they occur.
We estimate the fair value of stock options utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Inputs to the Black-Scholes model include our stock price, expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. Expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected term of the Company’s stock options offering period which is derived from historical experience. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates of U.S. Treasury securities appropriate for the expected terms of the stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on the history and expectation of no dividend payouts. The fair value of restricted stock units is estimated on the day of grant based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock.
We expect to continue to grant stock options in the future, and to the extent that we do, our actual stock-based compensation expense recognized may increase.
Legal Proceedings. We are involved in a number of proceedings, legal actions, and claims. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties, and the outcomes of these matters are not within our control and may not be known for prolonged periods of time. In some actions, the claimants seek damages, as well as other relief, including injunctions prohibiting us from engaging in certain activities, which, if granted, could require significant expenditures and/or result in lost revenues. We record a liability in the consolidated financial statements for these actions when a loss is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If the reasonable estimate of a probable loss is a range, and no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other, the minimum amount of the range is accrued. If a loss is reasonably possible but not known or probable, and can be reasonably estimated, the estimated loss or range of loss is disclosed. In most cases, significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of a loss to be recorded. We expense legal costs related to loss contingencies as incurred. While it is not possible to predict the outcome for these matters, we believe it is possible that costs associated with them could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated earnings, financial position or cash flows.
Income Taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which such items are expected to be received or settled. We recognize the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates in the period that includes the enactment date. We establish a valuation allowance to offset any deferred tax assets if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
While we believe that our tax positions are fully supportable, there is a risk that certain positions could be challenged successfully. In these instances, we look to establish reserves. If we determine that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, we recognize the benefit. We measure the benefit by determining the amount that has likelihood greater than 50% of being realized upon settlement. We presume that all tax positions will be examined by a taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information. We regularly monitor our tax positions, tax assets and tax liabilities. We reevaluate the technical merits of our tax positions and recognize an uncertain tax benefit or reverse a previously recorded tax benefit when (i) a tax audit is completed, (ii) applicable tax law, including a tax case or legislative guidance, changes or (iii) the statute of limitations expires. Significant judgment is required in accounting for tax reserves.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our net sales by geography expressed as dollar amounts and the changes in sales between the specified periods expressed in dollar amounts and as percentages:
In the United States, the increase in net sales of $16.8 million was due primarily to increased spine product sales resulting from continued penetration in existing territories.
International net sales decreased by $13.1 million, which was due primarily to the postponement of elective surgeries at hospitals and surgical centers as well as a one-time distributor stocking order in the period ended March 31, 2019.
Cost of Goods Sold
The $37.5 million increase in cost of goods sold was primarily due to higher write-downs of excess and obsolete inventory on less frequently used implant product sizes, non-recurring inventory write-offs and other manufacturing expenses, including depreciation.
Research and Development Expenses
The increase in research and development expenses was due primarily to $24.4 million of in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) from the acquisition of Synoste Oy (“Synoste”) which was expensed because we determined that it did not have an alternative future use.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 remained consistent with the previous fiscal year.
Provision for Litigation
The decrease in the provision for litigation is due to a one-time legal settlement and verdict costs that did not occur in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Amortization of Intangibles
The increase in the amortization of intangibles was primarily due to the developed technology and customer relationship intangible assets acquired in connection with the Nemaris and StelKast acquisitions, respectively.
Acquisition Related Costs
The increase in acquisition related costs was primarily due to costs associated with the change in fair value of business acquisition liabilities and business development-related activities.
Other Income, Net
The decrease in other income, net was due primarily to lower interest income from lower yields on short and long-term investments in marketable securities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Provision
The change in the effective income tax rates between the current year and prior year was primarily the result of the non-deductible expense of acquired IPR&D of $24.4 million, partially offset by higher tax benefits resulting from an increase in stock option exercises in the current year period.
A discussion of our Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations: Results of Operations; Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018.” on our Form 10-K/A filed on March 2, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flow from operating activities and our revolving credit facility, which was fully available as of December 31, 2020. We believe these sources will provide sufficient funding for us to meet our liquidity requirements for the foreseeable future. Our principal liquidity requirements are to fund working capital, research and development, including clinical trials, capital expenditures primarily related to investment in surgical sets required to maintain and expand our business, and potential future business or intellectual property acquisitions. We expect to continue to make investments in surgical sets as we launch new products, increase the size of our U.S. sales force, and expand into international markets. We may, however, require additional liquidity as we continue to execute our business strategy. Our liquidity may be negatively impacted as a result of a decline in sales of our products, including declines due to changes in our customers’ ability to obtain third-party coverage and reimbursement for procedures that use our products, increased pricing pressures resulting from intensifying competition, cost increases and slower product development cycles resulting from a changing regulatory environment; and unfavorable results from litigation which will affect our cash flow. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through the incurrence of other indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of liquidity. The sale of additional equity may result in dilution to our stockholders. There is no assurance that we will be able to secure such additional funding on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
In August 2020, we entered into a credit agreement with Citizens Bank, N.A. (the “Credit Agreement”) that provides a revolving credit facility permitting borrowings up to $125.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), and has a termination date of August 5, 2021. The Revolving Credit Facility includes up to a $25.0 million sub limit for letters of credit.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the increase of cash flow from the collection of accounts receivable.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the decrease in net purchases, maturities and sales of marketable securities and a decrease in purchases of property and equipment, partially offset by increases in payments related to asset acquisitions.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
The increase in net cash used in financing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of the repurchases of common stock, partially offset by the increase in proceeds from option exercises.
A discussion of our Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations: Results of Operations; Cash Flows.” on our Form 10-K/A filed on March 2, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our outstanding contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. There have been no material changes in our remaining contractual obligations since that time.
(1)
Reflects minimum annual volume commitments to purchase inventory under certain of our supplier contracts.
(2)
In connection with certain acquisitions completed in 2011 through 2020, we have certain contingent consideration obligations payable to the sellers in these transactions upon the achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones. For further information, see Notes 3, and 7 to the consolidated financial statements in “Part II; Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
*
Excludes contributions to pension and other post-employment benefit plans, uncertain tax positions, non-current tax liabilities and royalty obligations for which we cannot make a reliable estimate of the period of cash settlement. For further information, see Notes 15, and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in “Part II; Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Related-Party Transactions
We do not have any related-party transactions.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For further details on recently issued accounting pronouncements, please refer to “Part II; Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies; (v) Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.”
‎