Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis here and throughout this Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under Item 1A (“Risk Factors”) and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
As a result of the transaction with GameTech UK Limited as described elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company is now a mobile games developer and publisher with offices in London and New York.
The Company’s activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need for additional capital, as described below. The Company has not yet commenced any revenue-generating operations, does not have positive cash flows from operations, and is dependent on periodic infusions of equity capital to fund its operating requirements.
Background and Basis of Presentation
Gaming Technologies, Inc. was incorporated in the State of Delaware on July 23, 2019 under the name Dito, Inc. and on December 21, 2020 amended its name to Gaming Technologies, Inc. Effective as of March 18, 2020, Gaming Technologies, Inc. completed a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Exchange Agreement”) to acquire all of the outstanding ordinary shares of Gaming Technologies UK that provided for each outstanding ordinary share of Gaming Technologies UK to be effectively converted into 25 shares of common stock of Gaming Technologies, Inc., As a result, Gaming Technologies UK became our wholly-owned subsidiary in a recapitalization transaction, as described below. Gaming Technologies UK was originally formed on November 3, 2017, in the United Kingdom as Dito UK Limited for the purpose of software development.
For financial reporting purposes, the Exchange Agreement was accounted for as a combination of entities under common control (the “Combination”), as Gaming Technologies, Inc. was formed by Gaming Technologies UK, with the objective of Gaming Technologies UK becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gaming Technologies, Inc., and the resultant parent company being domiciled in the United States. As a result of the Combination, the former stockholders of Gaming Technologies UK became the controlling shareholders of Dito, Inc., and the Gaming Technologies UK management and board members became the management and board members of Gaming Technologies, Inc.
Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements presented herein for all periods are based on the historical financial statements of each of Gaming Technologies, Inc. and Gaming Technologies UK. The stockholders’ equity section of the Gaming Technologies, Inc. balance sheet has been retroactively restated for all periods presented to reflect the accounting effect of the Combination. The net loss per share and weighted average common shares outstanding information presented herein also reflects this retroactive restatement for all periods presented. All costs associated with the Combination were charged to operations as incurred.
Going Concern
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has had no operating revenues to date, and has experienced recurring net losses from operations and negative operating cash flows.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company incurred a net loss of $7,211,817, utilized cash in operating activities of $924,917, and had an accumulated deficit of $7,966,193 as of December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019 the Company incurred a net loss of $636,033, utilized cash in operating activities of $431,166, and had an accumulated deficit of $754,376 as of December 31, 2019. The Company has financed its working capital requirements since inception through the sale of its equity securities and from borrowings.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $1,946,232, which included $2,628,000 from the sale of Common Stock in a series of private placements in the fourth quarter of 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had cash of $320,402, which included $302,500 from the sale of Common Stock in December 2019. Subsequently, in January and February 2020, the Company raised an additional $210,000 from the sale of Common Stock, bringing the total amount raised in this equity financing to $512,500.
The Company estimates that a significant amount of capital will be necessary over a sustained period of time to advance the development of the Company’s business to the point at which it can become commercially viable and self-sustaining. However, there can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in this regard.
As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year of the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements are issued. In addition, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, has also expressed substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to raise additional funds and implement its business plan, and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The development and expansion of the Company’s business during 2021 and thereafter will be dependent on many factors, including the capital resources available to the Company. No assurances can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company or adequate to fund the development and expansion of the Company’s business to a level that is commercially viable and self-sustaining. There is also significant uncertainty as to the effect that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on the availability, amount and type of financing in the future.
If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company would be required to scale back or discontinue its operations, obtain funds, if available, although there can be no certainty, through strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to its technology, or to discontinue its operations entirely.
Concentration of Risk
The Company may periodically contract with consultants and vendors to provide services related to the Company’s business development activities. Agreements for these services may be for a specific time period or for a specific project or task. The Company did not have any such formal agreements as of December 31, 2020.
Costs and expenses incurred that represented 10% or more of general and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of stock compensation expense representing approximately 88% of total general and administrative costs for that period.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 presented elsewhere in this Form 10-K, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the US (“GAAP”). Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of the Company’s control. As a result, these issues are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on the Company’s historical operations, the future business plans and the projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, trends in the industry, and information available from other outside sources. For a more complete description of the Company’s significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Accordingly, the Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected impact of differences between the financial statements and the tax basis of assets and liabilities.
The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce its deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In the event the Company was to determine that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of its recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be credited to operations in the period such determination was made. Alternatively, should the Company determine that it would not be able to realize all or part of its deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to operations in the period such determination was made.
Gaming Technologies, Inc. is subject to US federal income taxes and income taxes of the State of New York. The Company’s operations in the US through December 31, 2020 were nominal.
Gaming Technologies UK is subject to taxation in the UK. As a foreign corporation, Gaming Technologies UK is not consolidated with Gaming Technologies, Inc. in the Company’s US federal tax filings.
As the Company’s net operating losses in the respective jurisdictions in which it operates have yet to be utilized, all previous tax years remain open to examination by the taxing authorities in which the Company currently operates. The Company had no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020 and does not anticipate any material amount of unrecognized tax benefits within the next 12 months.
The Company accounts for uncertainties in income tax law under a comprehensive model for the financial statement recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns as prescribed by GAAP. The tax effects of a position are recognized only if it is “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained by the taxing authority as of the reporting date. If the tax position is not considered “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained, then no benefits of the position are recognized. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had not recorded any liability for uncertain tax positions. In subsequent periods, any interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions will be recognized as a component of income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company issues Common Stock and intends to issue stock options to officers, directors and consultants for services rendered. Options will vest and expire according to terms established at the issuance date of each grant. Stock grants, which are generally time vested, will be measured at the grant date fair value and charged to operations ratably over the vesting period.
The fair value of stock options granted as stock-based compensation will be determined utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and can be affected by several variables, the most significant of which are the life of the equity award, the exercise price of the stock option as compared to the fair market value of the Common Stock on the grant date, and the estimated volatility of the Common Stock. Estimated volatility will be based on the historical volatility of the Company’s Common Stock over an appropriate calculation period, or, if not available, by reference to the volatility of a representative sample of comparable public companies. The risk-free interest rate will be based on the US Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. The fair market value of the Common Stock will be determined by reference to the quoted market price of the Company’s Common Stock on the grant date, or, if not available, by reference to an appropriate alternative valuation methodology.
The Company will recognize the fair value of stock-based compensation awards in general and administrative costs or in software development costs, as appropriate, in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations. The Company will issue new shares of Common Stock to satisfy stock option exercises.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any outstanding stock options.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Comprehensive income or loss is defined as the change in equity during a period from transactions and other events and circumstances from non- owner sources. Components of comprehensive income or loss, including net income or loss, unrealized gains or losses on available-for-sale securities, unrealized gains or losses on other financial investments, unrealized gains or losses on pension and retirement benefit plans, and foreign currency translation adjustments, are reported in the financial statements in the period in which they are recognized. Net income (loss) and other comprehensive income (loss) are reported net of any related tax effect to arrive at comprehensive income (loss). The Company’s comprehensive income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consists of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Software Development Costs
Due to the significant uncertainty with respect to the successful development of commercially viable products based on the Company’s development efforts, all software development costs incurred with respect to the Company’s mobile gaming platform are charged to operations as incurred.
Intellectual Property
Intellectual property, consisting of software, is recorded at cost. Amortization of intellectual property is provided using the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of three years.
The Company recognizes amortization of intellectual property in software development costs in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
Foreign Currency
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented in US dollars (“USD”). The functional currency of Dito UK, the Company’s foreign subsidiary, is the British Pound (“GBP”), the local currency in the UK. Accordingly, assets and liabilities of the foreign subsidiary are translated at the current exchange rate at the end of the period, and revenues and expenses are translated at average exchange rates during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The resulting translation adjustments are recorded as a component of shareholders’ equity (deficiency). Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions are included in net income (loss).
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 significantly changes how entities measure credit losses for most financial assets, including accounts and notes receivables. ASU 2016-13 will replace the current “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model, under which companies will recognize allowances based on expected rather than incurred losses. Entities will apply the provisions of ASU 2016-13 as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which ASU 2016-13 is effective. As small business filer, ASU 2016-13 will be effective for the Company for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Management is currently in the process of assessing the impact of adopting ASU-2016-13 on the Company’s financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 will simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models results in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 also amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. ASU 2020-06 will be effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Management has not yet evaluated the effect that the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures subsequent to its adoption.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, including its Emerging Issues Task Force, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Securities and Exchange Commission, did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company’s present or future consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Plan of Operation
The Company specializes in the rapidly growing financial, gaming and entertainment sectors. Once development is complete, the Company intends to license its software platform to mobile gaming operators and developers to enable rapid development of new games.
On November 13, 2020, we entered into an Agreement for the Provision of Online Gaming Management and Consulting Services (as subsequently amended) with Comercial de Juegos de la Frontera, S.A. de C.V., a Mexican company doing business as Big Bola, pursuant to which we provide to Big Bola consulting and management services related to their interactive online betting and gaming business in Mexico via the web site www.vale.mx, a regulated online casino and sports betting site. vale.mx operates under Big Bola’s existing license issued by the General Directorate of Games and Raffles of the Ministry of Interior (SEGOB). Big Bola is one of only 14 operators legally authorized to offer legal betting and online casino services in Mexico. vale.mx has more than 500 online premium casino games available, which can be enjoyed both on mobile or via desktop. Players can receive promotions and play live roulette and blackjack, or high-definition slots from leading software providers such as NetEnt, Microgaming, Pragmatic Play, Evolution and Matrix Studios. We are responsible for player acquisition, promotion and retention for vale.mx. We manage players’ accounts and are required to ensure that the balance in players’ accounts at all times satisfies the requirements under applicable law, and we pay out winnings to players from Big Bola’s account. While Big Bola bears liability to the players as provided by the permit, as between us and Big Bola we bear the costs of this obligation. Each party indemnifies the other against certain liabilities and claims. Under the terms of the agreement, we share 60% of gross gaming revenue generated from the platform, subject to certain minimum guaranteed monthly amounts of Big Bola’s participation in the remaining gross gaming revenues.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had not yet commenced any revenue-generating operations, did not have any positive cash flows from operations, and was dependent on its ability to raise equity capital to fund its operating requirements.
Operating Expenses
The Company generally recognizes operating costs and expenses as they are incurred in two general categories, software development costs and expenses and general and administrative costs and expenses. The Company’s operating costs and expenses also include non-cash components related to depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, and intellectual property, which are allocated, as appropriate, to software development costs and expenses and general and administrative costs and expenses.
Software development costs and expenses consist primarily of fees paid to consultants and amortization of intellectual property. Management expects software costs and expenses to increase in the future as the Company increases its efforts to develop technology for potential future products based on its technology and research.
General and administrative costs and expenses consist of fees for directors and officers, and their affiliates, as well as legal and other professional fees, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, lease and rent expense, and other general corporate expenses. Management expects general and administrative costs and expenses to increase in future periods as the Company adds personnel and incurs additional costs related to its operation as a public company, including higher legal, accounting, insurance, compliance, compensation and other costs.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as discussed herein, are presented below.
Revenues. The Company did not have any revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Software Development Costs and Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, software development costs and expenses were $128,563, which consisted of development costs paid to contractors of $67,505 and amortization of intellectual property of $61,058.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, software development costs and expenses were $163,786, which consisted of development costs paid to contractors of $102,981 and amortization of intellectual property of $60,805.
Software development costs and expenses decreased by $35,223 or 22% in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of a decrease in amortization of intellectual property as the end of the expected useful life of the underlying assets was approached.
General and Administrative Costs and Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative costs and expenses were $7,064,240, which consisted of director, consulting, and professional fees to officers, directors, affiliates, and other related parties of $417,094, stock compensation expense of $5,875,000, legal and accounting fees to non-related parties of $599,957, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment of $8,936, lease and rent expense of $51,071, transfer agent fees of $28,474, consulting fees of $72,703, and other operating costs of $11,005.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative costs and expenses were $464,812, which consisted of director, consulting, and professional fees to officers, directors, affiliates, and other related parties of $289,823, legal and accounting fees to non-related parties of $92,898, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment of $6,590, lease and rent expense of $46,824, and other operating costs of $28,677.
General and administrative costs increased by $6,599,428 or 1,420% in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily as a result of stock compensation expense of $5,875,000.
Interest Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had interest expense of $3,046, as compared to interest expense of $7,958 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of interest on notes payable.
Foreign Currency Gain (Loss). For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a foreign currency loss of $15,968, as compared to a foreign currency gain of $523 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of A decrease in the value of the GB Pound compared to the US Dollar.
Net Loss. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a net loss of $7,211,817, as compared to a net loss of $636,033 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a foreign currency translation adjustment of $(21,512), as compared to a foreign currency translation adjustment of $(2,522) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The foreign currency translation adjustment is a result of fluctuations between the GBP, the functional currency of the Company’s UK subsidiary, and the USD, the reporting currency of the Company.
Comprehensive Loss. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a comprehensive loss of $7,233,329, as compared to a comprehensive loss of $638,555 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources - December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in Item 6 (“Selected Financial Data”), the Company has had no operating revenues to date, and has experienced recurring net losses from operations and negative operating cash flows. The Company has financed its working capital requirements since inception through the sale of its equity securities and from borrowings.
As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year of the date that the consolidated financial statements are being issued. In addition, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, has also expressed substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern (see “-Going Concern”).
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to raise additional funds and implement its business plan, and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a working capital of $1,586,238, as compared to working capital of $154,594 as of December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase in working capital of $1,431,644 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of an increase in cash on hand due to the sale of common stock in the fourth quarter of 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had working capital of $154,594, as compared to working capital of ($243,886) as of December 31, 2018, reflecting an increase in working capital of $398,480 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of proceeds from the sale of Common Stock of $567,721 and the conversion of notes payable to related parties into the Company’s Common Stock, offset by working capital being utilized to fund the Company’s ongoing operating expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash of $1,946,232, reflecting cash of $2,628,000 from the sale of Common Stock in 2020. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had cash of $320,402, reflecting cash of $302,500 from the sale of Common Stock in December 2019.
The Company has not yet generated any net revenue from operations. The Company estimates that its working capital requirements for the next twelve months to be approximately $1,200,000, or $100,000 per month.
The working capital budget will enable the Company to support the existing monthly operating cost of the Company currently approximately $40,000 per month, the monthly (and quarterly) accounting and US securities filing costs estimated at $20,000 per month and a sales and marketing budget of $40,000 per month to engage in a sales and marketing campaign to sell licenses of the Company’s software platform to third parties.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company completed a series of private placements of its Common Stock, with proceeds totaling $2,628,000. See Item 1 (“Business-The Private Placements and Share Exchange”). The Company believes that resulting working capital will be sufficient to fund the Company’s operations for the next twelve months.
Since acquiring the software platform, the Company has successfully carried out development to port the software platform from its former physical server dependencies and reliance on third parties for hardware management and deployment to a cloud-based platform where deployment is automated through the use of infrastructure as code. To make the Company’s software platform work for B2B licensees, the Company has modified the software to enable remote management by system administrators of prospective licensees. Previously, the platform was B2C-focused, with outsourced management and deployment. As a result of this software development, the Company expects to be able to monetize its software platform by selling licenses to third parties.
The Company’s ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other sources may depend on the stage of development of the software platform, the commercial success of the software, and financial, economic and market conditions and other factors, some of which are beyond the Company’s control. No assurance can be given that the Company will be successful in raising the required capital at reasonable cost and at the required times, or at all. Further equity financings may have a dilutive effect on shareholders and any debt financing, if available, may require restrictions to be placed on the Company’s future financing and operating activities. If the Company requires additional capital and is unsuccessful in raising that capital, the Company may not be able to continue the development of its software platform and continue to advance its growth initiatives, or ultimately to be able to continue its business operations, which could adversely impact the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities utilized cash of $924,917, as compared to utilized cash of $431,166 for the year ended December 31, 2019, to fund the Company’s ongoing operating expenses.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s investing activities consisted of the acquisition of intellectual property for $18,620.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s investing activities consisted of the acquisition of property and equipment of $5,317 and proceeds from the sales of property and equipment of $4,198.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s financing activities consisted of gross proceeds from the private placement of 1,153,200 shares of Common Stock of $2,628,000, proceeds from a note payable to bank of $60,623, offset by the repayment of a note payable to related party of $35,508, and the repayment of $60,000 in connection with the cancellation of an investment in the private placement.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s financing activities consisted of proceeds from notes payable to related parties of $50,664, proceeds from the sale of 8,549,350 shares of Common Stock of $265,221, proceeds from the private placement of 121,000 shares of Common Stock of $302,500, and $60,000 from the sale of Common Stock in the private placement that was subsequently cancelled, with the funds returned to the investor on March 18, 2020.
Principal Commitments
Short-Term Operating Lease
The Company leases office facilities in New York, New York on a month-to-month basis at a cost of $142 per month.
Long-Term Operating Lease
The Company leases office facilities in London, England. The Company did not have any other leases with initial terms of 12 months or more as of December 31, 2020.
The monthly cash payment for this operating lease is approximately $4,010 per month, and the lease term ended on March 31, 2021.
The following schedule sets forth the current portion and long-term portion of operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
This operating lease had a remaining term of six months as of December 31, 2020. The following schedule sets forth the remaining annual future lease payments outstanding as of December 31, 2020:
Contractual Commitments
The Company has retained Julian Parge as a consultant to Gaming Technologies UK, at the request and under the sole discretion of Gaming Technologies UK, at the rate of $1,549 (equivalent to 1,250£) per week up to a maximum of $77,456 (equivalent to 62,500£) per annum.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any transactions, obligations or relationships that could be considered off-balance sheet arrangements.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Development of new software is, by its nature, unpredictable. Although the Company will undertake development efforts with commercially reasonable diligence, there can be no assurance that the Company’s efforts to raise funds in the future will be sufficient to enable the Company to develop its technology to the extent needed to create future revenues to sustain operations as contemplated herein.
There can be no assurances that the Company’s technology will be adopted or that the Company will ever achieve sustainable revenues sufficient to support its operations. Even if the Company is able to generate revenues, there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to achieve profitability or positive operating cash flows. There can be no assurances that the Company will be able to secure additional financing on acceptable terms or at all. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company would be required to scale back or discontinue its software development programs, or obtain funds, if available (although there can be no certainty), through strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to certain of its potential products, or to curtail or discontinue its operations entirely.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company is not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition.
Impact of COVID-19 on the Company
The global outbreak of COVID-19 has led to severe disruptions in general economic activities, as businesses and governments have taken broad actions to mitigate this public health crisis. Although the Company has not experienced any significant disruption to its business to date, these conditions could significantly negatively impact the Company’s business in the future.
The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak ultimately impacts the Company’s business, future revenues, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the outbreak, its severity and longevity, the actions to curtail the virus and treat its impact (including an effective vaccine), and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Even after the COVID-19 outbreak has subsided, the Company may be at risk of experiencing a significant impact to its business as a result of the global economic impact, including any economic downturn or recession that has occurred or may occur in the future.
Currently, capital markets have been disrupted by the crisis, as a result of which the availability, amount and type of financing available to the Company in the near future is uncertain and cannot be assured and is largely dependent upon evolving market conditions and other factors.
The Company intends to continue to monitor the situation and may adjust its current business plans as more information and guidance become available.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the Company is not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition.