Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
GMS Inc. (“we,” “our,” “us,” or the “Company”) is a distributor of specialty building products including wallboard, suspended ceilings systems, or ceilings, steel framing and other complementary specialty building products. We purchase products from many manufacturers and then distribute these goods to a customer base consisting of wallboard and ceilings contractors and homebuilders and, to a lesser extent, general contractors and individuals. We operate a network of more than 265 distribution centers across the United States and Canada.
Business Strategy
Our business strategy includes an emphasis on organic growth through expanding market share in our core products (wallboard, ceilings and steel framing) and growing our complementary product lines (insulation, lumber, ready-mix joint compound, tools, fasteners and various other construction products). Our growth strategy also includes the pursuit of greenfield branch openings and strategic acquisitions as we seek to further broaden our geographic platform. We expect to continue to capture profitable market share in our existing footprint by delivering industry-leading customer service. Our strategy for opening new branches is to further penetrate markets that are adjacent to our existing operations. Typically, we have pre-existing customer relationships in these markets but need a new location to fully capitalize on those relationships. In addition, we will continue to pursue acquisitions. Due to the large, highly-fragmented nature of our markets and our reputation throughout the industry, we believe we have the potential to access a robust acquisition pipeline that will continue to supplement our organic growth. We use a rigorous targeting process to identify acquisition candidates that we believe will fit our culture and business model and we have built an experienced team of professionals to manage the acquisition and integration processes. As a result of our scale, purchasing power and ability to improve operations through implementing best practices, we believe we can continue to achieve substantial synergies and drive earnings accretion from our acquisition strategy. Finally, our growth strategy also entails a heightened focus on enhanced productivity and profitability across the organization, seeking to leverage our scale and employ both technology and other best practices to deliver further margin expansion and earnings growth.
COVID-19 Update
We experienced an adverse impact on our operations during fiscal 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a decrease in demand for our products and disruption of our business operations during the first three quarters of the fiscal year. This was primarily the result of the suspension of construction activity related to mandated shutdowns and cancelled, delayed or temporarily paused building projects as customers focused on responding to COVID-19. We also temporarily closed many of our showrooms. The pandemic caused widespread adverse impacts to the economy and financial markets, and to our employees, customers, suppliers and other parties with whom we do business.
Throughout the pandemic, we were able to quickly implement a range of actions to reduce costs, improve our financial flexibility and ensure the strength of our balance sheet. These actions included:
•Deferring or limiting non-essential operating or other discretionary expenses;
•Implementing a wage and hiring freeze and certain permanent headcount reductions;
•Immediately furloughing employees (with a majority having returned to work following easing of shutdown restrictions in certain markets);
•Utilizing appropriate benefits of the CARES Act, including the temporary suspension of certain payment requirements for the employer portion of Social Security taxes;
•Temporarily suspending Company matching contributions to the 401(k) plan;
•Closing certain underperforming branches and distribution centers;
•Delaying or reducing capital expenditures that did not impact near-term business;
•Temporarily suspending acquisition-related activity; and
•Optimizing all areas of working capital.
Net sales during the first part of fiscal 2021 declined compared to the comparable period in the prior year as a result of the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in net sales was more pronounced in our ceilings and steel framing products, as these product categories are tied primarily to commercial construction, which was more impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic than the residential market. However, the U.S. residential market experienced an increase in demand and activity during the latter half of fiscal 2021, as did the Canadian housing market. In addition, we were able to respond quickly to reduce variable costs and have improved our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales. We also
repaid the $87.2 million that we proactively borrowed under our revolving credit facilities in March 2020 and repaid certain accounts payable that were delayed at the end of fiscal 2020 in order to preserve liquidity.
By the end of fiscal 2021, numerous countries, including the United States and Canada, had approved various vaccines and began distributing them to their citizens. We continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on macroeconomic and local economic conditions. We will continue to implement, as deemed necessary, procedures and processes to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers. Such measures include routine cleaning throughout the day at all locations, adherence to social distancing protocols, restricting or modifying access to facilities including limiting walk-in traffic in showrooms, encouraging employees to work remotely when possible, mandating the use of appropriate personal protective equipment and the suspension of non-essential travel. We expect to continue to implement these measures throughout the COVID-19 pandemic and we may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine certain procedures to be in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers.
A resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic in key areas of our operations may require us to implement further restrictions, may require us to temporarily shut down facilities or may further impact our net sales. We will continue to actively monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our business operations if required by federal, state, provincial or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and stockholders. See Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” for a discussion of risks which could have a material adverse effect on our operations and financial results.
Fiscal 2021 Highlights
Key highlights in our business during fiscal 2021 are described below:
•Generated net sales of $3,298.8 million in fiscal 2021, a 1.8% increase from the prior year, primarily due to growth in complementary products sales and a rebound in the Canadian and U.S. residential housing markets in the latter part of our fiscal year following the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic during the early part of our fiscal year.
•Generated net income of $105.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $23.4 million in the prior year, primarily due to a $63.1 million non-cash impairment charge to goodwill recognized in the prior fiscal year, operating expense containment measures in fiscal 2021 and a decrease in interest expense, partially offset by a decrease in gain on legal settlement and an increase in taxes.
•Generated Adjusted EBITDA (a non-GAAP measure, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” in this Item 7) of $319.4 million in fiscal 2021, an increase from $299.8 million in the prior fiscal year, primarily due to operating expense containment measures and strength in the Canadian housing market, partially offset by the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on net sales during the early part of our fiscal year.
•Generated cash provided by operating activities of $153.3 million.
Recent Developments
Acquisitions
On February 1, 2021, we acquired D.L. Building Materials Inc. (“D.L. Building Materials”) for a purchase price of approximately $39.5 million ($50.6 million Canadian dollars). D.L. Building Materials distributes wallboard, acoustical ceilings, steel framing, insulation and related building products in the Eastern Ontario and Western Quebec markets through two locations in Gatineau, Quebec and Kingston, Ontario.
On May 11, 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire substantially all the assets of Westside Building Material ("Westside"), one of the largest independent distributors of interior building products in the U.S., for $135.0 million in cash. Westside is a leading supplier of steel framing, wallboard, acoustical ceilings, insulation and related building products serving commercial and residential markets. Westside’s distribution network comprises ten locations, including nine across California (Anaheim, Hesperia, Oakland, Chatsworth, Fresno, Lancaster, Santa Maria, San Diego and National City) and one in Las Vegas, NV. The transaction is expected to close in the third calendar quarter of 2021, subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions.
Greenfields
In September 2020, we opened a new greenfield location in Hillsboro, OR. In January 2021, we opened a new greenfield location in Waco, TX. In February 2021, we opened four new greenfield locations, which include locations in Atlantic City, NJ, Memphis, TN, Jackson, TN and Jonesboro, AR.
Debt Transactions
In April 2021, we issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes due May 2029 (the “Senior Notes”) in a private offering. The Senior Notes bear interest at 4.625% per annum and mature on May 1, 2029. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on May 1 and November 1. Proceeds from the Senior Notes were used to repay a portion of outstanding borrowings under our senior secured first lien term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) and to pay related transaction fees and expenses.
Also in April 2021, we entered into the Fourth Amendment to our First Lien Credit Agreement (the “Fourth Amendment”) that, among other things, reduced the interest rate to LIBOR plus 2.50%, with a 0% floor, representing a 25 basis point reduction. After giving effect to the Fourth Amendment, the aggregate principal amount outstanding under our Term Loan Facility was $511.0 million. We recorded a write-off of debt discount and deferred financing fees of $4.6 million, which is included in write-off of debt discount and deferred financing fees in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended April 30, 2021.
For more information regarding these transactions and our indebtedness, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021.
Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results
General Economic Conditions
Our business is sensitive to changes in general economic conditions, including, in particular, conditions in the United States and Canadian commercial construction and housing markets. The markets we serve are broadly categorized as commercial new construction, commercial repair and remodeling (“R&R”), residential new construction and residential R&R. We believe all four end markets were in an extended period of expansion following a deep and prolonged downturn. However, during most of fiscal 2021 there was significant disruption and uncertainty due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The economy has begun to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, but any resurgence or future pandemics may have a negative impact on our customers and the construction industry in general, as it may impact, among others, economic activity, employment levels, consumer spending and consumer confidence, which would decrease demand for new construction, adversely affecting our business.
Commercial New Construction
Our addressable commercial construction market is composed of a variety of commercial and institutional sub-segments with varying demand drivers. Our commercial markets include offices, hotels, retail stores and other commercial buildings, while our institutional markets include educational facilities, healthcare facilities, government buildings and other institutional facilities. The principal demand drivers across these markets include the overall economic outlook, the general business cycle, government spending, vacancy rates, employment trends, interest rates, availability of credit and demographic trends. Given the depth of the last recession and the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, activity in the commercial construction market remains below average historical levels.
Commercial R&R
We believe commercial R&R spending is typically more stable than new commercial construction activity. Commercial R&R spending is driven by several factors, including commercial real estate prices and rental rates, office vacancy rates, government spending and interest rates. Commercial R&R spending is also driven by commercial lease expirations and renewals, as well as tenant turnover. Such events often result in repair, reconfiguration and/or upgrading of existing commercial space. As such, the commercial R&R market has historically been less volatile than commercial new construction. While there is very limited third-party data for commercial R&R spending, commercial R&R spending has been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we believe there are early indications of some recovery in the market.
Residential New Construction
Residential construction activity is driven by several factors, including the overall economic outlook, employment, income growth, home prices, availability of mortgage financing and related government regulations, interest rates and consumer confidence, among others. While housing starts have generally recovered in recent years, activity in the market remains below historical peaks. However, the U.S. residential market experienced an increase in demand and activity during the latter half of fiscal 2021, as did the Canadian housing market.
Residential R&R
Residential R&R activity is typically more stable than new construction activity. Following a prolonged period of under-investment during the downturn from 2007 to 2011, residential R&R activity experienced above-average growth, which we expect to continue for the next several years. The primary drivers of residential R&R spending include changes in existing home prices, existing home sales, the average age of the housing stock, consumer confidence and interest rates.
Seasonality
Our operating results are typically impacted by seasonality. Historically, sales of our products have been slightly higher in the first and second quarters of each fiscal year (covering the calendar months of May through October) due to favorable weather and longer daylight conditions during these periods. Seasonal variations in operating results may be impacted by inclement weather conditions, such as cold or wet weather, which can delay construction projects.
Price and Mix Changes
Prices for certain of our products are subject to fluctuations arising from changes in domestic and international supply and demand, labor costs, competition, market speculation, government regulations, tariffs and trade restrictions, and periodic delays in delivery. Price inflation may impact demand for these products while price deflation may reduce our net sales and compress our margins. There is no assurance that we can successfully pass on price increases from our vendors to our customers. In addition, we may experience changes in our customer mix or in our product mix. Our operating results may be negatively impacted if customers require more lower-margin products from us and few higher-margin products.
Acquisitions
Our results of operations are impacted by acquisitions, as we complement our organic growth strategy with acquisitions. During fiscal 2021, we completed one acquisition consisting of two branches in Canada. Subsequent to the end of fiscal 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire substantially all the assets of a business with nine locations in California and one in Nevada. During fiscal 2020, we completed three acquisitions totaling four branches in the United States and one branch in Canada. During fiscal 2019, we completed three acquisitions totaling three branches in the United States and 30 branches across Canada. We believe that significant opportunities exist to expand our geographic footprint by executing additional strategic acquisitions and we consistently strive to maintain an extensive and active acquisition pipeline. We are often evaluating several acquisition opportunities at any given time. Our acquisition activity was temporarily curtailed in fiscal 2021 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our business acquisitions.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the year ended April 30, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended April 30, 2020 compared to the year ended April 30, 2019 can be found under Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 25, 2020.
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations:
___________________________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are non-GAAP measures. See “Non-GAAP Measures” in this Item 7 for how we define and calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, reconciliations thereof to net income and a discussion of why we believe these measures are useful.
(2)Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales.
Net Sales
We generate net sales by providing a comprehensive product offering of wallboard, ceilings, steel framing and complementary construction products. The increase in net sales during our fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to a rebound in the latter half of the year, partially offset by the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic during the early part of the year and one fewer selling day during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase in net sales consisted of the following:
•an increase in wallboard sales, which are impacted by both commercial and residential construction activity, primarily due to higher volumes, offset by a decline in both price and product mix;
•a decrease in ceilings sales, which is principally impacted by commercial construction activity, primarily due to lower volumes and product mix, partially offset by higher pricing;
•a decrease in steel framing sales, which is principally impacted by commercial construction activity, primarily due to a decline in volumes, pricing and product mix; and
•an increase in complementary products sales, which include insulation, joint treatment, tools, lumber and various other specialty building products, primarily due to execution of growth initiatives to increase complementary products sales, notably lumber and roofing, positive contributions from acquisitions and an increase in pricing in certain product categories.
The following table breaks out our net sales into organic, or base business, net sales and recently acquired net sales for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020. When calculating organic sales growth, we exclude the net sales of acquired businesses until the first anniversary of the acquisition date. In addition, we exclude the impact of foreign currency translation in our calculation of organic net sales growth.
___________________________________
(1)Represents net sales of branches acquired by us until the first anniversary of the acquisition date. For the year ended April 30, 2021, this includes net sales of J.P. Hart Lumber Company, which was acquired on June 3, 2019, Rigney Building Supplies Ltd., which was acquired on November 1, 2019, Trowel Trades Supply, Inc., which was acquired on February 1, 2020 and D. L. Building Materials, which was acquired on February 1, 2021.
(2)Represents the impact of foreign currency translation on net sales.
(3)Represents net sales of existing branches and branches that were opened by us during the period presented.
The slight increase in organic net sales was primarily driven by growth in complementary products sales, strength in the Canadian housing market and a rebounding of the U.S. residential housing market, partially offset by the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic during most of the fiscal year and one less selling day during fiscal 2021. The negative impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic were more pronounced in our ceilings and steel framing products, as these product categories are tied primarily to commercial construction, which was more impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic than the residential market.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The decrease in gross profit during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to a decrease in gross margin on net sales. The decrease in gross margin on net sales during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to unfavorable mix and price-cost dynamics for certain product categories.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of warehouse, delivery and general and administrative expenses. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to decreases in payroll and payroll related costs, travel costs, fuel costs and contract labor, which were driven by reduced sales volume during most of fiscal 2021 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase in insurance expense due to an increase in premiums and the development of existing claims. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of our net sales decreased during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to proactive actions taken to reduce costs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during most of fiscal 2021, partially offset by deflationary market pricing of certain of our products and incremental costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of definite-lived intangible assets. The decrease in depreciation expense during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to assets becoming fully depreciated during the period, partially offset by capital expenditures and acquisitions over the past year. The decrease in amortization expense during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the time-based progression of our use of the accelerated method of amortization for acquired customer relationships.
Impairment of Goodwill
During the year ended April 30, 2020, we recognized a $63.1 million non-cash impairment charge to goodwill related to our Canada reporting unit in conjunction with our annual goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. This charge was included in impairment of goodwill in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended April 30, 3020. The primary factors contributing to the impairment were an increase in the discount rate and a decrease in market multiples, combined with a decrease in the reporting unit’s forecasted near-term cash flows, primarily resulting from COVID-19 driven economic uncertainty. The impairment charge was equal to the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value. This non-cash charge did not affect our cash position, liquidity, debt covenant compliance or operations. As of April 30, 2021, we had $144.6 million of remaining goodwill related to our Canada reporting unit. Our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 indicated the estimated fair values of our other reporting units exceeded their carrying values. Our fiscal 2021 annual impairment test indicated the estimated fair value of all of our reporting units exceeded their carrying values.
We test goodwill annually during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year or when events and circumstances indicate that those assets might not be recoverable. Impairment testing of goodwill is required at the reporting unit level. The impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair values of our reporting units with the reporting units’ carrying amounts, including goodwill. We identified seven reporting units for evaluating goodwill for the fiscal 2020 annual impairment test, which were Central, Midwest, Northeast, Southern, Southeast, Western and Canada. Each of these reporting units constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results. We estimated the fair values of our reporting units based on weighting of the income and market approaches. These models use significant unobservable inputs, or Level 3 inputs, as defined by the fair value hierarchy. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of the reporting unit based on the present value of estimated cash flows using a discounted cash flow method. The significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow method included internal forecasts and projections developed by management for planning purposes, discount rates, available industry/market data, and the growth rate to calculate the terminal value. Under the market approaches, the fair value was estimated using the guideline company method. We selected guideline companies in the industry in which each reporting unit operates. We primarily use revenue and EBITDA multiples based on the multiples of the selected guideline companies.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense incurred on our debt and finance leases and amortization of deferred financing fees and debt discounts. The decrease in interest expense during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to a decrease in the outstanding amount of debt and a decrease in interest rates.
Gain on Legal Settlement
During the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company received proceeds as part of a class action settlement against certain drywall manufacturers related to purchases made during calendar years 2012 and 2013. The Company recorded a gain on legal settlement of $1.4 million and $14.0 million during the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Write-Off of Debt Discount and Deferred Financing Fees
Write-off of debt discount and deferred financing fees of $4.6 million during the year ended April 30, 2021 related to the refinancing of our Term Loan Facility in April 2021. Write-off of debt discount and deferred financing fees of $1.3 million during the year ended April 30, 2020 related to $100.0 million of prepayments of outstanding principal amount of our Term Loan Facility made during fiscal 2020. For more information regarding our debt transactions, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Tax Expense
The change in the effective income tax rate during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the various tax impacts of our non-cash impairment charge to goodwill in the prior year, the impact of state taxes, foreign operations and stock-based compensation. For information regarding the significant differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and our effective tax rate, see Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Summary
We depend on cash flow from operations, cash on hand and funds available under our asset based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Facility”) to finance working capital needs, capital expenditures and acquisitions. We believe that these sources of funds will be adequate to fund debt service requirements and provide cash, as required, to support our growth strategies, ongoing operations, capital expenditures, lease obligations and working capital for at least the next 12 months and in the long term. During fiscal 2021, we took several measures to preserve liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe we would be able to take similar measures in the future should there be a resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic or any other public health crisis.
As of April 30, 2021, we had available borrowing capacity of approximately $429.6 million under our $445.0 million ABL Facility. The ABL Facility is scheduled to mature on September 30, 2024.
As of April 30, 2021, we had available borrowing capacity of approximately $24.2 million under our Canadian revolving credit facility (the “Canadian Facility”) that provides for aggregate revolving commitments of $24.4 million ($30.0 million Canadian dollars). In January 2021, we amended our Canadian Facility to, among other things, extend the maturity date to January 12, 2026 and remove the highest pricing level applicable to borrowings under the Canadian Facility. The other material terms of the Canadian Facility remain unchanged. The Canadian Facility matures on January 12, 2026.
For more information regarding our ABL Facility and other indebtedness, see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021.
We regularly evaluate opportunities to optimize our capital structure, including through consideration of the issuance or incurrence of additional debt, to refinance existing debt and to fund ongoing cash needs such as general corporate purposes, growth initiatives, acquisitions and our stock repurchase program.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth summarized cash flow data:
Operating Activities
The decrease in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to a $151.9 million decrease in cash resulting from changes to our net working capital and a $2.1 million decrease in net income after adjustments for non-cash items. The decrease in cash from changes in net working capital was primarily due to an increase business activity toward the end of fiscal 2021. In addition, at the end of fiscal 2020, we were focused on preserving liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investing Activities
The increase in cash used in investing activities during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to an $11.8 million increase in cash used for acquisitions and a $4.7 million increase in capital expenditures..
Capital expenditures during the years ended April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 primarily consisted of building and leasehold improvements, vehicles and IT-related spending. Capital expenditures vary depending on prevailing business factors, including current and anticipated market conditions. Historically, capital expenditures have remained at relatively low levels in comparison to the operating cash flows generated during the corresponding periods.
Financing Activities
The increase in cash used in financing activities during the year ended April 30, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the repayment of $87.2 million of our revolving credit facilities we proactively borrowed in March 2020, a $4.2 million decrease in proceeds from exercises of stock options, $8.4 million net cash used for the debt transactions in April 2021, a $5.0 million increase in payments for debt issuance costs due to the debt transactions in April 2021, a $5.1 million increase in principal payments on finance leases and $4.2 million of repurchases of common stock. These activities were partially offset by cash used in the prior year period for $100.0 million of principal prepayments of debt and $11.1 million of contingent consideration payments.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations and commitments as of April 30, 2021:
___________________________________
(1)Long-term debt includes principal payments on outstanding debt obligations. Long-term debt excludes unamortized discounts and deferred financing fees. As of April 30, 2021, we had $871.4 million aggregate amount of debt outstanding,
consisting of $509.7 million of our Term Loan Facility due 2025, $350.0 million under our Senior Notes due 2029 and $11.7 million of installment notes due in monthly and annual installments through 2025.
(2)Interest payments on long-term debt includes interest due on outstanding debt obligations and commitment and borrowing costs under our ABL Facility.
(3)Represents remaining payments under finance leases, including interest on finance lease obligations.
(4)Represents base rent payments under non-cancellable operating leases.
We may, from time to time, repurchase or otherwise retire or extend our debt and/or take other steps to reduce our debt or otherwise improve our financial position. These actions may include open market debt repurchases, negotiated repurchases, other retirements of outstanding debt and/or opportunistic refinancing of debt. The amount of debt that may be repurchased or otherwise retired or refinanced, if any, will depend on market conditions, trading levels of our debt, our cash position, compliance with debt covenants and other considerations.
We lease certain office and warehouse facilities and equipment, some of which provide renewal options. Rent expense for operating leases, which may have escalating rents over the terms of the leases, is recorded on a straight-line basis over the minimum lease terms. Rent expense under operating leases approximated $55.3 million, $55.4 million, and $53.5 million for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As existing leases expire, we anticipate such leases will be renewed or replaced with other leases that are substantially similar in terms, which are consistent with market rates at the time of renewal.
During fiscal 2021 and 2020, we entered into $27.4 million and $50.5 million of finance lease obligations for the purchase of equipment and vehicles. We expect to continue to enter into finance lease obligations for the purchase of equipment and vehicles in fiscal 2022.
Share Repurchase Program
Our Board of Directors has authorized a common stock repurchase program to repurchase up to $75.0 million of our outstanding common stock. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to acquire any particular amount of common stock, and it may be suspended or terminated at any time at our discretion. The timing and amount of any purchases of our common stock will be subject to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, our liquidity, credit availability, general business and market conditions, our debt covenant restrictions and the availability of alternative investment opportunities. We repurchased 134 thousand shares of our common stock during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 for $4.2 million. As of April 30, 2021, we had $54.3 million of remaining purchase authorization under the share repurchase program.
Interest Rate Swap
We have interest rate swap agreements with a notional amount of $500.0 million to convert the variable interest rate on a portion of our Term Loan Facility to a fixed 1-month LIBOR interest rate of 2.46%. These contracts were effective on February 28, 2019 and terminate on February 28, 2023.
Debt Covenants
The ABL Facility contains certain affirmative covenants, including financial and other reporting requirements. We were in compliance with all such covenants as of April 30, 2021.
The Term Loan Facility and Senior Notes contain a number of covenants that limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries, as described in the debt agreements, to: incur more indebtedness; pay dividends, redeem or repurchase stock or make other distributions; make investments; create restrictions on the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to pay dividends to us or make other intercompany transfers; create liens securing indebtedness; transfer or sell assets; merge or consolidate; enter into certain transactions with our affiliates; and prepay or amend the terms of certain indebtedness. We were in compliance with all restrictive covenants as of April 30, 2021.
Interest Rates
Our ABL Facility and Term Loan Facility include available interest rate options based on the LIBOR. LIBOR will be discontinued after 2021, and the United States and other countries are currently working to replace LIBOR with alternative reference rates. The consequences of these developments with respect to LIBOR cannot be entirely predicted; however, we do not believe that the discontinuation of LIBOR as a reference rate in our loan agreements will have a material adverse effect on our financial position or materially affect our interest expense.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of April 30, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of operating results and financial condition are based upon our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of our financial statements, in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. Although these estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact us in the future, actual results may be materially different from the estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and that the judgments and estimates are reasonable.
Goodwill
Description. We perform an impairment test of our goodwill annually during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year (February 1) or when events and circumstances indicate goodwill might be impaired. Impairment testing of goodwill is required at the reporting unit level. We may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair value of our reporting units with the reporting unit's carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is measured as the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. We evaluate our reporting units on an annual basis or when events or circumstances indicate our reporting units might change.
Judgments and Uncertainties. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assigning assets and liabilities to reporting units and determining the fair values of reporting units. We estimated the fair values of our reporting units based on weighting of the income and market approaches. These models use significant unobservable inputs, or Level 3 inputs, as defined by the fair value hierarchy. Significant estimates and assumptions inherent in the valuations include the amount and timing of future cash flows (including expected growth rates and profitability), the discount rate applied to the cash flows and the selection of guideline companies. The assumptions with the most significant impact on the fair value of our reporting units are those related to the discount rate, the terminal value, future operating cash flows and the growth rate.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions. As of April 30, 2021, we had $576.3 million of goodwill. During the year ended April 30, 2020, we recognized a $63.1 million non-cash impairment charge to write off goodwill related to our Canada reporting unit in conjunction with our annual goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. The primary factors contributing to the impairment was an increase in the discount rate and a decrease in market multiples, combined with a decrease in the reporting unit’s forecasted near-term cash flows, primarily resulting from COVID-19 driven economic uncertainty. The impairment charge was equal to the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value. As of April 30, 2021, we had $144.6 million of remaining goodwill related to our Canada reporting unit. Our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 indicated the estimated fair values of our other reporting units exceeded their carrying values. Our fiscal 2021 annual impairment test indicated that none of our reporting units were at risk of failing the quantitative impairment test. Changes to our business strategy, changes in industry or market conditions, changes in operating performance, a prolonged weakness in general economic conditions, volatility in the equity and debt markets or other similar
circumstances could affect the assumptions used in the impairment tests. Although management currently believes that the estimates used in the evaluation of goodwill are reasonable, if the assumptions used in the impairment analysis are not met or materially change, it could cause goodwill to be impaired.
Long-Lived Assets
Description. We depreciate property and equipment and amortize intangible assets over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Estimates of useful lives are based on the nature of the underlying assets as well as our experience with similar assets and intended use. We periodically review estimated useful lives for reasonableness. We evaluate recoverability of long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets, when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flow expected to be generated by the assets. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset.
Judgments and Uncertainties. Determining the useful life of an intangible asset requires judgment. Estimates of useful lives can differ from actual useful lives due to the inherent uncertainty in making these estimates. Our impairment tests contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions and apply judgment regarding the amount and timing of future cash flows (including expected growth rates and profitability) and the discount rate applied to the cash flows.
Effect if Actual Results Differ. As of April 30, 2021, we had $311.3 million of property and equipment, $289.5 million of definite-lived intangible assets and $118.4 million of operating lease right-of-use assets. During the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, we recorded impairments of $1.0 million and $1.9 million, respectively, of operating lease right-of-use assets due to restructuring plans to close certain facilities. We did not recognize any other material impairment charges for our long-lived assets during the past three years. We did not have any material changes in useful lives for our long-lived assets during the past three years. However, changes in management intentions, market events or conditions, projected future net sales, operating results and other similar circumstances could affect the assumptions used in the impairment tests. Although management currently believes that the estimates used in the evaluation of long-lived assets are reasonable, differences between actual and expected net sales, operating results and cash flow could cause these assets to be impaired.
Business Combinations
Description. We account for business combinations by recognizing the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair value. In valuing acquired assets and liabilities, fair value estimates use Level 3 inputs, including future expected cash flows and discount rates. Goodwill is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While the Company uses its best estimates and assumptions as a part of the acquisition accounting process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the Company’s estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company records adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments arising from new facts and circumstances are recorded to the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Judgments and Uncertainties. Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions about intangible assets, obligations assumed and pre-acquisition contingencies, including uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances and reserves. Critical inputs and assumptions in valuing certain of the intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from customer relationships and developed technologies; the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio; and discount rates.
Effect if Actual Results Differ. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are inherently uncertain. As a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Income Taxes
Description. Income taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Inherent in the measurement of deferred balances are certain judgments and interpretations of existing tax law and published guidance as applicable to our operations.
We evaluate our deferred tax assets to determine if valuation allowances are required. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider both positive and negative evidence in determining whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The primary negative evidence considered includes the cumulative operating losses generated in prior periods. The primary positive evidence considered includes the reversal of deferred tax liabilities related to depreciation and amortization that would occur within the same jurisdiction and during the carry-forward period necessary to absorb the federal and state net operating losses and other deferred tax assets. The reversal of such liabilities would utilize the federal and state net operating losses and other deferred tax assets.
We record amounts for uncertain tax positions that management believes are supportable, but are potentially subject to successful challenge by the applicable taxing authority. Consequently, changes in our assumptions and judgments could materially affect amounts recognized related to income tax uncertainties and may affect our results of operations or financial position. We believe our assumptions for estimates continue to be reasonable, although actual results may have a positive or negative material impact on the balances of such tax positions. Historically, the variation of estimates to actual results is immaterial and material variation is not expected in the future.
Judgments and Uncertainties. We consider the probability of future taxable income and our historical profitability, among other factors, in assessing the amount of the valuation allowance. Significant judgment is involved in this determination, including projections of future taxable income. Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits contains uncertainties because management is required to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various filing positions. Our effective income tax rate is also affected by changes in tax law, our level of earnings and the results of tax audits.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions. Although we believe that the judgments and estimates used are reasonable, changes in estimates and assumptions could materially affect the amount or timing of valuation allowances.
Newly Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are non-GAAP measures. We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. However, we present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, which are not recognized financial measures under GAAP, because we believe they assist investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are helpful in highlighting trends in our operating results, while other measures can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure and allocation, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments and acquisitions.
In addition, we utilize Adjusted EBITDA in certain calculations under our debt agreements. Our debt agreements permit us to make certain additional adjustments in calculating Consolidated EBITDA, such as projected net cost savings, which are not reflected in the Adjusted EBITDA data presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We may in the future reflect such permitted adjustments in our calculations of Adjusted EBITDA.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties in their evaluation of companies, many of which present an Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA margin measure when reporting their results. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies in our industry or across different industries.
We also include information concerning Adjusted EBITDA margin, which is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales. We present Adjusted EBITDA margin because it is used by management as a performance measure to judge the level of Adjusted EBITDA that is generated from net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have their limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
The following is a reconciliation of our net income to Adjusted EBITDA:
___________________________________
(a)Represents changes in the fair value of stock appreciation rights.
(b)Represents changes in the fair values of noncontrolling interests.
(c)Represents non-cash equity-based compensation expense related to the issuance of share-based awards.
(d)Represents severance expenses and other costs permitted in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA under the ABL Facility and the Term Loan Facility, including certain unusual, nonrecurring costs and credits due to COVID-19.
(e)Represents costs related to acquisitions paid to third parties.
(f)Includes gains from the sale of assets and impairment of assets resulting from restructuring plans to close certain facilities.
(g)Represents the non-cash cost of sales impact of acquisition accounting adjustments to increase inventory to its estimated fair value.
(h)Represents the mark-to-market adjustments for derivative financial instruments.
(i)Represents costs paid to third-party advisors related to secondary offerings of our common stock.
(j)Represents costs paid to third-party advisors related to debt refinancing activities.