ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to FS Development Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on June 25, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “business combination”). Our sponsor is FS Development Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (our “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our Initial Public Offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) became effective on August 11, 2020. On August 14, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 12,075,000 shares of Class A common stock, including the issuance of 1,575,000 shares of Class A Common Stock as a result of the underwriter’s exercise in full of its over-allotment option, (each, a “Public Share” and collectively, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per share, generating gross proceeds of approximately $120.8 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $7.1 million, inclusive of approximately $4.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 441,500 shares of Class A common stock (each, a “Private Placement Share” and collectively, the “Private Placement Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share to our Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $4.4 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Private Placement, and the over-allotment option on August 14, 2020, approximately $120.8 million ($10.00 per share) of the net proceeds of the sale of the shares in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the Trust Account as described below.
Our certificate of incorporation provides that, other than the withdrawal of interest to pay franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 to pay dissolution expenses), none of the funds held in the Trust Account will be released until the earliest of: (i) the completion of the initial business combination; (ii) the redemption of any Public Shares sold in the Initial Public Offering that have been properly tendered in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our certificate of incorporation to affect the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of such Public Shares if we have not consummated an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or August 14, 2022 (the “Combination Period”); or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the Public Shares if we are unable to complete an initial business combination within the Combination Period. The proceeds deposited in the Trust Account could become subject to the claims of our creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of our public stockholders.
Business Combination
On February 5, 2021, we consummated the previously announced Business Combination. In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement, at the Effective Time of the Merger (i) all shares of Old Gemini Stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time, whether vested or unvested, was converted into the right to receive their pro rata portion of the 17,942,274 shares of Common Stock issued as Merger Consideration, provided that 2,150,000 shares of Common Stock are being held in escrow for a period of 12 months to satisfy any indemnification obligations of Old Gemini under the Merger Agreement; (ii) each option exercisable for Old Gemini Stock that was outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time was assumed and continues in full force and effect on the same terms and conditions as were previously applicable to such options, subject to adjustments to exercise price and number of shares Common Stock issuable upon exercise based on the final conversion ratio calculated in accordance with the Merger Agreement, and (iii) 4,264,341 shares of Common Stock were reserved for issuance under the newly adopted 2021 Plan.
In connection with the Closing, the PIPE Investors subscribed for an aggregate of 9,506,000 shares of Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $95,060,000.
In connection with the Business Combination, 100 shares of Class A common Stock of FSDC were redeemed at a per share purchase price of approximately $10.00. Upon the Closing, Gemini had 42,998,664 shares of Common Stock outstanding.
As a result of the Business Combination, FSDC was renamed Gemini Therapeutics, Inc., and Old Gemini became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gemini.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.2 million in our operating bank account, approximately $5,000 of interest income available in the Trust Account to pay the Company’s franchise and income tax obligations and working capital of approximately $740,000. Further, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through the $25,000 capital contribution to purchase founder shares by our Sponsor, the loan proceeds under a promissory note of $200,000 from the Sponsor to cover the Company’s offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. The balance of the promissory note was fully repaid on August 14, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest earned on cash equivalents held in Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from June 25, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $812,000, which consisted of approximately $717,000 in general and administrative expenses and approximately $100,000 of franchise tax expense, which was partially offset by approximately $5,000 of interest earned on cash equivalents held in the Trust Account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares and Private Placement Shares
On June 30, 2020, our Sponsor purchased 2,875,000 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, (the “Founder Shares”) for an aggregate price of $25,000. On July 24, 2020, our Sponsor transferred 30,000 Founder Shares to each of its independent director nominees at their original per-share purchase price, for an aggregate of 90,000 Founder Shares transferred. On August 11, 2020, we effected a 1:1.05 stock split of the Class B common stock, resulting in our Sponsor holding an aggregate of 2,928,750 Founder Shares and there being an aggregate of 3,018,750 Founder Shares outstanding. All shares and the associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the aforementioned stock split. Our Sponsor agreed to forfeit up to 393,750 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriter, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock after the Initial Public Offering (excluding the Private Placement Shares). On August 14, 2020, the underwriter exercised the over-allotment option; thus, these Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 441,500 Private Placement Shares, at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $4.4 million.
The Sponsor and FSDC’s officers and directors (the “Initial Stockholders”) agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares or Private Placement Shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (ii) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction after the initial Business Combination that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their Class A common stock for cash, securities or other property; except to certain permitted transferees and under certain circumstances. Any permitted transferees will be subject to the same restrictions and other agreements of the Initial Stockholders with respect to any Founder Shares or Private Placement Shares. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if (1) the closing price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination or (2) if the Company consummates a transaction after the initial business combination which results in the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their shares for cash, securities or other property, the Founder Shares and Private Placement Shares will be released from the lock-up.
Related Party Loans
On June 30, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $200,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note. This promissory note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. The Company borrowed $200,000 under the promissory, and fully repaid it on August 14, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required as Working Capital Loans. If we complete an initial business combination, we will repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post initial business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. To date, we have no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Forward Purchase Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, an affiliate of the Sponsor entered into a subscription agreement to purchase 1,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock at a purchase price of $10 per share in a private placement that would occur concurrently with the closing of the Merger (the “Closing”). The affiliate of the Sponsor has assigned to the Sponsor its obligation to purchase its shares under the subscription agreement so that the Sponsor will purchase 1,500,000 of such shares at the Closing. At the time of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor had originally indicated an interest to purchase up to $25.0 million of shares in connection with the initial business combination. This purchase of 1,500,000 shares represents the Sponsor’s allocation of shares in the PIPE Investment. In addition, the Initial Stockholders entered into the Parent Support Agreement in which they agreed to vote, at any meeting of the stockholders of the Company, and in any action by written consent of the stockholders of the Company, all of such holders’ Class A common stock and Class B common stock (i) in favor of the Merger Agreement, each of the Parent Proposals (as defined in the Merger Agreement) and the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement and the Parent Support Agreement, and (ii) in favor of any other matter reasonably necessary to the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement and the approval of the Parent Proposals. Also, in connection with the Closing, the Sponsor and certain other stockholders will enter into a Voting Agreement with us, and the Initial Stockholders and certain other stockholders will enter into a Registration Rights Agreement with us that will replace the existing registration rights agreement in its entirety. For a description of the Voting Agreement and the Registration Rights Agreement see Item 13 “Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence” in this report.
Administrative Services Agreement
We have entered into an agreement that provides that, commencing on the date that the Company’s securities are first listed on Nasdaq and continuing until the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination and our liquidation, we will pay our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the Company’s management team. Additionally, our Sponsor, and our officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our Sponsor, our officers or directors, or their affiliates.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The Initial Stockholders are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The Initial Stockholders will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements. In connection with the Closing, the Initial Stockholders and certain other stockholders will enter into a Registration Rights Agreement with us that will replace the existing registration rights agreement in its entirety. See the description of the Registration Rights Agreement elsewhere in this report.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per share, or approximately $2.4 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per share, or approximately $4.2 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in interest earned from investments held in Trust Account in the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case the Company uses NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, 11,226,874 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares of common stock outstanding for the period.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock subject to redemption is calculated by dividing the interest earned from cash equivalents held in the Trust Account of approximately $4,500, net of applicable franchise taxes of approximately $4,500 for the period from June 25, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock subject to redemption that is outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock and non-redeemable Class A common stock for the period from June 25, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing the general and administration expenses of approximately $717,000 and franchise taxes of approximately $95,000, resulting in a net loss of approximately $812,000, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock and non-redeemable Class A common stock outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.