Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that contain the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends” and similar words and phrases. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results projected in any forward-looking statement. In addition to the factors specifically noted in the forward-looking statements, other important factors, risks and uncertainties that could result in those differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed under Item 1A to Part I “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. The forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this Annual Report, and we assume no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Investors should consult all of the information set forth in this report and the other information set forth from time to time in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including our reports on Forms 10-Q and 8-K.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are comprised of Genie Retail Energy ("GRE"), Genie Retail Energy International ("GRE International") and Genie Energy Services ("GES").
GRE owns and operates retail energy providers ("REPs"), including IDT Energy, Residents Energy, Town Square Energy ("TSE"), Southern Federal and Mirabito Natural Gas. GRE's REP businesses resell electricity and natural gas primarily to residential and small business customers, with the majority of the customers in the Midwestern and Eastern United States and Texas.
GRE International holds the Company's REPs that serves retail customers in the United Kingdom under the name Orbit Energy and in Japan. It holds 92.5% controlling interest in Lumo Energia Ojy ("Lumo Finland"), a REP serving residential customers in Finland and 100.0% of Lumo Energi AB ("Lumo Sweden"), which serves retail customers in Sweden. In October 2020, the Company acquired the remaining 23.0% interest in Shoreditch which increased the Company's interest to 100%.
GES holds Diversegy, a retail energy advisory and brokerage company that serves commercial and industrial customers throughout U.S. and our 60.0% controlling interest in Prism Solar. Prism is a solar solutions company that is engaged in solar project marketing, solar solution consultation, installation design and project management services.
In December 2020, Afek Oil & Gas Ltd., the oil and gas exploration project in the Golan Heights in Northern Israel (“Afek”), completed the final planned testing on one of its completed exploratory wells. The test was conducted as prior analysis indicated that a zone within the well potentially contained evidence of hydrocarbons at levels sufficient to warrant additional testing. After analyzing the results of the test and subsequent activity, as no traces of light oil were found. As a result, Afek ceased its exploratory operations. The remaining assets and liabilities and the results of operations are included within the corporate segment for reporting purposes.
As part of our ongoing business development efforts, we seek out new opportunities, which may include complementary operations or businesses that reflect horizontal or vertical expansion from our current operations. Some of these potential opportunities are considered briefly and others are examined in further depth. In particular, we seek out acquisitions to expand the geographic scope and size of our REP businesses.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID 19)
Starting in the first quarter 2020, the world and the United States experienced the unprecedented impacts of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the impacts of COVID-19 are evident in several key aspects of our business operations and the corresponding financial impact has been mixed. Our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, increased by $64.0 million equivalent to 20.3%.
Our customer base is predominantly residential, so we benefited from the increased demand for electricity when customers are working from their homes. On the other hand, like other retail energy providers, we suspended our face-to-face customer acquisition programs in March 2020 as public health measures were implemented to combat COVID-19, resulting in a decrease in gross meter acquisitions and a flat growth in the U.S. domestic meters served. The reduction in gross meter acquisitions decreased our customer acquisition expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Churn the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to 2019, in part, due to our competitors suspending face to face marketing programs.
We did not experience any significant changes in our workforce composition and were able to implement our business continuity plans with no significant impact to our ability to maintain our operations. We continue to maintain strong physical and cybersecurity measures in order to both serve our operational needs with a remote workforce and to ensure that we continue to provide services to our customers. We face challenges due to the need to operate with a remote workforce and are continuing to address those challenges so as to minimize the impact on our ability to operate.
Beginning the third quarter of 2020, public health restrictions have begun to ease in some of our markets which allow us to resume face-to-face sales and marketing. Looking ahead, we expect to see a modest rebound in meter acquisition, however, any reversal of the easing of restrictions would impact that expected rebound.
There are many uncertainties regarding the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are closely monitoring those impacts of on all aspects of its business, including how it will impact our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners. We are currently unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results due to the complexities of the impacts and numerous uncertainties that are beyond the Company's control. We expect to continue to assess the evolving impact of COVID-19 on our business and assets and intend to make adjustments accordingly.
Genie Retail Energy
GRE operates REPs that resell electricity and/or natural gas to residential and small business customers in Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida, Texas, Rhode Island, and Washington, D.C. GRE’s revenues represented approximately 80.5% and 90.9% of our consolidated revenues in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively
GRE’s cost of revenues consists primarily of natural gas and electricity purchased for resale. Certain of GRE’s REPs are party to an Amended and Restated Preferred Supplier Agreement with BP Energy Company, or BP, which is in effect through November 30, 2023. Those REPs ability to purchase electricity and natural gas under this agreement is subject to satisfaction of certain conditions including the maintenance of certain covenants.
As an operator of REPs, GRE does not own electrical power generation, transmission, or distribution facilities, or natural gas production, pipeline or distribution facilities. Instead, GRE’s REPs contract with various pipeline and distribution companies for natural gas pipeline, storage and transportation services, and utilizes NYISO, PJM, ISO New England and MISO for electric transmission and distribution. GRE’s cost of revenues includes scheduling costs, ISO fees, pipeline costs and utility service charges for the purchase of these services.
For risk management purposes, GRE’s REPs utilize put and call options and swaps as hedges against unfavorable fluctuations in market prices of electricity and natural gas and to reduce exposure from price fluctuations. The put and call options and swaps are recorded at fair value as a current asset or liability and any changes in fair value are recorded in cost of revenues. The impact of these options and swaps on cost of revenues is relatively small in comparison to the purchases of gas and electricity for resale.
The electricity transmission and distribution operators perform real-time load balancing for each of the electrical power grids in which GRE’s REPs operate. Similarly, the utility or the local distribution company, or LDC, performs load balancing for each of the natural gas markets in which GRE’s REPs operate. Load balancing ensures that the amount of electricity and natural gas that GRE’s REPs purchase is equal to the amount necessary to service their customers’ demands at any specific point in time. GRE’s REPs manage the differences between the actual electricity and natural gas demands of its customers and its bulk or block purchases by buying and selling in the spot market, and through monthly cash settlements and/or adjustments to futures deliveries in accordance with the load balancing performed by utilities, LDCs, and electricity transmission and distribution operators. Suppliers and the LDC’s charge or credit GRE for balancing the electricity and natural gas purchased and sold for its account.
Local utilities generally meter and deliver electricity and natural gas to GRE’s REPs' customers. The local utilities also provide billing and collection services on GRE’s REPs behalf for most of customers and certain local utilities offer purchase of receivables, or POR, programs. GRE’s REPs receive the proceeds less the utility’s fees for purchase of receivables billing and other ancillary services, where applicable.
Volatility in the electricity and natural gas markets affects the wholesale cost of the electricity and natural gas that GRE’s REPs sell to customers. GRE’s REPs may not always choose to pass along increases in costs to their customers for various reasons including competitive pressures and for overall customer satisfaction. In addition, GRE’s REPs offer fixed rate products or guaranteed pricing and may be unable to change their sell rates offered to fixed rate and guaranteed pricing customers in response to volatility in the prices of the underlying commodities. This can adversely affect GRE’s gross margins and results of operations. Alternatively, increases in GRE’s REPs rates charged to customers may lead to increased customer churn.
GRE’s REPs’ selling expense consists primarily of sales commissions paid to independent agents and marketing costs, which are the primary costs associated with the acquisition of customers. Selling, general and administrative expense includes compensation, benefits, utility fees for billing and collection, professional fees, rent and other administrative costs.
Seasonality and Weather
The weather and the seasons, among other things, affect GRE’s REPs’ revenues. Weather conditions have a significant impact on the demand for natural gas used for heating and electricity used for heating and cooling. Typically, colder winters increase demand for natural gas and electricity, and hotter summers increase demand for electricity. Milder winters and/or summers have the opposite effect. Unseasonable temperatures in other periods may also impact demand levels. Potential changes in global climate may produce, among other possible conditions, unusual variations in temperature and weather patterns, resulting in unusual weather conditions, more intense, frequent and extreme weather events and other natural disasters. Some climatologists believe that these extreme weather events will become more common and more extreme which will have a greater impact on our operations. Natural gas revenues typically increase in the first quarter due to increased heating demands and electricity revenues typically increase in the third quarter due to increased air conditioning use. Approximately 47.7% and 46.9% of GRE’s natural gas revenues for the relevant years were generated in the first quarter of 2020 and 2019, respectively, when demand for heating was highest. Although the demand for electricity is not as seasonal as natural gas (due, in part, to usage of electricity for both heating and cooling), approximately 31.8 % of GRE’s electricity revenues for 2020 and 2019, respectively, were generated in the third quarters of those years. GRE’s REPs’ revenues and operating income are subject to material seasonal variations, and the interim financial results are not necessarily indicative of the estimated financial results for the full year.
Concentration of Customers and Associated Credit Risk
GRE’s REPs reduce their customer credit risk by participating in purchase of receivable programs for a majority of their receivables. In addition to providing billing and collection services, some utility companies purchase those REPs’ receivables and assume all credit risk without recourse to those REPs for those purchased receivables. GRE’s REPs primary credit risk with respect to those purchased receivables is therefore nonpayment by the utility companies. Certain of the utility companies represent significant portions of our consolidated revenues and consolidated gross trade accounts receivable balance during certain periods, and such concentrations increase our risk associated with nonpayment by those utility companies.
There was no single utility company or customer that accounted for 10% or greater of our consolidated revenues and gross trade accounts receivable for the year ended December 31, 2020 and at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Purchase of Receivable
Utility companies offer purchase of receivable, or POR, programs in most of the service territories in which we operate. GRE’s REPs reduce their customer credit risk by participating in POR programs for a majority of their receivables. In addition to providing billing and collection services, utility companies purchase those REPs’ receivables and assume all credit risk without recourse to those REPs. GRE’s REPs’ primary credit risk is therefore nonpayment by the utility companies. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the associated cost was approximately 1.0% of GRE's revenue. At December 31, 2020, 87.0% of GRE’s net accounts receivables were under a POR program.
Class Action Lawsuits
Although GRE endeavors to maintain best sales and marketing practices, such practices have been the subject of certain class action lawsuits.
On October 5, 2018, named plaintiffs Scott Mackey and Daniel Hernandez filed a putative class action complaint against IDT Energy in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois alleging violations of the Telephone Consumer Protection , 47 U.S.C. § 227 et seq. On November 17, 2020, IDT Energy settled with the named for plaintiffs in exchange for a minimal payment and the case has been dismissed.
On February 18, 2020, named Plaintiff Danelle Davis filed a putative class action complaint against Residents Energy and GRE in United States District of New Jersey alleging violations of the Telephone Consumer Protection Act, 47 U.S.C § 227 et seq. Residents Energy denies allegations in the complaint and plans to vigorously defend this action. Based upon the Company's preliminary assessment of this matter, a loss is not considered probable, nor is the amount of loss if any, estimable as of December 31, 2020. On or around October 9, 2020, Residents Energy filed a preliminary motion to dismiss one of the counts in the complaint, and to dismiss Genie Retail Energy as a named defendant.
See Notes 16, Legal and Regulatory Proceedings, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference.
Agency and Regulatory Proceedings
From time to time, the Company responds to inquiries or requests for information or materials from public utility commissions or other governmental regulatory or law enforcement agencies related to investigations under statutory or regulatory schemes. The Company cannot predict whether any of those matters will lead to claims or enforcement actions or whether the Company and the regulatory parties will enter into settlements before a formal claim is made. See Notes 16, Legal and Regulatory Proceedings, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated by reference, for further detail on agency and regulatory proceedings.
New York Public Service Commission Orders
In December 2017, the New York Public Service Commission (“PSC”) held an evidentiary hearing to assess the retail energy market in New York. On December 12, 2019, following the completion of post-hearing briefings in the proceedings, the PSC issued orders adopting the changes to the New York retail energy market, effective April 16, 2020 (“2020 Orders”). The 2020 Orders limit the types of the services energy retailer marketers may offer new customers or renewals, in terms of pricing for non-renewable commodities and renewable product offerings. Although the Company is working to ensure that its products and services are fully compatible with the 2020 Orders, such compliance may adversely impact customer acquisition and renewal revenue and profitability. The Company is evaluating its options, both by itself and in tandem with other industry participants, to challenge or petition for additional clarity and changes to the 2020 Orders. There is insufficient basis to deem any loss probable or to assess the amount of any possible loss based on the changes instituted by the 2020 Orders. As of December 31, 2020, New York represented 19.4% of GRE’s total meters served and 14.7% of the total residential customer equivalents (“RCEs”) of GRE’s customer base. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross revenue from New York was $56.7 million and $63.2 million, respectively.
An RCE represents a natural gas customer with annual consumption of 100 mmbtu or an electricity customer with annual consumption of 10 MWh. Because different customers have different rates of energy consumption, RCEs are an industry standard metric for evaluating the consumption profile of a given retail customer base.
State of Connecticut Public Utilities Regulatory Authority
On September 19, 2018, the State of Connecticut Public Utilities Regulatory Authority (“PURA”) commenced an investigation into Town Square following customer complaints of allegedly misleading and deceptive sales practices on the part of Town Square. The Connecticut Office of Consumer Counsel has joined in the investigation. Although Town Square denies any basis for those complaints and any wrongdoing on its part, it is cooperating with the investigation and responding to subpoenas for discovery. On June 17, 2020, the PURA or Authority notified Town Square that it was advancing its investigation by assigning Prosecutorial (PRO) staff for the purpose of investigating Town Square’s compliance with licensed electric supplier billing, marketing, and licensing requirements, and, if appropriate, facilitating settlement discussions among the parties that contains, but is not limited to, an appropriate civil penalty, extensive retraining of the supplier’s third-party agents, and retention of all sales calls with continued auditing. If a settlement is not achieved and PRO staff believe the Authority should take further action regarding alleged non-compliance, the Authority requests that PRO staff petition the Authority setting forth its recommendations citing to supporting facts and law. As of December 31, 2020, Town Square’s Connecticut customer base represented 11.6% of GRE’s total meters served and 12.8% of the total residential customer equivalents of GRE’s customer base. As of December 31, 2020, no claims or demands have been made against Town Square by either agency, and there is insufficient basis to deem the loss probable or to the assess the amount of any possible loss.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the enforcement division of PURA contacted Residents Energy concerning customer complaints received in connection with alleged door-to-door marketing activities in violation of various rules and regulations, including a ban on door-to-door activities during the pertinent time period as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Residents Energy denies any allegations of wrongdoing. In January and February of 2021, Residents Energy responded to the limited information requests and discovery made by the enforcement division. On March 12, 2021, the enforcement division filed a motion against Resident Energy with the adjudicating body of PURA, seeking the assessment of $1.5 million in penalties, along with a suspension of license for eighteen months, auditing of marketing practices upon reinstatement and an invitation for settlement discussions. As noted above, Residents Energy denies any wrongdoing, and there is insufficient basis to deem or assess the probably amount of any loss. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross revenues from sales in Connecticut were $38.0 million and $35.6 million, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, gross revenues from sales in Connecticut were $38.0 million and $35.6 million, respectively.
State of Illinois Office of the Attorney General
In response to complaints that IDT Energy enrolled consumers without their express consent and misrepresented the amount of savings those consumers would receive, the Office of the Attorney General of the State of Illinois (“IL AG”) has been investigating the marketing practices of IDT Energy and has alleged violations of the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act, 815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. and the Illinois Telephone Solicitations Act, 815 ILCS 413/1 et seq. Shortly thereafter, the Illinois Commerce Commission ("IL ICC") commenced a similar investigation. Although IDT Energy denies any wrongdoing in connection with those allegations, the parties (including IL ICC) settled the matter pursuant to a court approved consent decree that includes restitution payments in the amount of $3.0 million, temporary suspension of all marking activities directed at new customers through December 31, 2020, and implementation of various compliance and reporting procedures.
In third quarter of 2018, the Company recorded a liability of $3.0 million recorded as a reduction of electricity revenues in the consolidated statement of operations. As of December 31, 2020, Illinois represented 2.5% of GRE’s total meters served and 1.2% of the total residential customer equivalents of GRE’s customer base. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, IDT Energy’s gross revenues from sales in Illinois were $7.0 million and $10.1 million, respectively.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Critical accounting policies are those that require application of management’s most subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our critical accounting policies include those related to the allowance for doubtful accounts, goodwill and income taxes. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from Sale of Electricity and Natural Gas
Revenue from the single performance obligation to deliver a unit of electricity and/or natural gas is recognized as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit. Variable quantities in requirements contracts are considered to be options for additional goods and services because the customer has a current contractual right to choose the amount of additional distinct goods. GRE and Genie Japan records unbilled revenues for the estimated amount customers will be billed for services rendered from the time meters were last read to the end of the respective accounting period. The unbilled revenue is estimated each month based on available per day usage data, the number of unbilled days in the period and historical trends. Revenues from Shoreditch are accrued based on industry data flows and National Grid data. Revenue calculated from sale of electricity and natural gas includes an estimate of the quantity in units of electricity or natural gas supplied to customers by profile class. The estimate is made using historical consumption patterns, industry estimated consumption rates, and takes into consideration industry reconciliation processes. The estimated revenue is superseded when customer meter reads are received; at which point estimates are adjusted to actual usage.
Utility companies offer purchase of receivable, or POR, programs in most of the service territories in which we operate, and GRE’s REPs participate in POR programs for a majority of their receivables. We estimate variable consideration related to our REPs' rebate programs using the expected value method and a portfolio approach. Our estimates related to rebate programs are based on the terms of the rebate program, the customer’s historical electricity and natural gas consumption, the customer’s rate plan, and a churn factor. Taxes that are imposed on our sales and collected from customers are excluded from the transaction price.
We recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer as an asset if it expects the benefit of those costs to be received in a period longer than one year. We determined that certain sales commissions to acquire customers meet the requirements to be capitalized. For GRE, we apply a practical expedient to expense costs as incurred for sales commissions to acquire customers as the period would have been one year or less. Incremental customer acquisition cost GRE International entities are capitalized and amortized over a range of eighteen and twenty-four months. These costs and the related amortization are recorded within sales and marketing expenses. Total capitalized customer acquisition costs to obtain a contract was $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. At December 31, 2020, capitalized customer acquisition cost of $0.6 million and $0.2 million were included in other current assets and other assets, respectively, on the consolidated balance sheet. The Company continuously monitors its customer relationship periods to ensure compliance with the application of the standard.
Revenues from Sale of Solar Panels
Our revenue from sales of solar panels are recognized at a point in time following the transfer of control of the solar panels to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. For sales contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, such as the shipment or delivery of solar modules, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on relative standalone selling prices, or estimates of such prices, and recognize the related revenue as control of each individual product is transferred to the customer, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligations.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses that result from the inability or unwillingness of our customers to make required payments. The allowance for doubtful accounts was $8.8 million at December 31, 2020 and $2.6 million at December 31, 2019. Our allowance is determined based on known troubled accounts, historical experience and other currently available evidence. Our estimates of recoverability of customer accounts may change due to new developments, changes in assumptions or changes in our strategy, which may impact our allowance for doubtful accounts balance. We continually assess the likelihood of potential amounts or ranges of recoverability and adjust our allowance accordingly, however, actual collections and write-offs of trade accounts receivable may materially differ from our estimates.
Acquisitions
The purchase price of each acquisition we consummate is allocated to the net assets acquired based on estimates of their fair values at the date of the acquisition. Any purchase price in excess of these net assets is recorded as goodwill. The allocation of purchase price in certain cases may be subject to revision based on the final determination of fair values during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date. Results of operations of acquired companies are included in our results of operations as of the respective acquisition dates.
The accounting for business combinations requires estimates and judgment as to expectations for future cash flows of the acquired business, and the allocation of those cash flows to identifiable intangible assets, in determining the estimated fair value for assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The fair values assigned to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on management’s estimates and assumptions, as well as other information compiled by management, including valuations that utilize customary valuation procedures and techniques. If the actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used in these estimates, the amounts recorded in the financial statements could result in a possible impairment of the intangible assets and goodwill, require acceleration of the amortization expense of finite lived intangible assets, or the recognition of additional consideration which would be expensed.
Goodwill
Our goodwill balances were $25.9 million and $12.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Goodwill is not amortized since it is deemed to have an indefinite life. It is reviewed annually (or more frequently under various conditions) for impairment using a fair value approach.
Goodwill is the excess of the acquisition cost of businesses over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets are not amortized. These assets are reviewed annually (or more frequently under various conditions) for impairment using a fair value approach.
The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using discounted cash flow methodologies, as well as considering third party market value indicators. Calculating the fair value of the reporting units requires significant estimates and assumptions by management. Should the estimates and assumptions regarding the fair value of the reporting units prove to be incorrect, the Company may be required to record impairments to its goodwill in future periods and such impairments could be material.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1. In reviewing goodwill for impairment, we have the option, for any or all of our reporting units that carry goodwill - to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (i.e. greater than 50%) that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determines that an impairment is more likely than not, we then required to perform the quantitative impairment test, otherwise no further analysis is required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to quantitative impairment test. The ultimate outcome of the goodwill impairment review for a reporting unit should be the same whether we choose to perform the qualitative assessment or proceeds directly to the quantitative impairment test. In 2020, we elected to perform a qualitative analysis for our GRE and GRE International reporting units as of October 1, 2019. The Company determined, after performing a qualitative analysis, that there was no evidence that it is more likely than not that the fair value of any identified reporting unit was less that the carrying amounts, therefore, it was not necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. We determined, after performing qualitative analysis, that there was no evidence that it is more likely than not that the fair value of any identified reporting unit was less that the carrying amounts, therefore, it was not necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. We performed quantitative impairment analysis for Prism reporting unit. As a result of this test, we concluded that the carrying value Prism reporting unit exceeded its fair value of reporting unit including the allocated goodwill. Therefore, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $0.4 million. There is no goodwill allocated to other reporting units as of October 1, 2019.
The determination of the fair value of our reporting units is based on an income approach, that utilizes discounted cash flows for each reporting unit and other Level 3 inputs as specified in the fair value hierarchy in ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosure. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on the present value of the most recent cash flow projections for the reporting unit as of the date of the analysis and calculate a terminal value utilizing a terminal growth rate. The significant assumptions under this approach include, among others: income projections, which are dependent on future sales, new customers, customer behavior, competitor pricing, operating expenses, the discount rate, and the terminal growth rate. The cash flows used to determine fair value are dependent on a number of significant management assumptions such as the expectations of future performance and the expected future economic environment, which are partly based upon our historical experience. The estimates are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future results. Additionally, the discount rate and the terminal growth rate are based on judgment of the rates that would be utilized by a hypothetical market participant.
Income Taxes
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowance are impacted by events and transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with special and non-routine items. Assessment of the appropriate amount and classification of income taxes is dependent on several factors, including estimates of the timing and realization of deferred income tax assets, the results of Internal Revenue Service audits of our federal income tax returns, and changes in tax laws or regulations.
The valuation allowance on our deferred income tax assets was $15.2 million and $44.8 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We employ a tax strategy that enables us to currently deduct losses from our foreign subsidiaries against our profitable U.S. operations and we assess the realizability of deferred taxes quarterly. Because of our current projections, we concluded that we meet the criteria of more likely than not in order to utilize our deferred federal income tax assets in the foreseeable future and have released the valuation on the assets that we will utilize.
We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that, a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume that the appropriate taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information will examine the position. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured to determine the amount of tax benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Differences between tax positions taken in a tax return and amounts recognized in the financial statements will generally result in one or more of the following: an increase in a liability for income taxes payable, a reduction of an income tax refund receivable, a reduction in a deferred tax asset, or an increase in a deferred tax liability. We review and adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits based on our best estimate and judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at each reporting date. To the extent that the outcome of these tax positions is different from the amounts recorded, such differences may affect income tax expense and actual tax payments.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Information regarding new accounting pronouncement are included in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We evaluate the performance of our operating business segments based primarily on income (loss) from operations. Accordingly, the income and expense line items below income (loss) from operations are only included in our discussion of the consolidated results of operations.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Genie Retail Energy Segment
nm - not meaningful
Revenues. GRE’s electricity revenues increased in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in electricity revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 was the result of increase in electricity consumption partially offset by decrease in the average price charged to customers. Electricity consumption by GRE's REPs' customers increased 18.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in electricity consumption reflected an increase in average electricity consumption per meter, which increased by 12.3% in 2020 compared to 2019 and a 5.7% increase in average number of meters served. The increase in per meter consumption reflects a sustained focus on the acquisition of higher consumption meters, warmer weather during summer of 2020 compared to 2019 and increased residential electricity consumption resulting from COVID-19 "stay-at-home" orders. The average rate per kilowatt hour sold decreased by 7.5% in 2020 compared to 2019.
GRE’s natural gas revenues decreased in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in natural gas revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 was a result of decreases in average meters served, natural gas consumptions, average rate per therm sold and average consumption per meter. Natural gas consumption of GRE's REP's customers decreased by 6.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. Average meters served, decreased 3.6% in 2020 compared to 2019 and average consumption per meter decreased by 3.1%. The average rate per therm sold decreased 9.9% in 2020 compared to 2019.
Other revenue in 2020 included commission from selling third-party products to customers.
Gross meter acquisitions in 2020 were 212,000 compared to 308,000 in 2019.
The decreases reflect reduced sales activity in the second quarter of 2020 as a result of COVID-19 related public health restrictions on certain sales channels. Gross meter acquisitions in 2019 includes the impact of a municipal aggregation deal in New Jersey which added approximately 35,000 meters. The number of meters served was relatively flat at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. In 2020, average monthly churn decreased to 4.4% compared to 5.3% in 2019. The reduction in churn reflects the impact of a shift in our customer mix related to channel, product and geography as well as continuing increase in the ratio of fixed rate to variable rate customers, where fixed rate customers generally have lower rates of churn. The reduction in churn also reflects decreased sales activity by competitors as a result of COVID-19 related restrictions.
The average rates of annualized energy consumption, as measured by residential customer equivalents, or RCEs, are presented in the chart below. An RCE represents a natural gas customer with annual consumption of 100 mmbtu or an electricity customer with annual consumption of 10 MWh. Because different customers have different rates of energy consumption, RCEs are an industry standard metric for evaluating the consumption profile of a given retail customer base.
RCEs increased 9.1% at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily due to our recent focus on adding higher consumption meters, warmer than average weather in 2020 and COVID-19 driven shift to work-from-home which increased per-meter consumption.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin Percentage. GRE’s cost of revenues and gross margin percentage were as follows:
Cost of revenues for electricity increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily because of increases in electricity consumption partially offset by a decrease in the average unit cost of electricity. Electricity consumption by GRE's REPs' customers increased 18.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. The average unit cost of electricity decreased by 8.0% in 2020 compared to 2019. Gross margin on electricity sales increased in 2020 compared to 2019 because the average rate charged to customers decreased less than the decrease in the average unit cost of electricity.
Cost of revenues for natural gas decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily because of decreases in total natural gas consumption and average unit cost of natural gas. Natural gas consumption by GRE’s REPs’ customers decreased by 6.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. The average unit cost of natural gas decreased 20.9% in 2020 compared to 2019. Gross margin on natural gas sales increased in 2020 compared to 2019 because the decrease in the average rate charged to customers decreased more than the average unit cost of natural gas.
Selling, General and Administrative. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to decreases in marketing and customer acquisition costs and employee-related costs partially offset by increase in provision for doubtful accounts and costs related to POR programs. Marketing and customer acquisition expenses decreased by $4.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to reduced pace of customer acquisition activities related to COVID-19 related public health restrictions. Employee-related expenses slightly decreased by $0.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a reduction in the number of employees. Provision for doubtful accounts and costs related to POR programs increased by $2.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of entrance to non-POR markets (which led to an increase in the provision for doubtful accounts) and increase in revenue. As a percentage of GRE’s total revenues, selling, general and administrative expense increased from 18.6% in 2020 to 17.0% in 2019.
GRE International
GRE International holds our stakes in REPs outside of North America. These businesses currently include our stake in Shoreditch, which operates as Orbit Energy in the U.K., Genie Japan, and our controlling stake in Lumo, which operates in certain portions of Scandinavia. In the second quarter of 2020, we started commercial operations in Sweden through a wholly owned entity.
On October 8, 2020, the Company acquired 23.0% interest in Shoreditch that it did not previously own. The results of operations of GRE International include the accounts of Shoreditch from the date of acquisition through December 31, 2020.
Prior to the acquisition of the remaining 23.0% of Shoreditch, we accounted for our investment in Shoreditch under the equity method of accounting. Under this method we recorded our share in the net income or loss of Shoreditch. Therefore, revenue generated, and expenses incurred were not reflected in our consolidated revenue and expenses. The accounts of Shoreditch are consolidated to the consolidated financial statements after the acquisition.
nm - not meaningful
Meters served by GRE International's REPs, including Shoreditch, increased to 195,000 at December 31, 2020 from 127,000 at December 31, 2019 primarily as a result growth in Shoreditch's and Lumo Finlands's customer bases. The Company also started the commercial operations of Lumo Sweden and Genie Japan in second quarter of 2020 and second quarter of 2019, respectively.
RCEs of GRE International's REPs, including Shoreditch at December 31, 2020 increased to 103,000 from 65,000 at December 31, 2019 primarily from the increase in meters served as discussed above.
Revenue and Cost of Revenue. GRE International's revenues and cost of revenue increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the consolidation of Shoreditch in October 2020, increase in meters served in Lumo Finland and the start of commercial operations of Lumo Sweden and Japan in the second quarter of 2020 and 2019, respectively. Shoreditch increased GREI's revenue and cost of revenue in 2020 by $22.4 million and $19.8 million, respectively. Meters served by Lumo Finland increased by 73.5% at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the consolidation of Shoreditch in October 2020, increase in activity in level of operations in Lumo Finland and Japan and start of commercial operations of Lumo Sweden. Shoreditch increased GREI's selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 by $4.9 million.
Equity in net loss of joint venture. Prior to the acquisition of the controlling interest in Shoreditch in October 2020, we accounted our ownership interest in Shoreditch using the equity method since we had the ability to exercise significant influence over Shoreditch's operating and financial matters, although we did not control Shoreditch. As of October 7, 2020, the book value the Company's investment in Shoreditch was reduced to nil as a result of the Company's share in accumulated losses of Shoreditch using the equity method of accounting, and as result, the Company did not recognize a certain portion of its share in net losses Shoreditch prior to the acquisition in October 2020 as the Company had no obligation to fund the Shoreditch losses. The Company's share in Shoreditch’s net loss in 2020 was $1.5 million compared to $4.4 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to decrease in capital contributions to Shoreditch for the period from January 1, 2020 to October 7, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
GES Segment
The GES segment is composed of Prism, in which we acquired a 60.0% controlling interest in October 2018, Diversegy and Genie Solar.
Revenue. GES's revenues increased in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in revenues was the result of the delivery of a large number of orders at Prism particularly in the first half of 2020. Prism discontinued the relationship with its principal customer in the second quarter of 2020 resulting to decrease in GES revenues by 91.7% in the second half of 2020 compared to the first half of 2020. Revenue from Diversegy includes commissions, entry fees and other fees from our energy brokerage and marketing services businesses.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenues increased in 2020compared to 2019. The increase in cost of revenues primarily the result of a significant increase in deliveries of solar panels in 2020. Cost of revenue related to Diversegy included commissions incurred by our energy brokerage and marketing services businesses.
Selling, General and Administrative and Impairment of Customer Relationship and Goodwill. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily because of the streamlining of operations of Prism in first quarter of 2020.
In March 2020, we initiated a plan to sell the property, plant and equipment of Prism. Prism's 4.75% notes payable to Catskill Hudson Bank are collateralized by Prism's land and building and improvements. Prism's property, plant and equipment with a net book value of $2.8 million and notes payable with net book value of $0.9 million were reclassified as assets and liabilities held for sale and reported at lower of fair value less cost to sell and net book value. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a $0.2 million write-down to fair value of certain property and equipment.
In second quarter of 2020, Prism renegotiated a contract with a customer which resulted in impairment of customer relationship of $0.8 million included in the consolidated statements of operation.
In October 2020, Prism completed the sale of all assets held for sales and recorded a net loss from disposal of $0.3 million included in the selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. A portion of the net proceeds was used to settle the notes payable of Prism classified as liabilities held for sale at a carrying amount of $0.8 million.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recognized impairment charge of $0.4 million against the goodwill previously recognized when we acquired a controlling interest in Prism in October 2018 reducing the value of goodwill related to Prism to nil.
Corporate
Corporate does not generate any revenues, nor does it incur any cost of revenues. Corporate costs include unallocated compensation, consulting fees, legal fees, business development expense and other corporate-related general and administrative expense.
The increase in Corporate general and administrative expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to expenses incurred by GOGAS related to the final testing of exploratory well in Golan Heights as discussed above, partially offset by decreases in stock-based compensation and professional and consulting fees. As a percentage of our consolidated revenues, Corporate general and administrative expense decreased from 2.0% in 2019 to 1.8% in 2020.
Consolidated
Selling, General and Administrative. Stock-based compensation expense included in consolidated selling, general and administrative expense was $1.1 in 2020 and 2019. At December 31, 2020, aggregate unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested stock-based compensation was $1.7 million. The unrecognized compensation cost expected to be recognized over the average service period of 2.4 years.
As a percentage of our consolidated revenues, selling, general and administrative expense decreased from 23.0% in 2019 to 20.3% in 2020.
The following is a discussion of our consolidated income and expense line items below loss from operations.
nm - not meaningful
Interest Income. The decrease in interest income in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates on cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense. The decrease in interest expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the settlement of a revolving line of credit in April 2020.
Other Income, net. Other expense, net in 2020 and 2019 consisted primarily foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
Provision for Income Taxes. The increase in provision for income tax in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to the higher taxable income of GRE in 2020 compared to 2019.
Net (Income) Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. Income attributable to noncontrolling interest in 2020 was mainly consist of noncontrolling interest share in income resulting from write-off of intercompany payable of GOGAS entities within the Company. The income was offset by the share of noncontrolling interest in the losses mainly from Prism, Lumo Finland and Citizens Choice Energy. Loss attributable to noncontrolling interest in 2020 is primarily from the losses of Prism, Lumo Finland and Citizens Choice Energy.
Gain on Consolidation of Subsidiary. Gain on consolidation of subsidiary in 2020 was from the acquisition of the controlling interest of Shoreditch in October 2020. The gain pertains to the estimated fair value of the noncontrolling interest to Shoreditch immediately prior to acquisition. The carrying value of our investment in Shoreditch immediately before the acquisition was nil.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
In February 2021, a series of severe winter storms (collectively, Winter Storm Uri) struck the mid-western United States. The storm triggered unprecedented increases in electricity demand in combination with significant reductions in supply within the Electric Reliability Council of Texas ("ERCOT") service area. Wholesale electricity prices reached or exceeded maximum allowed clearing prices for sustained periods and rolling blackouts impacted millions of residential and commercial customers across the State of Texas.
In January and February of 2021, the Company experienced unprecedented price volatility in the Japanese and Texas markets. These events are expected to have an estimated adverse impact on the first quarter of 2021 consolidated result of operations of $2.5 million in Japan and $12.8 million to $14.0 million in Texas.
We currently expect that our cash flows from operations in the next twelve months and the $36.9 million balance of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents that we held at December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to meet our currently anticipated cash requirements for at least the period from January 1, 2021 to March 16, 2022.
At December 31, 2020, we had working capital (current assets less current liabilities) of $36.3 million.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by continuing operating activities was $23.1 million and $15.8 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net income from continuing operations after non-cash adjustments decreased cash flows by $28.4 million for 2020 compared to $15.7 million in 2019. The increase is primarily the result of favorable results of continuing operations in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Our cash flow from operations varies significantly from quarter to quarter and from year to year, depending on our operating results and the timing of operating cash receipts and payments, specifically trade accounts receivable and trade accounts payable. Changes in working capital decreased cash flows by $5.0 million for 2020, compared to 2019. Changes in other assets decreased cash flows by $1.1 million for 2020, compared to 2019.
Certain of GRE's REPs are party to an Amended and Restated Preferred Supplier Agreement with BP Energy Company, or BP, which is to be in effect through November 30, 2023. Under the agreement, the REPs purchase electricity and natural gas at market rate plus a fee. The obligations to BP are secured by a first security interest in deposits or receivables from utilities in connection with their purchase of the REP’s customer’s receivables, and in any cash deposits or letters of credit posted in connection with any collateral accounts with BP. The ability to purchase electricity and natural gas under this agreement is subject to satisfaction of certain conditions including the maintenance of certain covenants. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with such covenants. At December 31, 2020, restricted cash-short-term of $0.5 million and trade accounts receivable of $47.0 million were pledged to BP as collateral for the payment of trade accounts payable to BP of $16.7 million at December 31, 2020.
We had purchase commitments of $131.3 million at December 31, 2020, of which $85.3 million was for purchases of electricity.
Orbit Energy has an exclusive contract with Shell U.K. Limited ("Shell") to provide electricity and natural gas to Orbit Energy until June 2024, with an option (not an obligation) to extend through June 2027. Shell provides access to the forward market such that Orbit Energy can enter into a forward hedge for its customers which protects Orbit Energy from mark-to-market fluctuations. Shell also provide extended payment facilities of an additional 30 days compared to the U.K. payment terms up to a limit of £5.0 million at an interest of LIBOR plus 5.0%. Shell charges an additional £0.9 per therm of natural gas and Mwh of electricity for all delivered volume on top of the wholesale costs. The contract with Shell is secured by Orbit Energy's shares. The contract is also subject to satisfaction of certain conditions including the maintenance of certain covenants which includes minimum levels of cash, gross margin, net worth, as defined in the contract, earnings before tax, as defined in the contract and provision for bad debts on accounts receivable. At December 31, 2020, Orbit Energy was in compliance with such covenants. At December 31, 2020, Shoreditch was in compliance with all such covenants. At December 31, 2020, Shoreditch total liability to Shell was $7.0 million, which is included in trade accounts payable and accrued expenses in the consolidated balance sheet.
From time to time, we receive inquiries or requests for information or materials from public utility commissions or other governmental regulatory or law enforcement agencies related to investigations under statutory or regulatory schemes, and we respond to those inquiries or requests. We cannot predict whether any of those matters will lead to claims or enforcement actions.
Investing Activities
On July 17, 2017, the Company’s subsidiary, Genie Energy UK Ltd. ("GEUK), entered into a definitive agreement to launch Shoreditch, a joint venture to offer electricity and natural gas service to residential and small business customers in the United Kingdom, using the trade name Orbit Energy. In 2020 and 2019, the Company contributed $1.5 million and $3.2 million, respectively, to Shoreditch.
On October 8, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Energy Global Investments Pty Ltd ("EGC") under which GEUK purchased EGC’s remaining interest in Shoreditch, in exchange for a cash payment of £1.3 million (equivalent to $1.7 million on the date of closing) offset by £0.2 million (equivalent to $0.2 million on the date of closing) in amounts owing from EGC to the Company under a loan provided to EGC in 2018 related to EGC’s capital contributions to Shoreditch. Prior to October 8, 2020, the net book value of the Company's investment in Shoreditch was nil. Following the transaction, Shoreditch is a wholly-owned subsidiary of GEUK. Shoreditch had $2.7 million of cash at the date of acquisition.
In December 2020, the Company invested $5.0 million in the Class B common stocks of Rafael Holdings, Inc., a publicly-traded company ("Rafael"). Rafael also issued warrants to purchase an additional 43,649 of Rafael's Class B common stock at $22.91 per share up to June 6, 2022. The Company does not exercise significant influence over the operating or financial policies of Rafael.
In March 2020, the Company initiated a plan to sell the property, plant and equipment of Prism. Prism's 4.75% notes payable to Catskill Hudson Bank were collateralized by Prism's land, building and improvements. In the first quarter of 2020, Prism's property, plant and equipment and notes payable were reclassified as assets and liabilities held for sale and reported at lower of fair value less cost to sell. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a $0.2 million write-down to the fair value of certain property and equipment.
In October 2020, the Prism completed the sale of all assets held for sale with an aggregate proceed $2.7 million of and recorded a net loss from disposal of $0.3 million included in the selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. In October 2020, Prism settled the 4.75% notes payable to Catskill Bank previously classified as liabilities held for sale with full payment of the principal amount of $0.9 million.
Our capital expenditures were $0.2 million and $0.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We currently anticipate that our total capital expenditures in the year ending December 31, 2021 will be between $0.5 million and $1.0 million.
In connection with the acquisition of Lumo Finland in January 2019, the Company has a conditional continuing call option to purchase a portion or the entire noncontrolling interest from the sellers during the period beginning at the third anniversary of the Lumo Finland Closing Date and ending three years later.
Financing Activities
In each of 2020 and 2019, we paid aggregate Base Dividends per share of $0.6376 on our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock. The aggregate preferred stock dividends paid in each of 2020 and 2019 were $1.5 million. On February 18, 2021, we paid a quarterly Base Dividend of $0.1594 per share on our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock for the fourth quarter of 2020 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 6, 2021.
In 2020 and 2019, we paid aggregate dividends per share of $0.33 and $0.30, respectively, to stockholders of our Class A common stock and Class B common stock. The aggregate dividends paid in 2020 and 2019 were $8.7 million and $8.1 million, respectively.
As announced on March 11, 2021, we suspended our dividends on our common stock to rebuild our cash position in light of the losses incurred from the effects of Winter Storm Uri as discussed above.
In 2020, we received minimal proceeds from the exercise of stock options for which we issued 4,133 shares of our Class B common stock. In 2019, we received $1.4 million from the exercise of stock options for which we issued 205,350 shares of our Class B common stock.
On March 11, 2013, our Board of Directors approved a program for the repurchase of up to an aggregate of 7.0 million shares of our Class B common stock. In 2020, we acquired 233,602 Class B common stock under the stock repurchase program for an aggregate amount of 1.7 million. In 2019, we acquired 732,869 Class B common stock under the repurchase program for an aggregate amount of $5.6 million. At December 31, 2020, 5.9 million shares remained available for repurchase under the stock repurchase program.
On November 28, 2019, Genie Japan entered into a Loan Agreement with Tokyo Star Bank for a ¥100.0 million (equivalent to $0.9 million) short-term credit facility. Genie Japan provided a letter of credit issued by JPMorgan Chase amounting to ¥100.0 million (equivalent to $0.9 million) as collateral. The outstanding principal amount incurred interest at Tokyo Star Bank's short-term prime rate plus 0.25% per annum. Interest was payable monthly and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest matured on May 13, 2020. Genie Japan settled the Loan agreement and paid the outstanding balance of ¥100.0 million (equivalent to $0.9 million) on May 13, 2020.
On May 13, 2020, Genie Japan entered into a new Loan Agreement with Tokyo Star Bank for a ¥150.0 million (equivalent to $1.4 million) short-term credit facility ("May 2020 Loan"). Genie Japan provided a letter of credit issued by JPMorgan Chase in the amount of ¥150.0 million (equivalent to $1.4 million) as collateral. The outstanding principal amount incurs interest at 3.0% per annum. Interest is payable monthly and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest matured on November 13, 2020. On November 13, 2020, Genie Japan and Tokyo Star Bank amended the May 2020 Loan to extend the maturity date to March 13, 2021. At September 30, 2020, $1.4 million was outstanding under the May 2020 Loan. At December 31, 2020, the effective interest rate was 3.0%.
On December 5, 2019, we entered into the first amendment of Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank (“Credit Agreement”) to extend the maturity date to December 31, 2020. On December 8, 2020, we entered into the second amendment of its existing Credit Agreement to extend the maturity date to December 31, 2021. The Company continues to have the aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million credit line facility (“Credit Line”). The Company pays a commitment fee of 0.1% per annum on unused portion of the Credit Line as specified in the Credit Agreement. The borrowed amounts will be in the form of letters of credit which will bear interest of 1.0% per annum. The Company will also pay a fee for each letter of credit that is issued equal to the greater of $500 or 1.0% of the original maximum available amount of the letter of credit. We agreed to deposit cash in a money market account at JPMorgan Chase Bank as collateral for the line of credit equal to $5.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, JP Morgan Chase Bank issued $2.3 million letter of credit from the Credit Line. As of December 31, 2020, none of the letters of credits were drawn upon. At December 31, 2020, the cash collateral of $5.2 million was included in restricted cash-short-term in the consolidated balance sheet.
On April 4, 2017, GRE, IDT Energy, and other GRE subsidiaries entered into a Credit Agreement with Vantage Commodities Financial Services II, LLC ("Vantage"), for a $20.0 million revolving loan facility. The borrowers consist of our subsidiaries that operate REP businesses, and those subsidiaries’ obligations are guaranteed by GRE. The borrowers have provided as collateral a security interest in their receivables, bank accounts, customer agreements, certain other material agreements and related commercial and intangible rights. The outstanding principal amount incurs interest at LIBOR plus 4.5% per annum. Interest was payable monthly and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest matured on April 3, 2020. In April 2020, the revolving line of credit expired and we paid outstanding balance of $3.5 million.
On December 11, 2019, Prism refinance the 5.95% notes payable to Catskill Hudson Bank that were due in November 2019. The outstanding balance of notes payable of $0.9 million December 11, 2019 was payable in monthly equal installments for period of ten years. The outstanding principal amount incurred fixed interest at 4.75% per annum. The notes payable were secured by Prism's commercial property in Highland, New York. In March 2020, the outstanding balance of the notes payable was transferred to liabilities held for sale. On October 16, 2020, Prism settled the notes payable to Catskill Bank previously classified as liabilities held for sale with full payment of the principal amount of $0.8 million
In 2020, we paid $0.5 million to repurchase 58,650 shares of our Class B common stock, and, in 2019, we paid $0.5 million to repurchase 48,197 shares of our Class B common stock tendered by our employees to satisfy tax withholding obligations in connection with the lapsing of restrictions on awards of restricted stock. Such shares were repurchased by us based on their fair market value on the trading day immediately prior to the vesting date.
Series 2012-A Preferred Stock
At December 31, 2020, there were 2.3 million shares of our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock issued and outstanding with an aggregate liquidation preference of $19.7 million. Each share of our Series 2012-A Preferred Stock has a liquidation preference of $8.50 (the “Liquidation Preference”), and is entitled to receive an annual dividend per share equal to the sum of (i) $0.6375 (the “Base Dividend”) plus (ii) seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the quotient obtained by dividing (A) the amount by which the EBITDA for a fiscal year of our retail energy provider business exceeds $32 million by (B) 8,750,000 (the “Additional Dividend”), payable in cash. EBITDA consists of income (loss) from operations exclusive of depreciation and amortization and other operating gains (losses).
The Series 2012-A Preferred Stock is redeemable, in whole or in part, at our option following October 11, 2017 at 101% of the Liquidation Preference plus accrued and unpaid dividends, and 100% of the Liquidation Preference plus accrued and unpaid dividends following October 11, 2018.
During any period when we have failed to pay a dividend on the Series 2012-A Preferred Stock and until all unpaid dividends have been paid in full, we are prohibited from paying dividends or distributions on our Class B or Class A common stock.
The Base Dividend is payable (if declared by our Board of Directors, and accrued, if not declared) quarterly on each February 15, May 15, August 15 and November 15, and to the extent that there is any Additional Dividend payable with respect to a fiscal year, it will be paid to holders of Series 2012-A Preferred Stock with the May dividend. With respect to the payment of dividends and amounts upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up, the Series 2012-A Preferred Stock is equal in rank to all other equity securities we issue, the terms of which specifically provide that such equity securities rank on a parity with the Series 2012-A Preferred Stock with respect to dividend rights or rights upon our liquidation, dissolution or winding up; senior to our common stock; and junior to all of our existing and future indebtedness.
Each share of Series 2012-A Preferred Stock has the same voting rights as a share of Class B common stock, except on certain matters that only impact our common stock, as well as additional voting rights on specific matters or upon the occurrence of certain events.
On March 21, 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company approved a program to redeem up to $4.0 million worth of the Company's Preferred Stock in accordance with the Certificate of Designations for the preferred stock. There was no redemption under this program in 2020.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
The following table quantifies our future contractual obligations and other commercial commitments at December 31, 2020:
Payments Due by Period
(1)
The above table does not include amounts related to call option in the amount of $0.1 million in connection with the acquisition of Smile Energy due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any such payments.
(2) The above table does not include amounts related to call option and a put option related to the noncontrolling interest in connection with the acquisition of Lumo Finland due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any such payments.
(3)
The above table does not include the financing made available to New Atid of up to $0.4 million due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any financing to be provided.
(4)
The above table does not include an aggregate of $13.7 million in performance bonds at December 31, 2020 due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any payments.
(5) The above table does not include an aggregate of $2.3 million in letters of credit issued by JP Morgan Chare to the Company as of December 31, 2020 due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any payments. None of the letters of credit were used as of December 31, 2019.
(6)
The above table does not include our unrecognized income tax benefits for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2020 of $2.5 million due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any such payments. Uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return may result in additional payments to tax authorities. We are not currently able to reasonably estimate the timing of any potential future payments. If a tax authority agrees with the tax position taken or expected to be taken or the applicable statute of limitations expires, then additional payments will not be necessary.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any “off-balance sheet arrangements,” as defined in relevant SEC regulations that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources, other than the following. GRE has performance bonds issued through a third party for the benefit of certain utility companies and for various states in order to comply with the states’ financial requirements for retail energy providers. At December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding aggregate performance bonds of $13.7 million and $2.3 million of unused letters of credit.