ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The MD&A generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020.
We are a Marshall Islands company that transports iron ore, coal, grain, steel products and other drybulk cargoes along worldwide shipping routes through the ownership and operation of drybulk carrier vessels. After the sale of two of our Supramax vessels, our fleet will consist of 39 drybulk carriers, including 17 Capesize drybulk carriers, nine Ultramax drybulk carriers, and thirteen Supramax drybulk carriers with an aggregate carrying capacity of approximately 4,315,000 deadweight tons (“dwt”). The average age of our current fleet is approximately 10.1 years. We seek to deploy our vessels on time charters, spot market voyage charters, spot market-related time charters or in vessel pools trading in the spot market, to reputable charterers. The majority of the vessels in our current fleet are presently engaged under time charter and spot market voyage charters that expire (assuming the option periods in the time charters are not exercised) between February 2021 and June 2021.
See pages 3 - 4 for a table of our current fleet.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus strain, or COVID-19, to be a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is having widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. Governments have implemented measures in an effort to contain the virus, including social distancing, travel restrictions, border closures, limitations on public gatherings, working from home, supply chain logistical changes, and closure of non-essential businesses. This has led to a significant slowdown in overall economic activity levels globally and a decline in demand for certain of the raw materials that our vessels transport.
Drybulk shipping rates, and therefore our voyage revenues, depend to a significant degree on global economic activity levels and specifically, economic activity in China. As the world’s second largest economy, China is the largest importer of drybulk commodities globally, which drives demand for iron ore, coal and other cargoes we carry. In particular, earlier in 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in reduced industrial activity in China on which our business is substantially dependent, with temporary closures of factories and other facilities. The pandemic resulted in a 6.8% contraction in China’s GDP during the first quarter of 2020, with the most significant impact occurring in January and February. Since March, China’s economy has substantially improved, as various economic indicators such as fixed asset investment and industrial production rose as compared to the previous months of the year, which led to GDP growth of 3.2%, 4.9% and 6.5% during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively. However, economic activity levels in regions outside of China declined significantly beginning in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing into the second quarter of the year due to various forms of nationwide shutdowns being imposed to prevent the spread of COVID-19. India, Japan, Europe and the U.S., which are important drivers of demand for drybulk trade, have seen meaningful contractions in economic output in the year to date. Several economies around the world gradually eased measures taken earlier in 2020 resulting in improved activity levels from earlier year lows. The impact of the economic
contraction remains highly dependent on the trajectory of COVID-19 and the timing of wide-scale vaccine distribution, which remains uncertain.
While global economic activity levels, led by China, have improved, the outlook for China and the rest of the world remains uncertain and is highly dependent on the path of COVID-19 and measures taken by governments around the world in response to it. Drybulk commodities that are closely tied to global GDP growth, such as coal and various minor bulk cargoes, experienced reduced trade flows in 2020 due to lower end user demand resulting from a decline in global economic activity. As countries worldwide gradually reopened their respective economies in mid-2020, trade flows and demand for raw materials increased, particularly during the second half of 2020. Drybulk spot freight rates increased off of the year to date lows towards the end of the second quarter and remained firm in the second half of 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020 and early 2021, there has been a resurgence of the virus in some European countries and the U.S. that may impact the sustainability of this recovery in addition to drybulk specific seasonality described in further detail below.
As our vessels continue to trade commodities globally, we have taken measures to safeguard our crew and work toward preventing the spread of COVID-19. Crew members have received gloves, face masks, hand sanitizer, goggles and handheld thermometers. Genco requires its vessel crews to wear masks when in contact with other individuals who board the vessel. We continue to monitor the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”) and the WHO guidelines and are also limiting access of shore personnel boarding our vessels. Specifically, no shore personnel with fever or respiratory symptoms are allowed on board, and those that are allowed on board are restricted to designated areas that are thoroughly cleaned after their use. Face masks are also provided to shore personnel prior to boarding a vessel. Precautionary materials are posted in common areas to supplement safety training while personal hygiene best practices are strongly encouraged on board.
We have implemented protocols with regard to crew rotations to keep our crew members safe and healthy which includes polymerase chain reaction (PCR) antibody testing as well as a 14-day quarantine period prior to boarding a vessel. Genco is enacting crew changes where permitted by regulations of the ports and of the country of origin of the mariners, in addition to strict protocols that safeguard our crews against COVID-19 exposure. Crew rotations have been challenging in recent months due to port and travel restrictions globally, as well as promoting the health and safety of both on and off signing crew members.
Onshore, our offices located in New York and Singapore are temporarily closed with our personnel working remotely. Our office in Copenhagen reopened in June 2020 following approximately three months during which our team worked remotely. Regarding our headquarters in New York, we are planning to implement a phased-in approach towards reopening the office; however a return date has not yet been determined. We currently have placed a ban on all non-essential travel.
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures to contain its spread thus have negatively impacted and could continue to impact regional and global economies and trade patterns in markets in which we operate, the way we operate our business, and the businesses of our charterers and suppliers. These impacts may continue or become more severe. Although we have successfully completed a number of crew changes over the course of the pandemic to date, additional crew changes could remain challenging due to COVID-19 related factors. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business going forward will depend on numerous evolving factors we cannot reliably predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business, and individuals’ actions in response to the pandemic; and the impact on economic activity, including the possibility of recession or financial market instability.
U.S.-China Trade Dispute
Over the course of 2018 and 2019, the United States imposed a series of tariffs on several goods imported from various countries. Certain of these countries, including China, undertook retaliatory actions by implementing tariffs on select U.S. products. Most notably in terms of drybulk trade volumes is China’s tariff placed upon U.S. soybean exports, which could adversely affect drybulk rates. With the signing of the “phase one” trade agreement between China and the U.S. in January 2020, China has agreed in principle to purchase meaningful quantities of agricultural products, including soybeans, from the U.S. Peak North American grain season historically ramps up during the fourth quarter and extends
into the early first quarter of the following year. In recent months, China has purchased large amounts of agricultural products that are transported on drybulk vessels which has helped support freight rates for the mid-sized and smaller vessel classes. It remains to be seen the stance the new U.S. administration will take towards China as well as any previously agreed upon trade deals. Any deterioration in the trading relationship or a re-escalation of protectionist measures taken between these countries or others could lead to reduced volumes of drybulk trade.
IMO 2020 Compliance
On October 27, 2016, the Marine Environment Protection Committee (“MEPC”) of the International Maritime Organization (“IMO”) announced the ratification of regulations mandating reduction in sulfur emissions from 3.5% currently to 0.5% as of the beginning of 2020 rather than pushing the deadline back to 2025. Accordingly, ships now have to reduce sulfur emissions, for which the principal solutions are the use of exhaust gas cleaning systems (“scrubbers”) or buying fuel with low sulfur content. If a vessel is not retrofitted with a scrubber, it will need to use low sulfur fuel, which is currently more expensive than standard marine fuel containing 3.5% sulfur content. This increased demand for low sulfur fuel resulted in an increase in prices for such fuel during the beginning of 2020. Following a decrease during the second quarter of 2020, fuel prices began to increase again during the third quarter of 2020 and continue to increase due to such demand.
In order to comply with regulations mandating a reduction in sulfur emissions from 3.5% to 0.5% as of the beginning of 2020, we entered into agreements to install exhaust gas cleaning systems (“scrubbers”) on our 17 Capesize vessels, sixteen of which installations were completed by December 31, 2019, and the last of which the installation was completed by January 17, 2020. Additionally, we have transitioned to consuming IMO compliant fuels as of January 1, 2020 on our vessels that are not equipped with scrubbers and when our scrubbers may not be used. We will continue to evaluate all options to comply with IMO regulations. Our fuel costs and fuel inventories may increase as a result of these sulfur emission regulations. Low sulfur fuel is more expensive than standard marine fuel containing 3.5% sulfur content and may become more expensive or difficult to obtain as a result of increased demand. If the cost differential between low sulfur fuel and high sulfur fuel is significantly higher than anticipated, or if low sulfur fuel is not available at ports on certain trading routes, it may not be feasible or competitive to operate vessels on certain trading routes without installing scrubbers or without incurring deviation time to obtain compliant fuel. Conversely, if the cost differential between low sulfur fuel and high sulfur fuel is significantly lower than anticipated, or if regulations are passed negatively impacting the use of open-loop scrubbers, we may not realize the economic benefits or recover the cost of the scrubbers we have installed. In addition, a number of countries have imposed restrictions on the discharge of wash water from open loop scrubbers within their port limits. While there are no restrictions on using open loop scrubbers outside of port limits, any changes in these regulations or more stringent standards globally could impact the use of open loop scrubbers going forward.
Vessel Sales and Acquisitions
On December 17, 2020, we entered into an agreement to acquire three modern, eco Ultramax vessels in exchange for six of our older Handysize vessels. The Genco Magic, a 2014-built Ultramax vessel, and the Genco Vigilant and the Genco Freedom, both 2015-built Ultramax vessels, were delivered to the Company on December 23, 2020, January 28, 2021 and February 20, 2021, respectively. We delivered the Genco Ocean, Baltic Cove and Baltic Fox, all 2010-built Handysize vessels, and the Genco Spirit, Genco Avra and Genco Mare, all 2011-built Handysize vessels, on December 29, 2020, January 30, 2021, February 2, 2021, February 15, 2021, February 21, 2021 and February 24, 2021, respectively.
During 2020, we completed the sale of nine of our vessels, including the Genco Ocean as noted above, and have entered into agreements to sell ten additional vessels, including the remaining five Handysize vessels noted above. Of the additional five vessels we have entered into agreements to sell, excluding the five Handysize vessels noted above, we have completed the sale of three vessels during January and February 2021. Three vessels were classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2020 and the five Handysize vessels were classified as held for exchange as of December 31, 2020. During 2019, we completed the sale of four vessels, one of which was classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2018. We will continue to seek opportunities to renew our fleet going forward.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that the following table reflects important measures for analyzing trends in our results of operations. The table reflects our ownership days, chartered-in days, available days, operating days, fleet utilization, TCE rates and daily vessel operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 on a consolidated basis.
(1) Ownership days. We define ownership days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which each vessel in our fleet has been owned by us. Ownership days are an indicator of the size of our fleet over a period and affect both the amount of revenues and the amount of expenses that we record during a period.
(2) Chartered-in days. We define chartered-in days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which we chartered-in third party vessels.
(3) Available days (owned and chartered-in fleet). We define available days as the number of our ownership days and chartered-in days less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to familiarization upon acquisition, repairs or repairs under guarantee, vessel upgrades or special surveys. Companies in the shipping industry generally use available days to measure the number of days in a period during which vessels should be capable of generating revenues.
(4) Available days (owned fleet). We define available days for the owned fleet as available days less chartered-in days.
(5) Operating days. We define operating days as the number of our total available days in a period less the aggregate number of days that our vessels are off-hire due to unforeseen circumstances. The shipping industry uses operating days to measure the aggregate number of days in a period during which vessels actually generate revenues.
(6) Fleet utilization. We calculate fleet utilization as the number of our operating days during a period divided by the number of ownership days plus chartered-in days less drydocking days.
(7) Time Charter Equivalent (“TCE”). We define TCE rates as our voyage revenues less voyage expenses and charter-hire expenses, divided by the number of the available days of our owned fleet during the period. TCE rate is a common shipping industry performance measure used primarily to compare daily earnings generated by vessels on time charters with daily earnings generated by vessels on voyage charters, because charterhire rates for vessels on voyage charters are generally not expressed in per-day amounts while charterhire rates for vessels on time charters generally are expressed in such amounts.
(8) Daily vessel operating expenses. We define daily vessel operating expenses to include crew wages and related costs, the cost of insurance, expenses relating to repairs and maintenance (excluding drydocking), the costs of spares and consumable stores, tonnage taxes and other miscellaneous expenses. Daily vessel operating expenses are calculated by dividing vessel operating expenses by ownership days for the relevant period.
Operating Data
The following tables represent the operating data and certain balance sheet and other data as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 on a consolidated basis.
(1) EBITDA represents net loss plus net interest expense, taxes and depreciation and amortization. Refer to page 40 included in Item 6 where the use of EBITDA is discussed and for a table demonstrating our calculation of EBITDA that provides a reconciliation of EBITDA to net (loss) income attributable to Genco Shipping & Trading for each of the periods presented above.
Results of Operations
VOYAGE REVENUES-
Our revenues are driven primarily by the number of vessels in our fleet, the number of days during which our vessels operate, the type of fixture our vessels are chartered on (spot market voyage charters or fixed rate time charters), and the amount of daily charterhire or freight rates that our vessels earn, that, in turn, are affected by a number of factors, including:
● the duration of our charters;
● our decisions relating to vessel acquisitions and disposals;
● the amount of time that we spend positioning our vessels;
● the amount of time that our vessels spend in drydock undergoing repairs;
● maintenance and upgrade work;
● the age, condition and specifications of our vessels;
● levels of supply and demand in the drybulk shipping industry; and
● other factors affecting spot market charter rates for drybulk carriers.
During 2020, voyage revenues decreased by $33.9 million, or 8.7%, to $355.6 million as compared to $389.5 million during 2019. The decrease in voyage revenues was primarily due to the operation of fewer vessels in our fleet. During the first half of 2020, drybulk seasonal factors such as the timing of newbuilding deliveries, the Lunar New Year holiday celebration in China and weather-related cargo disruptions impacted the drybulk freight rate environment. These factors were further accentuated by the onset of COVID-19 and subsequent reactions to prevent its spread taken by various countries essential to drybulk trade flows. In mid-2020, a gradual reopening of economies contributed to increased trade flows and a firm freight rate environment during the second half of 2020 as compared to the first half of the year. During the second half of 2020, the economic recovery in China resulted in record volumes of seaborne iron ore imports to fuel all-time high steel production and replenish low inventory levels. This demand was aided by improved Brazilian iron ore exports, which has been constrained earlier in the year due to poor weather conditions and operational challenges from the Brumadinho dam collapse in January 2019.
The average Time Charter Equivalent (“TCE”) rate of our overall fleet increased marginally by 0.4% to $10,221 a day during 2020 from $10,182 a day during 2019. The TCE for our major bulk vessels increased by 13.6% from $13,181 a day during 2019 to $14,977 a day during 2020. This increase was primarily a result of additional drydocking days during 2019 as a result of the installation of scrubbers on our Capesize vessels. The TCE for our minor bulk vessels decreased by 13.6% from $9,063 a day during 2019 to $7,832 a day during 2020 primarily a result of lower rates achieved by our Panamax and Handysize vessels, as well as offhire days associated with COVID-19 delays during 2020 and delays in the completion of the sale of the Baltic Breeze and Genco Bay during the third quarter of 2020.
The overall uncertainty surrounding the impact of COVID-19 on our business, together with reduced economic activity and in turn trade flows, could continue to negatively impact the revenue generated by our vessels. While we believe that the gradual reopening of economies affected by COVID-19 has begun to lead to increased global trade flows and a rise in drybulk shipping rates, the sustainability of the recovery cannot be predicted and could be affected by a resurgence of the virus and the timing of wide-scale vaccine distribution. Furthermore, deviation time associated with positioning our vessels to countries in which we can undertake a crew rotation due to various travel and port restrictions
related to COVID-19, resulted in days in 2020 in which our vessels were unable to earn revenue and may continue to do so.
For 2020 and 2019, we had ownership days of 18,956.8 days and 21,022.5 days, respectively. The decrease in ownership days is primarily due to the sale of four vessels during 2019 and nine vessels during 2020 partially offset by the delivery of one vessel during 2020. Fleet utilization decreased marginally from 97.5% during 2019 to 97.1% during 2020.
Please see pages 6 - 7 for a table that sets forth information about the current employment of the vessels in our fleet.
VOYAGE EXPENSES-
In time charters, spot market-related time charters and pool agreements, operating costs including crews, maintenance and insurance are typically paid by the owner of the vessel and specified voyage costs such as fuel and port charges are paid by the charterer. These expenses are borne by the Company during spot market voyage charters. There are certain other non-specified voyage expenses such as commissions which are typically borne by us. Voyage expenses include port and canal charges, fuel (bunker) expenses and brokerage commissions payable to unaffiliated third parties. Port and canal charges and bunker expenses primarily increase in periods during which vessels are employed on spot market voyage charters because these expenses are for the account of the vessel owner. At the inception of a time charter, we record the difference between the cost of bunker fuel delivered by the terminating charterer and the bunker fuel sold to the new charterer as a gain or loss within voyage expenses. Voyage expenses also include the cost of bunkers consumed during short-term time charters pursuant to the terms of the time charter agreement. Additionally, we may record lower of cost and net realizable value adjustments to re-value the bunker fuel on a quarterly basis for certain time charter agreements where the inventory is subject to gains and losses. Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Due to various travel and port restrictions relating to COVID-19 and our strong emphasis on maintaining the health and safety of both our on-signing and off-signing crew members, we experienced increased deviation time for certain of our vessels to undertake crew rotations during the third and fourth quarter of 2020. As such, we have experienced higher voyage expenses for certain crew changes that we have completed, which we expect to continue as a result of COVID-19 restrictions imposed by various counties. These increased voyage expenses are due to the incremental fuel consumption of deviating to certain ports on which we would ordinarily not call during a typical voyage.
As a result of installing scrubbers on all of our 17 Capesize vessels, which accounted for approximately 50% of our fleet’s fuel consumption in 2020, we realized significant fuel cost savings during 2020. The amount of savings we realize, and the amount of time in which we would recover our investment in scrubbers, depends on the spread between high sulfur and low sulfur fuel. The spread between these two fuel types is currently approximately $130 per metric ton, and was as high as $361 per metric ton and as low as $47 per metric ton during 2020.
Voyage expenses were $157.0 million and $173.0 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease was primarily due to the operation of fewer vessels during 2020, as well as a decrease in bunker consumption.
VESSEL OPERATING EXPENSES-
Vessel operating expenses decreased by $8.8 million from $96.2 million during 2019 to $87.4 million during 2020. This decrease was primarily due to fewer owned vessels during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Average daily vessel operating expenses for our fleet increased marginally by $36 per day from $4,576 per day during 2019 as compared to $4,612 in 2020. The increase in daily vessel operating expenses was predominantly due to higher crew related expenses, partially offset by lower drydocking related expenditures. We believe daily vessel operating expenses are best measured for comparative purposes over a 12-month period in order to take into account all of the expenses that each vessel in our fleet will incur over a full year of operation. Our actual daily vessel operating
expenses per vessel for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $22 above the weighted-average budgeted rate of $4,590 per vessel per day.
Restrictions on crew rotations led to a temporary decline in crewing related expenses of approximately $1 million during the first half of 2020. However, such costs began to increase in June 2020, reaching their highest level during the third quarter of 2020. Although we have completed a significant number of crew rotations, we still expect higher costs related to crew rotations surrounding COVID-19 restrictions. Travel and port restrictions together with promoting the health of the on-signing crew boarding the ship while the off-signing crew gets home safely have all been increasing challenges that shipowners are facing globally. As crew members worldwide have in many cases, including on certain of our vessels, exceeded the duration of their contracts there is an increased urgency to work towards completing more crew rotations in the coming months. Given this urgency, since June 2020, certain of these crew rotations have led to and could continue to lead to additional deviation time of our vessels as well as unbudgeted expenses due to testing, PPE, quarantine periods and higher than normal travel expenses due to increased airfare costs.
The timing of crew rotations remains dependent on the duration and severity of COVID-19 in countries from which our crews are sourced as well as any restrictions in place at ports in which our vessels call. In cases when crew rotations have been delayed further, we have paid some additional costs related to crew bonuses to retain the existing crew members on board since June 2020 and may continue to do so.
Our vessel operating expenses, which generally represent fixed costs for each vessel, increase to the extent our fleet expands. Other factors beyond our control, some of which may affect the shipping industry in general, including, for instance, developments relating to market prices for crewing, lubes, and insurance, may also cause these expenses to increase. The impact of COVID-19 could result in potential shortages or a lack of access to required spare parts for the operation of our vessels, potential delays in any unscheduled repairs, deviations for crew changes or increased costs to successfully execute a crew change, which could lead to business disruptions and delays. We expect that crew costs for the crew that we utilize on our vessels will increase going forward due to expected higher wages, as well as the impact of COVID-19 restrictions.
Based on our management’s estimates and budgets provided by our technical manager for our fleet, we expect our vessels to have average daily vessel operating expenses during 2021 of:
Based on these average daily budgeted amounts by vessel type, we expect our fleet to have average daily vessel operating expenses of $5,000 during 2021, reflecting our exit from the smaller, Handysize vessels and the greater weighting of our fleet towards Capesize vessels as well as an anticipated increase in COVID-19 related expenses, as well as higher crew costs and stores. The potential impacts of COVID-19 are beyond our control and are difficult to predict due to uncertainties surrounding the pandemic.
CHARTER HIRE EXPENSES-
Charter hire expenses decreased by $5.9 million from $16.2 million during 2019 to $10.3 million during 2020. The decrease was primarily due to fewer chartered-in days, as well as the chartering in of smaller class vessels during 2020 as compared to 2019.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES-
We incur general and administrative expenses which relate to our onshore non-vessel-related activities. Our general and administrative expenses include our payroll expenses, including those relating to our executive officers, rent, legal, auditing and other professional expenses. General and administrative expenses include nonvested stock
amortization expense which represent the amortization of stock-based compensation that has been issued to our Directors and employees pursuant to the 2015 Equity Incentive Plan. Refer to Note 16 - Stock-Based Compensation in our Consolidated Financial Statements. General and administrative expenses also include legal and professional fees associated with our credit facilities, which are not capitalizable to deferred financing costs. We incurred additional general and administrative expenses during 2019 as a result of our global expansion to Singapore and Copenhagen and have incurred additional expenses related to these overseas offices during 2020.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $3.3 million from $24.5 million during 2019 to $21.3 million during 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower office rent and administrative expenses, as well as lower travel expenses and legal and professional fees.
TECHNICAL MANAGEMENT FEES-
We incur management fees to third party technical management companies for the day-to-day management of our vessels, including performing routine maintenance, attending to vessel operations and arranging for crews and supplies.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, technical management fees were $7.0 million and $7.6 million, respectively. The decrease was a result of fewer owned vessels during 2020 as compared to 2019.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION-
We depreciate the cost of our vessels on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of each vessel. Depreciation is based on the cost of the vessel less its estimated residual value. We estimate the useful life of our vessels to be 25 years and we estimate the residual value by taking the estimated scrap value of $310 per lightweight ton multiplied by the weight of the ship in lightweight tons.
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $7.7 million from $72.8 million during 2019 to $65.2 million during 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in depreciation for the twelve vessels that were sold during the fourth quarter of 2019 and 2020, as well as a decrease in depreciation for certain vessels in our fleet that were impaired during 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in depreciation expense related to scrubber additions for our Capesize vessels.
IMPAIRMENT OF VESSEL ASSETS-
During 2020 and 2019, we recorded $208.9 million and $27.4 million of impairment of vessel assets, respectively. During 2020, we recorded impairment losses for 20 of our Supramax vessels and ten of our Handysize vessels. During 2019, we recorded impairment losses for three of our Handysize vessels and two of our Panamax vessels.
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
LOSS ON SALE OF VESSELS-
During 2020, we recorded a $1.9 million net loss on sale of vessels related primarily to the sale of the Genco Charger, Genco Thunder, Baltic Wind, Baltic Breeze, Genco Bay, Baltic Jaguar, Genco Loire, Genco Normandy and Genco Ocean. During 2019, we recorded a $0.2 million net loss on sale of vessels related primarily to the sale of the Genco Challenger, Genco Champion and Genco Raptor, which was largely offset by a net gain related to the sale of the Genco Vigour.
OTHER (EXPENSE) INCOME-
NET INTEREST EXPENSE-
Net interest expense decreased by $6.5 million to $21.4 million during 2020 as compared to $27.9 million during 2019. Net interest expense during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted of interest expense under our credit facilities and amortization of deferred financing costs for those facilities. The decrease is primarily due to a $9.5 million decrease in interest expense as a result of lower interest rates, as well as lower outstanding debt. This was offset by a $3.1 million decrease in interest income due to a decrease in interest earned on our time deposits and cash accounts. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our credit facilities.
IMPAIRMENT OF RIGHT-OF-USE ASSET -
During 2019, we recognized $0.2 million of impairment charges on our operating lease right-of-use asset in accordance with ASC 360. Refer to Note 13 - Leases in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flow from operations, cash on hand, equity offerings and credit facility borrowings. We currently use our funds primarily for the acquisition of vessels generally and under our ongoing fleet renewal program, drydocking for our vessels, and satisfying working capital requirements as may be needed to support our business and make required payments under our indebtedness. Our ability to continue to meet our liquidity needs is subject to and will be affected by cash utilized in operations, the economic or business environment in which we operate, shipping industry conditions, the financial condition of our customers, vendors and service providers, our ability to comply with the financial and other covenants of our indebtedness, and other factors.
We believe, given our current cash holdings, if drybulk shipping rates do not decline significantly from current levels, our capital resources, including cash anticipated to be generated within the year, are sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. Such resources include unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $143.9 million as of December 31, 2020, which compares to a minimum liquidity requirement under our credit facilities of approximately $34 million as of the date of this report. Given quarterly amortization payments of $20.2 million which began on December 31, 2020 under our credit facilities, anticipated capital expenditures related to drydockings and the installation of ballast water treatment systems (“BWTS”), as well as any quarterly dividend payments, we anticipate to continue to have significant cash expenditures. However, if market conditions were to worsen significantly due to the current COVID-19 pandemic or other causes, then our cash resources may decline to a level that may put at risk our ability to service timely our debt and capital expenditure commitments.
Our credit facilities contain collateral maintenance covenants that require the aggregate appraised value of collateral vessels to be at least 135% of the principal amount of the loan outstanding under each such facility. If the values of our vessels were to decline as a result of COVID-19 or otherwise, we may not satisfy this collateral maintenance requirement. Outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility, which total $21.2 million as of December 31, 2020, make it more difficult to satisfy the collateral maintenance requirement under our $133 Million Credit Facility. If we do not satisfy the collateral maintenance requirement, we will need to post additional collateral or prepay outstanding loans to bring us back into compliance, or we will need to seek waivers, which may not be available or may be subject to conditions.
In the future, we may require capital to fund acquisitions or to improve or support our ongoing operations and debt structure, particularly in light of economic conditions resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We may from time to time seek to raise additional capital through equity or debt offerings, selling vessels or other assets, pursuing strategic opportunities, or otherwise. We may also from time to time seek to incur additional debt financing from private or public sector sources, refinance our indebtedness or obtain waivers or modifications to our credit agreements to obtain more favorable terms, enhance flexibility in conducting our business, or otherwise. We may also seek to manage our interest rate exposure through hedging transactions. We may seek to accomplish any of these independently or in conjunction with one or more of these actions. However, if market conditions are unfavorable, we may be unable to accomplish any of the foregoing on acceptable terms or at all.
We entered into the $495 Million Credit Facility on May 31, 2018, which was initially used to refinance our prior credit facilities: the $400 Million Credit Facility, the $98 Million Credit Facility and the 2014 Term Loan Facilities on June 5, 2018 and originally allowed borrowings of up to $460 million. On February 28, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility that provides for an additional tranche of up to $35 million to finance a portion of the acquisitions, installations, and related costs for exhaust cleaning systems (or “scrubbers”) for 17 of the Company’s Capesize vessels. On June 5, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility to extend the period that collateral vessels can be sold or disposed of without prepayment of the loan if a replacement vessel or vessels meeting certain requirements are included as collateral from 180 days to 360 days. On December 17, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility that allowed us to enter into a vessel transaction in which we agreed to acquire three modern Ultramax vessels in exchange for six of our older Handysize vessels.
We entered into the $133 Million Credit Facility on August 14, 2018, which was initially used to finance a portion of the purchase price for the six vessels that were purchased during the third quarter of 2018 and originally allowed borrowings of up to $108 million. On June 11, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $133 Million Credit Facility that provides us with a $25 million revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate and working capital purposes. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the $495 Million Credit facility and the $133 Million Credit Facility.
Dividends
Our Board of Directors adopted a quarterly dividend policy following the third quarter of 2019 to pay a dividend of $0.175 per share. In light of market weakness and heightened economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, in May 2020, our Board of Directors determined following its quarterly review that it would be prudent to reduce our regular quarterly dividend beginning in the first quarter of 2020 to $0.02 per share in order to support our balance sheet and liquidity position and better position us for an eventual economic recovery. Furthermore, our Board of Directors determined to maintain this dividend level for the fourth quarter of 2020, as we announced a quarterly dividend of $0.02 per share on February 24, 2021. Our Board expects to reassess the payment of dividends as appropriate from time to time. Our declaration and payment of dividends is subject to a number of conditions and restrictions as described below.
On November 5, 2019, we entered into amendments with our lenders to the dividend covenants of the credit agreements for our $495 Million Credit Facility and our $133 Million Credit Facility. Under the terms of these two facilities as so amended, dividends or repurchases of our stock are subject to customary conditions. We may pay dividends or repurchase stock under these facilities to the extent our total cash and cash equivalents are greater than $100 million and 18.75% of our total indebtedness, whichever is higher; if we cannot satisfy this condition, we are subject to a limitation of 50% of consolidated net income for the quarter preceding such dividend payment or stock repurchase if the collateral maintenance test ratio is 200% or less for such quarter, for which purpose the full commitment of up to $35 million of our new scrubber tranche is assumed to be drawn. As of December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $143.9 million. We have commitments for amortization payments expected to be $20.2 million which began on December 31, 2020 under our credit facilities. Therefore, if we do not generate cash flow from operations, we would be unlikely to be able to declare or pay dividends in the future, except to the extent of permissible dividends from net income.
The declaration and payment of any dividend or any stock repurchase is subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors. Our Board of Directors and management continue to closely monitor market developments together with the evaluation of our quarterly dividend policy in the current market environment. The principal business factors that our Board of Directors expects to consider when determining the timing and amount of dividend payments or stock repurchases include our earnings, financial condition, and cash requirements at the time. Marshall Islands law generally prohibits the declaration and payment of dividends or stock repurchases other than from surplus. Marshall Islands law also prohibits the declaration and payment of dividends or stock repurchases while a company is insolvent or would be rendered insolvent by the payment of such a dividend or such a stock repurchase. Heightened economic uncertainty and
the potential for renewed drybulk market weakness as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic conditions may result in our suspension, reduction, or termination of future quarterly dividends.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of Dividends
U.S. Holders
For purposes of this discussion, the term "U.S. Holder" means a beneficial owner of our common stock that is, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, (i) an individual U.S. citizen or resident, (ii) a corporation that is created or organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia, or any other U.S. entity taxable as a corporation, (iii) an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source, or (iv) a trust if either (x) a court within the United States is able to exercise primary jurisdiction over the administration of the trust and one or more U.S. persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust, or (y) the trust has a valid election in effect under applicable Treasury Regulations to be treated as a U.S. person. If a partnership, or an entity treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a partnership, such as a limited liability company, holds common stock, the tax treatment of a partner will generally depend on the status of the partner and upon the activities of the partnership. If you are a partner in such a partnership holding our common stock, you are encouraged to consult your tax advisor. A beneficial owner of our common stock (other than a partnership) that is not a U.S. Holder is referred to below as a "Non-U.S. Holder."
Subject to the discussion of passive foreign investment company (PFIC) status on pages 33 - 34 above, any distributions made by us to a U.S. Holder with respect to our common shares generally will constitute dividends to the extent of our current or accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. Distributions in excess of those earnings and profits will be treated first as a nontaxable return of capital to the extent of the U.S. Holder's tax basis in our common shares (determined on a share-by-share basis), and thereafter as capital gain. U.S. Holders that own at least 10% of our shares may be able to claim a dividends-received-deduction and should consult their tax advisors.
Dividends paid on our common shares to a U.S. Holder who is an individual, trust or estate, or a "non-corporate U.S. Holder," will generally be treated as "qualified dividend income" that is taxable to such non-corporate U.S. Holder at preferential tax rates, provided that (1) our common shares are readily tradable on an established securities market in the United States (such as the NYSE, on which our common shares are traded); (2) we are not a PFIC for the taxable year during which the dividend is paid or the immediately preceding taxable year (which we do not believe we have been, are, or will be); (3) the non-corporate U.S. Holder's holding period of our common shares includes more than 60 days in the 121-day period beginning 60 days before the date on which our common shares becomes ex-dividend; and (4) the non-corporate U.S. Holder is not under an obligation to make related payments with respect to positions in substantially similar or related property. A non-corporate U.S. Holder will be able to take qualified dividend income into account in determining its deductible investment interest (which is generally limited to its net investment income) only if it elects to do so; in such case, the dividend will be taxed at ordinary income rates. Non-corporate U.S. Holders also may be required to pay a 3.8% surtax on all or part of such holder's "net investment income," which includes, among other items, dividends on our shares, subject to certain limitations and exceptions. Investors are encouraged to consult their own tax advisors regarding the effect, if any, of this surtax on their ownership of our shares.
Amounts taxable as dividends generally will be treated as passive income from sources outside the U.S. However, if (a) we are 50% or more owned, by vote or value, by U.S. Holders and (b) at least 10% of our earnings and profits are attributable to sources within the U.S., then for foreign tax credit purposes, a portion of our dividends would be treated as derived from sources within the U.S. With respect to any dividend paid for any taxable year, the U.S. source ratio of our dividends for foreign tax credit purposes would be equal to the portion of our earnings and profits from sources within the U.S. for such taxable year divided by the total amount of our earnings and profits for such taxable year. The rules related to U.S. foreign tax credits are complex and U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisors to determine whether and to what extent a credit would be available.
Special rules may apply to any "extraordinary dividend" - generally, a dividend in an amount which is equal to or in excess of 10% of a shareholder's adjusted basis (or fair market value in certain circumstances) in a share of our
common shares - paid by us. If we pay an "extraordinary dividend" on our common shares that is treated as "qualified dividend income", then any loss derived by a non-corporate U.S. Holder from the sale or exchange of such common shares will be treated as long-term capital loss to the extent of such dividend.
Tax Consequences if We Are a Passive Foreign Investment Company
As discussed in “U.S. tax authorities could treat us as a ‘passive foreign investment company,’ which could have adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S. shareholders” in Item 1.A Risk Factors above, a foreign corporation generally will be treated as a PFIC for U.S. federal income tax purposes if, after applying certain look through rules, either (1) at least 75% of its gross income for any taxable year consists of “passive income” or (2) at least 50% of the average value or adjusted bases of its assets (determined on a quarterly basis) produce or are held for the production of passive income, i.e., “passive assets.” As discussed above, we do not believe that our past or existing operations would cause, or would have caused, us to be deemed a PFIC with respect to any taxable year. No assurance can be given that the IRS or a court of law will accept our position, and there is a risk that the IRS or a court of law could determine that we are a PFIC. Moreover, there can be no assurance that we will not become a PFIC in any future taxable year because the PFIC test is an annual test, there are uncertainties in the application of the PFIC rules, and although we intend to manage our business so as to avoid PFIC status to the extent consistent with our other business goals, there could be changes in the nature and extent of our operations in future taxable years.
If we were to be treated as a PFIC for any taxable year in which a U.S. Holder owns shares of our common stock (and regardless of whether we remain a PFIC for subsequent taxable years), the tax consequences to such a U.S. holder upon the receipt of distributions in respect of such shares that are treated as “excess distributions” would differ from those described above. In general, an excess distribution is the amount of distributions received during a taxable year that exceed 125% of the average amount of distributions received by a U.S. Holder in respect of the common shares during the preceding three taxable years, or if shorter, during the U.S. Holder’s holding period prior to the taxable year of the distribution. The distributions that are excess distributions would be allocated ratably over the U.S. Holder’s holding period for the common shares. The amount allocated to the current taxable year and any taxable year prior to the first taxable year in which we were a PFIC would be taxed as ordinary income. The amount allocated to each of the other taxable years would be subject to tax at the highest marginal rate in effect for the U.S. Holder for that taxable year, and an interest charge for the deemed deferral benefit would be imposed on the resulting tax allocated to such other taxable years. The tax liability with respect to the amount allocated to taxable years prior to the year of the distribution cannot be offset by net operating losses. As an alternative to such tax treatment, a U.S. Holder may make a “qualified electing fund” election or “mark to market” election, to the extent available, in which event different rules would apply. The U.S. federal income tax consequences to a U.S. Holder if we were to be classified as a PFIC are complex. A U.S. Holder should consult with his or her own advisor with regard to those consequences, as well as with regard to whether he or she is eligible to and should make either of the elections described above.
Non-U.S. Holders
Non-U.S. Holders generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on dividends received from us on our common shares unless the income is effectively connected with the conduct by the Non-U.S. Holder of a trade or business in the United States (“effectively connected income”) (and, if an applicable income tax treaty so provides, the dividends are attributable to a permanent establishment maintained by the Non-U.S. Holder in the U.S.). Effectively connected income (or, if an income tax treaty applies, income attributable to a permanent establishment maintained in the U.S.) generally will be subject to regular U.S. federal income tax in the same manner discussed above relating to taxation of U.S. Holders. In addition, earnings and profits of a corporate Non-U.S. Holder that are attributable to such income, as determined after allowance for certain adjustments, may be subject to an additional branch profits tax at a rate of 30%, or at a lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty. Non-U.S. Holders may be subject to tax in jurisdictions other than the United States on dividends received from us on our common shares.
Dividends paid on our common shares to a non-corporate U.S. Holder may be subject to U.S. federal backup withholding tax if the non-corporate U.S. Holder:
● fails to provide us with an accurate taxpayer identification number;
● is notified by the IRS that they have become subject to backup withholding because they previously failed to report all interest or dividends required to be shown on their federal income tax returns; or
● fails to comply with applicable certification requirements.
A holder that is not a U.S. Holder or a partnership may be subject to U.S. federal backup withholding with respect to such dividends unless the holder certifies that it is a non-U.S. person, under penalties of perjury, or otherwise establishes an exemption therefrom. Backup withholding tax is not an additional tax. Holders generally may obtain a refund of any amounts withheld under backup withholding rules that exceed their income tax liability by timely filing a refund claim with the IRS.
You are encouraged to consult your own tax advisor concerning the overall tax consequences arising in your own particular situation under U.S. federal, state, local, or foreign law from the payment of dividends on our common stock.
Cash Flow
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $36.9 million and $59.5 million, respectively. This decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to changes in working capital, offset by a decrease in drydocking related expenditures.
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $37.4 million as compared to $22.8 million net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. This fluctuation was primarily due to an increase in net proceeds from the sale of vessels in 2020 as compared to 2019, as well as a decrease in scrubber and ballast water treatment system related expenditures.
Net cash used in financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $56.9 million and $77.2 million, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the $24.0 million drawdown on the $133 Million Credit Facility during 2020 and an $11.0 million decrease in the payment of dividends during 2020 as compared to 2019. These decreases were partially offset by a $10.3 million decrease in drawdowns under the $495 Million Credit Facility, as well as a $2.8 million and a $1.9 million increase in repayments under the $133 Million Credit Facility and $495 Million Credit Facility, respectively, during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Credit Facilities
We entered into the $133 Million Credit Facility on August 14, 2018, which was initially used to finance a portion of the purchase price for the six vessels that were purchased during the third quarter of 2018. On June 11, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $133 Million Credit Facility which provided us with a $25 million revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate and working capital purposes. Additionally, we entered into the $495 Million Credit Facility on May 31, 2018, which was initially used to refinance our prior credit facilities. On February 28, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility, which provides for an additional tranche of up to $35 million to finance a portion of the acquisitions, installations, and related costs for exhaust cleaning systems (or “scrubbers”) for 17 of our Capesize vessels. On June 5, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility to extend the period that collateral vessels can be sold or disposed of without prepayment of the loan if a replacement vessel or vessels meeting certain requirements are included as collateral from 180 days to 360 days. On December 17, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the $495 Million Credit Facility that allowed us to enter into a vessel transaction in which we agreed to acquire three modern Ultramax vessels in exchange for six of our older Handysize vessels.
Refer to Note 7 - Debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our current credit facilities, including the underlying financial and non-financial covenants.
Interest Rate Swap Agreements, Forward Freight Agreements and Currency Swap Agreements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any interest rate swap agreements. As part of our business strategy, we may enter into interest rate swap agreements to manage interest costs and the risk associated with changing interest rates. In determining the fair value of interest rate derivatives, we would consider the creditworthiness of both the counterparty and ourselves, which in the past, have resulted in an immaterial adjustment. Valuations prior to any adjustments for credit risk would be validated by comparison with counterparty valuations. Amounts would not and should not be identical due to the different modeling assumptions. Any material differences would be investigated.
As part of our business strategy, we may enter into arrangements commonly known as forward freight agreements, or FFAs, to hedge and manage our exposure to the charter market risks relating to the deployment of our vessels. Generally, these arrangements would bind us and each counterparty in the arrangement to buy or sell a specified tonnage freighting commitment “forward” at an agreed time and price and for a particular route. Upon settlement, if the contracted charter rate is less than the average of the rates (as reported by an identified index) for the specified route and period, the seller of the FFA is required to pay the buyer an amount equal to the difference between the contracted rate and the settlement rate multiplied by the number of days in the specific period. Conversely, if the contracted rate is greater than the settlement rate, the buyer is required to pay the seller the settlement sum. Although FFAs can be entered into for a variety of purposes, including for hedging, as an option, for trading or for arbitrage, if we decided to enter into FFAs, our objective would be to hedge and manage market risks as part of our commercial management. It is not currently our intention to enter into FFAs to generate a stream of income independent of the revenues we derive from the operation of our fleet of vessels. If we determine to enter into FFAs, we may reduce our exposure to any declines in our results from operations due to weak market conditions or downturns, but may also limit our ability to benefit economically during periods of strong demand in the market. We have not entered into any FFAs as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Interest Rates
The effective interest rate for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 include interest rates associated with the interest expense for our various credit facilities including the following: the $133 Million Credit Facility; the $495 Million Credit Facility; the $400 Million Credit Facility, the $98 Million Credit Facility and the 2014 Term Loan Facilities (until these facilities were refinanced with the $495 Million Credit Facility on June 5, 2018).
The effective interest rate for the aforementioned credit facilities, including the cost associated with unused commitment fees, if applicable, was 3.71%, 5.31% and 5.71% during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The interest rate on the debt, excluding unused commitment fees, ranged from 2.65% to 3.50%; 4.05% to 5.76% and 3.83% to 8.43% during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations and their scheduled maturity dates as of December 31, 2020. The table incorporates the employment agreement entered into in September 2007 with our Chief Executive Officer and President, John C. Wobensmith, as amended. The interest and borrowing fees and scheduled credit agreement payments below reflect the $495 Million Credit Facility and the $133 Million Credit Facility, as well as other fees associated with the facilities. The following table also incorporates the future lease payments associated with our office leases. Refer to Note 13 - Leases in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the terms of our lease agreements. Lastly, the table incorporates the remaining contractual purchase obligations for the purchase of ballast water treatment systems for 11 of our vessels, refer to “Capital Expenditures” below for further
information. All of our time charter-in agreements with third parties are less than twelve months and have not been included below.
Interest expense has been estimated using 0.13% based on one-month LIBOR plus the applicable margin of 3.25% for the $460 million tranche of the $495 Million Credit Facility; 2.50% for the $35 million tranche of the $495 Million Credit Facility; 2.50% for the $108 million tranche of the $133 Million Credit Facility; and 3.00% for the $25 million tranche of the $133 Million Credit Facility.
Capital Expenditures
We make capital expenditures from time to time in connection with our vessel acquisitions. After the sale of two Supramax vessels, our fleet will consist of 39 drybulk vessels, including 17 Capesize drybulk carriers, nine Ultramax drybulk carriers and thirteen Supramax drybulk carriers.
As previously announced, we have initiated a fuel efficiency upgrade program for certain of our vessels in an effort to generate fuel savings and increase the future earnings potential for these vessels. The upgrades have been successfully installed on 22 of our vessels in the aggregate during previous drydockings.
Under U.S. Federal law and 33 CFR, Part 151, Subpart D, U.S. approved BWTS will be required to be installed in all vessels at the first out of water drydocking after January 1, 2016 if these vessels are to discharge ballast water inside 12 nautical miles of the coast of the U.S. U.S. authorities did not approve ballast water treatment systems until December 2016. Therefore, the U.S. Coast Guard (“USCG”) has granted us extensions for our vessels with 2016 drydocking deadlines until January 1, 2018; however, an alternative management system (“AMS”) may be installed in lieu. For example, in February 2015, the USCG added Bawat to the list of ballast water treatment systems that received AMS acceptance. An AMS is valid for five years from the date of required compliance with ballast water discharge standards, by which time it must be replaced by an approved system unless the AMS itself achieves approval. Furthermore, we received extensions for vessels drydocking in 2016 that allowed for further extensions to the vessels’ next scheduled drydockings in year 2021. Additionally, for our vessels that were scheduled to drydock in 2017 and 2018, the USCG has granted an extension that enables us to defer installation to the next scheduled out of water drydocking. Any newbuilding vessels that we acquire will have a USCG approved system or at least an AMS installed when the vessel is being built.
In addition, on September 8, 2016, the Ballast Water Management (“BWM”) Convention was ratified and had an original effective date of September 8, 2017. However, on July 7, 2017, the effective date of the BWM Convention was extended two years to September 8, 2019 for existing ships. This will require vessels to have a BWTS installed to coincide with the vessels’ next International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate (“IOPP”) renewal survey after September 8, 2019. In order for a vessel to trade in U.S. waters, it must be compliant with the installation date as required by the USCG as outlined above.
During the second half of 2018, we have entered into agreements for the purchase of BWTS for 36 of our vessels. The cost of these systems will vary based on the size and specifications of each vessel and whether the systems will be installed in China. Based on the contractual purchase price of the BWTS and the estimated installation fees, the Company estimates the cost of the systems to be approximately $0.9 million for Capesize, $0.6 million for Supramax
and $0.5 million for Handysize vessels. The BWTS will be installed during a vessel’s scheduled drydocking and these costs will be capitalized and depreciated over the remainder of the life of the vessel. During 2020 and 2019, we completed the installation of BWTS on nine and 17 of our vessels, respectively. Eight of these vessels have since been sold. We anticipate that we will complete the installation of BWTS on five vessels during 2021 and five vessels during 2022. We intend to fund the remaining BWTS purchase price and installation fees using cash on hand.
Under maritime regulations that went into effect January 1, 2020, our vessels were required to reduce sulfur emissions, for which the principal solutions are the use of scrubbers or buying fuel with low sulfur content. We have completed the installation of scrubbers on our 17 Capesize vessels, 16 of which were completed as of December 31, 2019 and the last one of which was completed on January 17, 2020. The remainder of our vessels are consuming VLSFO. The costs for the scrubber equipment and installation will be capitalized and depreciated over the remainder of the life of the vessel. This does not include any lost revenue associated with offhire days due to the installation of the scrubbers. During February 2019, we entered into an amendment to our $495 Million Credit Facility for an additional tranche of up to $35 million to cover a portion of the expenses to the acquisition and installation of scrubbers on our 17 Capesize vessels. We have funded the remainder of the costs with cash on hand. For vessels on which we did not install scrubbers, we incurred additional costs during 2019 in order to transition these vessels from high sulfur fuel to compliant low sulfur fuel.
In addition to acquisitions that we may undertake in future periods, we will incur additional expenditures due to special surveys and drydockings for our fleet. Through December 31, 2020, we have paid $42.7 million in cash installments towards our scrubber program and have drawn down $32.8 million under the scrubber tranche under our $495 Million Credit Facility.
We estimate our drydocking costs, including capitalized costs incurred during drydocking related to vessel assets and vessel equipment, BWTS costs and scheduled off-hire days for our fleet through 2022 to be:
The costs reflected are estimates based on drydocking our vessels in China. Actual costs will vary based on various factors, including where the drydockings are actually performed. We expect to fund these costs with cash on hand. These costs do not include drydock expense items that are reflected in vessel operating expenses.
Actual length of drydocking will vary based on the condition of the vessel, yard schedules and other factors. Higher repairs and maintenance expenses during drydocking for vessels which are over 15 years old typically result in a higher number of off-hire days depending on the condition of the vessel.
During 2020 and 2019, we incurred a total of $8.6 million and $14.6 million of drydocking costs, respectively, excluding costs incurred during drydocking that were capitalized to vessel assets or vessel equipment.
Fourteen vessels completed their respective drydockings during 2020, which included one vessel that began its drydocking during the fourth quarter of 2019. We estimate that eight of our vessels will be drydocked during 2021 and seven of our vessels will be drydocked during 2022.
As of January 17, 2020, we have completed the installation of scrubbers on our 17 Capesize vessels.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Inflation
Inflation has only a moderate effect on our expenses given current economic conditions. In the event that significant global inflationary pressures appear, these pressures would increase our operating, voyage, general and administrative, and financing costs.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of those financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Critical accounting policies are those that reflect significant judgments of uncertainties and potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We have described below what we believe are our most critical accounting policies, because they generally involve a comparatively higher degree of judgment in their application. For an additional description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this 10-K.
Vessels and Depreciation
We record the value of our vessels at their cost (which includes acquisition costs directly attributable to the vessel and expenditures made to prepare the vessel for its initial voyage) less accumulated depreciation. We depreciate our drybulk vessels on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, estimated to be 25 years from the date of initial delivery from the shipyard. Depreciation is based on cost less the estimated residual scrap value of $310/lwt based on the 15-year average scrap value of steel. An increase in the residual value of the vessels will decrease the annual depreciation charge over the remaining useful life of the vessels. Similarly, an increase in the useful life of a drybulk vessel would also decrease the annual depreciation charge. Comparatively, a decrease in the useful life of a drybulk vessel or in its residual value would have the effect of increasing the annual depreciation charge. However, when regulations place limitations over the ability of a vessel to trade on a worldwide basis, we will adjust the vessel’s useful life to end at the date such regulations preclude such vessel’s further commercial use.
The carrying value of each of our vessels does not represent the fair market value of such vessel or the amount we could obtain if we were to sell any of our vessels, which could be more or less. Under U.S. GAAP, we would not record a loss if the fair market value of a vessel (excluding its charter) is below our carrying value unless and until we determine to sell that vessel or the vessel is impaired as discussed below under the heading “Impairment of long-lived assets.”
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recorded losses of $208.9 million, $27.4 million and $56.6 million related to the impairment of our vessel assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairment for 20 of our Supramax vessels (the Genco Loire, the Genco Lorraine, the Genco Normandy, the Genco Picardy, the Genco Predator, the Genco Provence, the Genco Warrior, the Baltic Cougar, the Baltic Jaguar, the Baltic Leopard, the Baltic Panther, the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone) and ten of our Handysize vessels (the Genco Avra, the Genco Bay, the Genco Mare, the Genco Ocean, the Genco Spirit, the Baltic Breeze, the Baltic Cove, the Baltic Fox, the Baltic Hare and the Baltic Wind). During the year ended
December 31, 2019, we recorded impairment for two of our Panamax vessels (the Genco Raptor and Genco Thunder) and three of our Handysize vessels (the Genco Challenger, the Genco Champion and the Genco Charger). During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded impairment for one of our Panamax vessels (the Genco Surprise), one of our Handymax vessels (the Genco Muse), and eight of our Supramax vessels (the Genco Cavalier, the Genco Loire, the Genco Lorraine, the Genco Normandy, the Baltic Cougar, the Baltic Jaguar, the Baltic Leopard and the Baltic Panther). Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the impairment recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Pursuant to our credit facilities, we regularly submit to the lenders valuations of our vessels on an individual charter free basis in order to evidence our compliance with the collateral maintenance covenants under our bank credit facilities. Such a valuation is not necessarily the same as the amount any vessel may bring upon sale, which may be more or less, and should not be relied upon as such. We were in compliance with the collateral maintenance covenant under our $495 Million Credit Facility and $133 Million Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 7 - Debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. We obtained valuations for all of the vessels in our fleet pursuant to the terms of the $495 Million Credit Facility and the $133 Million Credit Facility. In the chart below, we list each of our vessels, the year it was built, the year we acquired it, and its carrying value as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Vessels have been grouped according to their collateralized status as of December 31, 2020 and does not include any vessels held for sale or held for exchange. The carrying value of 15 Supramax vessels as noted above reflect the impairment loss recorded during 2020 for these vessels (the Genco Lorraine, the Genco Picardy, the Genco Predator, the Genco Provence, the Genco Warrior, the Baltic Leopard, the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone). The carrying value of the Genco Charger as of December 31, 2019 reflects the impairment loss recorded during 2019 for this vessel.
As of December 31, 2020, the vessel valuations of all of our vessels for covenant compliance purposes under our credit facilities as of the most recent compliance testing date were lower than their carrying values as of December 31, 2020, with the exception of nine of the Supramax vessels that were impaired as of December 31, 2020 (the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone) and the Genco Magic that was acquired on December 23, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, the vessel valuations of all of our vessels for covenant compliance purposes under our credit facility as of the most recent compliance testing date were lower than their carrying values as of December 31, 2019, with the exception of the Genco Charger, which was impaired during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The amount by which the carrying value as of December 31, 2020 of all of the vessels in our fleet, with the exception of the ten aforementioned vessels, exceeded the valuation of such vessels for covenant compliance purposes ranged, on an individual basis, from $0 million to $18.3 million per vessel, and $260.8 million on an aggregate fleet basis. The amount by which the carrying value as of December 31, 2019 of all of the vessels in our fleet, with the exception of the Genco Charger, exceeded the valuation of such vessels for covenant compliance purposes ranged, on an individual basis, from $1.6 million to $18.1 million per vessel, and $418.1 million on an aggregate fleet basis. The average amount by which the carrying value of these vessels exceeded the valuation of such vessels for covenant compliance purposes was $9.0 million and $7.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. However, neither such valuation nor the carrying value in the table below reflects the value of long-term time charters, if any, related to some of our vessels.
If we were to sell a vessel or hold a vessel for sale, and the carrying value of the vessel were to exceed its fair market value, net of commission, we would record a loss in the amount of the difference. Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 - Vessel Acquisitions and Dispositions in our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the sale of vessel assets and the classification of vessel assets held for sale and exchange as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Deferred drydocking costs
Our vessels are required to be drydocked approximately every 30 to 60 months for major repairs and maintenance that cannot be performed while the vessels are operating. We defer the costs associated with drydockings as they occur and amortize these costs on a straight-line basis over the period between drydockings. Deferred drydocking costs include actual costs incurred at the drydock yard; cost of travel, lodging and subsistence of our personnel sent to the drydocking site to supervise; and the cost of hiring a third party to oversee the drydocking. We believe that these criteria are consistent with U.S. GAAP guidelines and industry practice and that our policy of deferral reflects the economics and market values of the vessels. Costs that are not related to drydocking, including routine maintenance and repairs, are expensed as incurred. If the vessel is drydocked earlier than originally anticipated, any remaining deferred drydock costs that have not been amortized are expensed at the end of the next drydock.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We follow the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) subtopic 360-10, “Property, Plant and Equipment” (“ASC 360-10”) which requires impairment losses to be recorded on long-lived assets used in operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amounts. If indicators of impairment are present, we perform an analysis of the anticipated undiscounted future net cash flows to be derived from the related long-lived assets.
Weaker supply and demand fundamentals experienced in recent years have negatively impacted the drybulk industry. General market volatility has endured as a result of uncertainty about the growth rate of the world economy and the Chinese economy in particular, on which the drybulk industry depends to a significant degree. Additional unforeseen events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the dam breach that occurred in Brazil at a mine operated by Vale during 2019 have also negatively impacted the market. As a result of these factors and the increased supply of drybulk vessels, freight rates and charter rates have remained volatile in recent years.
When indicators of impairment are present and our estimate of future undiscounted cash flows for any vessel is lower than the vessel’s carrying value, the carrying value is written down, by recording a charge to operations, to the vessel’s fair market value if the fair market value is lower than the vessel’s carrying value.
We determined that as of December 31, 2020, the future income streams expected to be earned by such vessels over their remaining operating lives and upon disposal on an undiscounted basis would be sufficient to recover their carrying values. After the impairment of nine of our Supramax vessels as of December 31, 2020 resulting in $67.2 million of impairment during 2020, our estimated future undiscounted cash flows exceeded each of our vessels’ carrying values by a margin of approximately 22% - 115% of the carrying value. Our vessels remain fully utilized and have a relatively long average remaining useful life of approximately 15 years in which to recover sufficient cash flows on an undiscounted basis to recover their carrying values as of December 31, 2020. Management will continue to monitor developments in charter rates in the markets in which it participates with respect to the expectation of future rates over an extended period of time that are utilized in the analyses.
In developing estimates of future undiscounted cash flows, we make assumptions and estimates about the vessels’ future performance, with the significant assumptions being related to charter rates, fleet utilization, vessels’ operating expenses, vessels’ capital expenditures and drydocking requirements, vessels’ residual value and the estimated remaining useful life of each vessel. The assumptions used to develop estimates of future undiscounted cash flows are based on historical trends. Specifically, we utilize the rates currently in effect for the duration of their current time charters or spot market voyage charters, without assuming additional profit sharing. For periods of time where our vessels are not fixed on time charters or spot market voyage charters, we utilize an estimated daily time charter equivalent for our vessels’ unfixed days based on the most recent ten year historical one-year time charter average. In addition, we consider the current market rate environment and, if necessary, adjust our estimates of undiscounted cash flows to reflect the current rate environment. Further, for our older vessels, those vessels in operation for at least 18 years, we evaluate the current rate environment compared to the ten-year historical one-year time charter rate and adjust the rate to better reflect the expected cash flows over the remaining useful lives of those vessels. Older vessels are inherently more susceptible to impairment from weakness in the charter rate environment as their shorter remaining useful lives provide for less of an opportunity for them to benefit from potentially stronger rates in the future. It is reasonably possible that the estimate of undiscounted cash flows may change in the near term due to changes in current rates which adversely affect the average rates being utilized and could result in impairment of certain of our older vessels. Actual equivalent drybulk shipping rates are currently lower than the estimated rates. We believe current rates have been driven by seasonal issues, as well as a number of factors that have affected demand growth and overall sentiment in the drybulk market as discussed under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Voyage Revenues.”
Of the inputs that the Company uses for its impairment analysis, future charter rates are the most significant and most volatile. Based on the sensitivity analysis performed by the Company, the Company would record impairment on its vessels for time charter declines from their most recent ten-year historical one-year time charter averages as follows (this table excludes any vessels held for sale or vessels held for exchange as of December 31, 2020):
(1) We excluded the Genco Magic from this sensitivity analysis as the vessel was recently acquired on December 23, 2020.
(2) We excluded the Genco Aquitaine, the Genco Ardennes, the Genco Auvergne, the Genco Bourgogne, the Genco Brittany, the Genco Hunter, the Genco Languedoc, the Genco Pyrenees and the Genco Rhone from this sensitivity analysis as these vessels were impaired during the fourth quarter of 2020.
For our impairment analysis, we utilize the ten-year historical one-year time charter average, as well as considering the current rate environment, to project future charter rates, which we believe appropriately takes into account the volatility and highs and lows of the shipping cycle.
Our time charter equivalent (TCE) rates for our fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were above or (below) the ten-year historical one-year time charter average as of such dates as follows:
The projected net operating cash flows are determined by considering the future voyage revenues from existing time charters for the fixed fleet days and an estimated daily time charter equivalent for the unfixed days over the estimated remaining life of the vessel, assumed to be 25 years from the delivery of the vessel from the shipyard, reduced by brokerage and address commissions, expected outflows for vessels’ maintenance and vessel operating expenses (including planned drydocking and special survey expenditures) and required capital expenditures adjusted annually for inflation, assuming fleet utilization of 98%. The salvage value used in the impairment test is estimated to be $310 per light weight ton, consistent with our vessels’ depreciation policy discussed above.
Although we believe that the assumptions used to evaluate potential impairment are reasonable and appropriate, such assumptions are highly subjective. There can be no assurance as to how long charter rates and vessel values will remain at their currently low levels or whether they will improve by any significant degree. Charter rates may remain at depressed levels for a prolonged period of time, which could adversely affect our revenue and profitability, and future assessments of vessel impairment.