Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) contains certain forward-looking statements. Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. Factors that may cause differences between actual results and those contemplated by forward- looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, including any changes that might result from any facts, events, or circumstances after the date hereof that may bear upon forward-looking statements. Furthermore, we cannot guarantee future results, events, levels of activity, performance, or achievements.
Overview
We are a clinical stage gene therapy company focused on developing life-changing treatments for cancer and diabetes. Our lead cancer drug candidate, REQORSA™ Immunogene therapy drug (sometimes referred to as GPX-001), is being developed to treat NSCLC. The active agent in REQORSA is a TUSC2 gene expressing plasmid that is encapsulated in a DOTAP cholesterol nanoparticle. TUSC2 is a tumor suppressor gene which has both tumor killing (via apoptosis) and immunomodulatory effects. We utilize our novel proprietary ONCOPREX® Nanoparticle Delivery System to deliver the TUSC2 gene expressing plasmid to cancer cells. The TUSC2 gene is one of a series of genes whose therapeutic use is covered by our exclusive worldwide licenses from MD Anderson.
We are planning to initiate our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials in 2021. Acclaim-1 is a Phase 1/2 clinical trial using a combination of REQORSA with AstraZeneca PLC’s Tagrisso® in patients with late-stage NSCLC with mutated epidermal growth factor receptors ("EGFRs") whose disease progressed after treatment with Tagrisso. In January 2020, we received FDA Fast Track Designation for the Acclaim-1 patient population. Acclaim-2 is a Phase 1/2 clinical trial using a combination of REQORSA with Merck & Co.’s Keytruda® in late-stage NSCLC patients who are low expressors (1% to 49%) of the PD-L1.
In diabetes, we are developing a gene therapy that is exclusively licensed from the University of Pittsburgh of the Commonwealth System of Higher Education ("University of Pittsburgh") for the treatment of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes. This potential treatment is designed to work by transforming alpha cells in the pancreas into functional beta-like cells, which can produce insulin but are distinct enough from beta cells to evade the body’s immune system. Our diabetes product candidate is currently being evaluated in preclinical studies.
Oncology Platform
Utilizing our non-viral ONCOPREX Nanoparticle Delivery System, we are developing cancer treatments that are designed to administer cancer fighting genes. We encapsulate the gene-expressing plasmids using ONCOPREX lipid nanoparticles, and administer them intravenously, where they are then taken up by tumor cells and express proteins that are missing or found in low quantities in the tumor cells. With our lead drug candidate, REQORSA, there is a multimodal mechanism of action whereby REQORSA interrupts cell signaling pathways that cause replication and proliferation of cancer cells, re-establishes pathways for apoptosis, or programmed cell death, in cancer cells, and modulates the immune response against cancer cells. REQORSA has also been shown to block mechanisms that create drug resistance.
We believe that our ONCOPREX Nanoparticle Delivery System could allow delivery of a number of cancer-fighting genes, alone or in combination with other cancer therapies, to combat multiple types of cancer. We believe that REQORSA’s combination of pan-kinase inhibition, direct induction of apoptosis, anti-cancer immune modulation and complementary action with targeted drugs and immunotherapies is unique, and positions REQORSA to provide treatment for patients with NSCLC and possibly other cancers, who are not benefitting from current therapies.
Diabetes Gene Therapy
Our diabetes gene therapy, also referred to as GPX-002, was developed by lead researcher Dr. George Gittes, at the Rangos Research Center at the UPMC Children’s Hospital. This potential treatment is designed to work by transforming alpha cells in the pancreas into functional beta-like cells, which can produce insulin but are distinct enough from beta cells to evade the body’s immune system. The therapy utilizes a procedure in which an adeno-associated virus vector delivers Pdx1 and MafA genes to the pancreas.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. Although we are an emerging growth company, we have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies. We have implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and may affect our financial statements, and we do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that would have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we intend to rely on certain exemptions, including, without limitation, the exemption from the requirements (i) to provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and (ii) to comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our initial public offering; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for costs invoiced from research and development activities conducted on our behalf by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials and use of contract research and manufacturing activities. We record the costs of research and development activities based upon the amount of services provided, and we include these costs in accrued liabilities in the balance sheets and within research and development expense in the statements of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. Purchased materials to be used in future research are capitalized and included in research and development supplies.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed, the number of patients enrolled and the rate of patient enrollment in any of our clinical trials may vary from our estimates and could result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party service providers. To date, there have been no material differences from our accrued expenses to actual expenses.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets or liabilities are recorded for temporary differences between financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, using applicable rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded if it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have provided a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets, which primarily consist of cumulative net operating losses from April 1, 2009 (inception) to December 31, 2020. Due to our history of operating losses since inception and losses expected to be incurred in the foreseeable future, a full valuation allowance was considered necessary.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Management reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be realizable or at a minimum annually during the fourth quarter of the year. If an evaluation is required, the estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to the asset’s carrying value to determine if an impairment of such asset is necessary. The effect of any impairment would be to expense the difference between the fair value of such asset and its carrying value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K or any commitments or contractual obligations.
Components of our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expenses into three categories: research and development, general and administrative, and depreciation.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our current and potential product candidates;
•
costs related to production and storage of clinical supplies, including fees paid to contract manufacturers, manufacturing consultants, and cold-storage facilities;
•
fees paid to clinical consultants, clinical trial sites and vendors, including CROs in conjunction with implementing and monitoring our clinical trials and acquiring and evaluating clinical trial data, including all related fees, such as patient screening fees, laboratory work, and statistical compilation and analysis;
•
costs related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements;
•
costs related to staffing and personnel associated with research and development activities, including wages, taxes, benefits, leases, overheads, supplies, and share-based compensation.
We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Clinical trial costs, contract manufacturing and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the future as we advance our current and potential product candidates into and through clinical trials, as we pursue regulatory approval of our current and potential product candidates in the United States and Europe, and as we expand our research programs to include new therapies and new therapy combinations. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our current and potential product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including the quality of our current and potential product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our current or future product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates, if at all.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists of personnel related costs, which include salaries, as well as the costs of professional services, such as accounting and legal, travel, facilities, information technology and other administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in future periods due to the anticipated growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as accounting, insurance, investor relations, and other costs associated with being a public company.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense consists of depreciation from our fixed assets consisting of our property, equipment, and furniture. We depreciate our assets over their estimated useful life. We estimate furniture and computer and office equipment to have a 5-year life.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development ("R&D") expense was $7,302,923 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1,967,007 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $5,335,916, or 271%, is due to the hiring of new employees and consultants to develop strategy for and execute on the launch of our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials, major advancements in our manufacturing programs providing drug product for our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials, and research of novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cancer using REQORSA and immunotherapies. These R&D activities will continue throughout 2021 and thereafter and will continue to include costs related to the launch and conduct of the Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials, the development and execution on related manufacturing strategies and processes required to support these, and potentially other, clinical programs, and additional preclinical research.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative ("G&A") expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10,635,881 as compared to $8,702,596 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $1,933,285, or 22% is mostly due to an increase in financing costs and legal fees associated with our registered direct offerings in 2020 as well as greater than normal share-based compensation expense associated with the accelerated vesting of options for a former executive pursuant to his separation agreement. Notwithstanding these expenses, some G&A expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to reclassification of expenses associated with R&D personnel to more accurately reflect expenses associated with their job function as well as reduced travel and office expenses as the result of travel restrictions and social distancing guidelines put in place as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Income. Interest income was $18,811 and $27,905 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease of $9,094, or 33%%, was due to changes in balances and a significant drop in interest rates of our money market instruments for the year ended December 31, 2020 as opposed to the prior year.
Interest Expense. There was no interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 because we satisfied all debt obligations and repaid all short-term loans prior to 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding debt.
Depreciation Expense. Depreciation expense was $22,777 and $13,070 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $9,707, or 74%, in depreciation was driven by increased purchase of equipment for use by employees and manufacturing partners for research activities in the year ended in December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have never generated revenue from product sales and have incurred net losses in each year. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $58,422,229. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale and issuance of capital stock. During 2019, we sold 3,167,986 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 3,167,986 shares of common stock for total net proceeds of $1,178,491 pursuant to a registered direct offering. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 16,697,884 shares of common stock for total net proceeds of $34,493,423 pursuant to registered direct offerings and issued 7,104,524 shares of common stock with gross proceeds of $3,857,886 from warrant and option exercises.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $27,319,685 in cash.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development of, obtain regulatory approval for and begin to commercialize one or more of our current and potential product candidates, or other product candidates to which we may acquire rights, which we expect will take a number of years and which is subject to significant uncertainty. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will need to raise additional capital to fund our future operations, which include conducting our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials expected to be initiated in 2021. Until such time as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operating activities through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings and we may seek to raise additional capital through strategic collaborations. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all, which would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our development programs or commercialization efforts or grant to others rights to develop or market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. Failure to receive additional funding could cause us to curtail or cease our operations. Furthermore, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations.
Based on our current cash, we estimate that we will be able to fund our expenditure requirements for our current operations and planned clinical trial activities into 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently plan due to incorrect assumptions or due to a decision to expand our activities beyond those currently planned.
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $13,935,086 and $6,918,721 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $7,016,365, or 101%%, in net cash used in operating activities in 2020 was due to an increase in financing costs and legal fees associated with our fundraising activities in early and late 2020 and significant increases to our headcount and service providers in preparation for the launch of our Acclaim-1 and Acclaim-2 clinical trials planned for 2021.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $2,337,250 and $946,899 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in net cash used in investing activities of $1,390,351, or 147%, was primarily due to a major investment in manufacturing materials for the year ended December 31, 2020 that are currently being used to manufacture REQORSA for our planned clinical trials. Investments in property and equipment and intellectual property increased marginally for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $41,589,529 and $1,267,194 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $40,322,335, or 3,182%, in net cash provided by financing activities was due to our selling common stock in capital raising activities throughout the year ended December 31, 2020.