ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on August 26, 2019 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units and Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from August 26, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to consummate the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $441,978, which consists of operating costs of $1,598,581, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,156,603.
For the period from August 26, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net loss of $2,199, which consists of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 13, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 300,000 Private Units and 1,500,000 Private Warrants to our Sponsor and Imperial Capital and its designee, generating gross proceeds of $4,500,000.
On February 14, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we consummated the sale of an additional 2,250,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $22,500,000. In addition, we also consummated the sale of an additional 30,000 Private Units at $10.00 per Private Unit and 150,000 Private Warrants at $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $450,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,214,806, which was comprised of our net loss of $441,978, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,156,603 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $383,775 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from August 26, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $31,071, which was comprised of our net loss of $2,199 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $28,872 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $173,656,603 (including approximately $1,157,000 of interest income) consisting of securities held in a money market fund that invests in U.S Treasury securities with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including a fee payable to Imperial Capital, upon consummation of our initial Business Combination for assisting us in connection with our initial Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect a Business Combination, the remaining funds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our Business Combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $309,849. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Insiders, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of notes may be convertible into Private Units, at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit, and/or Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant. The units and warrants would be identical to the Private Units and Private Warrants sold in the Private Placement. On March 26, 2020, we issued an unsecured promissory note (the “2020 Note”) in the principal amount of $1,000,000 to the Sponsor. The 2020 Note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of a Business Combination. The 2020 Note may be converted into units at a price of $10.00 per unit and/or warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The units would be identical to the Private Units and the warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants. On January 29, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note (the “2021 Note”) in the principal amount of $1,000,000 to the Sponsor. The 2021 Note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of a Business Combination. The 2021 Note may be converted into units at a price of $10.00 per unit and/or warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The units would be identical to the Private Units and the warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants.
We monitor the adequacy of our working capital in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial Business Combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on February 10, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The Initial Public Offering underwriting agreement provides that in the event we complete a financing transaction similar to the Initial Public Offering or Business Combination, or enter into a statement or letter of intent that results in such a transaction, within 18 months following its termination, Imperial shall be entitled to receive any expense reimbursement due to it along with payment in full of its applicable fee of either (i) 2% of the gross proceeds of the offering, of which 1% will be in cash and 1% will be in equity of the Company for a financing transaction, or (ii) an amount equal to 5% of the face amount of any equity securities and 3% of the face amount of any debt sold or arranged as part of the Business Combination (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable). Additionally, Imperial has the right to act as a book-runner and managing underwriter for all underwritten follow-on offerings for 18 months following completion of the Initial Public Offering and the right to approve any co-lead managing underwriter or co-book runner.
We have engaged Imperial as an advisor in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with its press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay Imperial a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to 4.5% of the gross proceeds of Initial Public Offering, or $7,762,500 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 20% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other FINRA members that assist us in identifying and consummating a Business Combination.
Additionally, we have agreed to pay Imperial a cash fee for assisting us in obtaining financing for the Business Combination in an amount equal to 5% of the face amount of any equity securities and 3% of the face amount of any debt sold or arranged as part of the Business Combination (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable).
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Common Stock possible to redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent accounting standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.