Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The discussion and analysis set forth below should be read in conjunction with the information presented in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Item 1. Business,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This discussion contains forward-looking statements which are based on our current expectations and industry experience, as well as our perception of historical trends, current market conditions, current economic data, expected future developments and other factors that we believe are appropriate under the circumstances. These statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
Genasys is a global provider of critical communications hardware and software solutions designed to alert, inform, and protect. Our unified platform receives information from a wide variety of sensors and Internet-of-Things (IoT) inputs to collect real-time information on developing and active emergency situations. Genasys uses this information to create and disseminate alerts, warnings, notifications, and instructions through multiple channels before, during, and after public safety and enterprise threats, critical events, and other crisis situations.
Our products, systems and solutions include:
•
GEM is Genasys’ software-based product line. The GEM lineup consists of GEM Software, IMNS, and Zonehaven.
GEM Software is an interactive, cloud-based SaaS solution that sends at-risk individuals or groups critical information when an emergency occurs. GEM Software acts as both a communications input and output, receiving information from state-of-the-art sensors and emergency services, and quickly relaying notifications, alerts, and instructions to at-risk populations and first responders. GEM Software operators can create and send critical, verified, and secure notifications and messages using emails, voice calls, text messages, panic buttons, desktop alerts, television, social media, and more.
IMNS is Genasys’ comprehensive emergency response solution, uniting GEM Software and Genasys speaker system hardware in a multi-use solution. IMNS gives operators the ability to communicate critical notifications across platforms using a command and control interface that can be accessed from an emergency operations center, authorized computer, or smart phone. Notifications can be sent using text messages, emails, IPAWS, desktop alerts, television, voice calls, social media, and Genasys speaker systems. By providing several digital, software-based notifications and audible voice alerts through speakers, IMNS creates layered redundancy that ensures the maximum number of people receive critical communications.
Zonehaven is a multipronged SaaS application that serves both first responders and the communities they protect. Zonehaven can function as a standalone application or as a GEM integration. When an incident occurs, it is immediately tracked by the Zonehaven platform, which maps the incident, simulates the speed and direction of the incident, and determines which Zones (geographic areas) are at risk and/or need to be evacuated. As an incident develops, Zonehaven provides real-time updates to help ensure emergency organizations and at-risk populations have the most up-to-date information.
•
NEWS provides multichannel public safety notifications and instructions to designated areas, groups, or agencies when a crisis occurs. The NEWS platform is cloud-based, geo-redundant, and end-to-end encrypted. NEWS is a SaaS product that requires mobile telecom services for installation, integration and to deliver NEWS SMS and CBC alerts and notifications that can be sent to anyone, anywhere, with no recipient opt-in, registration, or download required. NEWS can locate recipients and deliver messages in near real time, compared to other SMS alert providers that can take up to 15 minutes. Despite NEWS’ reach and scope, all data is anonymized, ensuring individuals stay safe and informed without sacrificing privacy.
•
LRAD is the world’s leading AHD device that projects sirens and audible voice messages with exceptional vocal clarity in a 30° beam from close range to 5,500 meters. LRADs are used throughout the world in multiple applications and circumstances to safely hail and warn, inform and direct, prevent misunderstandings, determine intent, establish large safety zones, resolve uncertain situations, and save lives.
Our critical communications systems are being used in more than 100 countries throughout the world in a range of diverse applications, including public safety, emergency warning, mass notification, defense, law enforcement, critical event management and many more. We continue to develop new communication innovations and believe we have established significant competitive advantages in our principal markets.
Recent Developments
In the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we accomplished the following:
●
Completed the acquisition of enterprise software provider, Amika Mobile
●
Acquired Zonehaven, an emergency evacuation planning and public safety resources software provider
●
Opened international offices in Dubai and Singapore as part of planned regional expansion
●
Launched next generation NEWS service in Australia under multi-year contract
●
Announced multi-year enterprise GEM software services contract from global automobile manufacturer for its operations in North America
●
Awarded GEM software services contract from Riverside County, CA
●
Received $28.0 million in follow-on AHD program of record orders from the U.S. Army
●
Received $9.0 million U.S. Army mobile mass notification systems order
●
Awarded U.S. Navy SBIR program research and development project
●
Announced $7.7 million in U.S. defense orders
●
Received $6.4 million in LRAD domestic and international law enforcement, homeland security and mass notifications
●
Announced $1.0 million in international infrastructure protection and wildlife preservation orders
●
Signed a $10 million revolving line of credit with MUFG Union Bank, N.A.
Business Outlook
Our products, systems and solutions continue to gain worldwide awareness and recognition through media exposure, product demonstrations, and word of mouth as a result of positive responses and increased acceptance. We believe we have a solid global brand, technology, and product foundation, which we continue to expand to serve new markets and customers for greater business growth. We believe we have strong market opportunities for our product offerings throughout the world in the defense, public safety, emergency warning, mass notification, critical event management and law enforcement sectors as a result of increasing threats to government, commerce, law enforcement, homeland security and critical infrastructure. Our products, systems and solutions also have many applications within the fire rescue, maritime, asset protection, and wildlife control and preservation business segments.
Genasys has developed a global market and an increased demand for LRAD AHDs and advanced mass notification speakers. We have a reputation for producing quality products that feature industry-leading broadcast area coverage, vocal intelligibility and product reliability. We intend to continue building on our AHD leadership position by offering enhanced voice broadcast systems and accessories for an expanding range of applications. In executing our strategy, we use direct sales to governments, militaries, large end-users, system integrators, and prime vendors. We have built a worldwide distribution channel consisting of partners and resellers that have significant expertise and experience selling integrated communication solutions into our various target markets. As our primary AHD sales opportunities are with domestic and international governments, military branches, and law enforcement agencies, we are subject to each customer’s unique budget cycle, which leads to long selling cycles and uneven revenue flow, complicating our product planning.
The proliferation of natural and man-made disasters, emergency events and civil unrest require technologically advanced, multi-channel solutions to deliver clear and timely critical communications to help keep people safe during crisis situations. Businesses are also incorporating critical communication and emergency management systems that locate and help safeguard employees when crises occur.
By providing the only SaaS platform that unifies sensors and IoT inputs with multichannel, multiagency alerting and notifications, Genasys seeks to deliver reliable, fast, and intuitive solutions for creating and disseminating geolocation-targeted warnings, information and instructions before, during, and after public safety and business threats, critical events, and other crisis situations.
While the mass notification market is more mature with many established manufacturers and suppliers, we believe that our advanced technology and unified platform provides opportunities to succeed in the large and growing public safety, emergency warning and critical communications markets.
In fiscal 2022, we intend to continue to pursue domestic and international business opportunities with the support of business development consultants, key representatives, and resellers. We plan to grow our revenues through increased direct sales to governments and agencies that desire to integrate our communication technologies into their homeland security and public safety systems. This includes building on fiscal 2021 domestic defense sales by pursuing further U.S. military opportunities. We also plan to pursue emergency warning, enterprise and critical event management, government, law enforcement, fire rescue, homeland and international security, private and commercial security, border security, maritime security, and wildlife preservation and control business opportunities. In addition to the matters above, we are authorized for the performance of services and provision of goods pursuant to Delaware General Corporation Law.
Our research and development strategy involves incorporating further innovations and capabilities into our GEM, IMNS, Zonehaven, NEWS and LRAD products, systems and solutions to meet the needs of our target markets.
Our GEM, IMNS, Zonehaven and NEWS software solutions represent more complex, integrated offerings. We are pursuing certain certifications, which are often required when bidding on government and mass notification opportunities. We intend to invest engineering resources to enhance our GEM, IMNS, Zonehaven and NEWS software solutions to compete for larger emergency warning and critical communications business opportunities. We are also configuring alternative solutions to achieve lower price points to meet the needs of certain customers or applications. We also engage in ongoing value engineering to reduce the cost and simplify the manufacturing of our products.
A large number of components and sub-assemblies manufactured by outside suppliers within our supply chain are produced within 50 miles of our facility. We source a small amount of component parts from suppliers in China. It is also likely that some of our suppliers source parts in China. The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted worldwide supply chains and the ability to obtain sufficient amounts of component parts, including semiconductor chips and integrated circuits, resins, coating and other equipment and components. Negative impacts on our supply chain could have a material adverse effect on our business. We are in contact with our suppliers and evaluating what impact, if any, may result from COVID-19.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and to understanding our results of operations. Our accounting policies are more fully described in our consolidated financial statements and related notes located in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and throughout “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” when such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our accounting policies, in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates affect the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition. On October 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) and its amendments. We adopted the new standard using the full retrospective approach.
Topic 606 outlines a new, single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. This new revenue recognition model provides a five-step analysis in determining when and how revenue is recognized:
1.
Identify the contract(s) with customers
2.
Identify the performance obligations
3.
Determine the transaction price
4.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations
5.
Recognize revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied
Topic 606 requires revenue recognition to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration a company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We derive our revenue from the sale of products and services to customers, contracts, license fees, other services and freight. The Company sells its products and services through its direct sales force and through authorized resellers and system integrators. The Company recognizes revenue for goods, including software, when all the significant risks and rewards have been transferred to the customer, no continuing managerial involvement usually associated with ownership of the goods is retained, no effective control over the goods sold is retained, the amount of revenue can be measured reliably, it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transactions will flow to the Company and the costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably. Software license revenue, maintenance and/or software development service fees may be bundled in one arrangement or may be sold separately.
Product Revenue
Product revenue is recognized as a distinct single performance obligation when products are tendered to a carrier for delivery, which represents the point in time that our customer obtains control of the products. A smaller portion of product revenue is recognized when the customer receives delivery of the products. A portion of products are sold through resellers and system integrators based on firm commitments from an end user, and as a result, resellers and system integrators carry little or no inventory. Our customers do not have a right to return product unless the product is found defective and therefore our estimate for returns has historically been insignificant.
Perpetual licensed software
The sale and/or license of software products is deemed to have occurred when a customer either has taken possession of, or has the ability to take immediate possession of, the software and the software key. Perpetual software licenses can include one-year maintenance and support services. In addition, the Company sells maintenance services on a stand-alone basis and is therefore capable of determining their fair value. On this basis, the amount of the embedded maintenance is separated from the fee for the perpetual license and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the period to which the maintenance relates.
Time-based licensed software
The time-based license agreements include the use of a software license for a fixed term, generally one-year, and maintenance and support services during the same period. The Company does not sell time-based licenses without maintenance and support services and therefore revenues for the entire arrangements are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term.
Warranty, maintenance and services
We offer extended warranty, maintenance and other services. Extended warranty and maintenance contracts are offered with terms ranging from one to several years, which provide repair and maintenance services after expiration of the original one-year warranty term. Revenues from separately priced extended warranty contracts are recognized on a straight-line basis over the warranty period and maintenance contracts are recognized based on time elapsed over the service period. Revenue from other services such as training or installation is recognized when the service is completed. Warranty, maintenance and services are classified as contract and other revenues.
Multiple element arrangements
The Company has entered into a number of multiple element arrangements, such as when selling a product or perpetual licenses that may include maintenance and support (included in price of perpetual licenses) and time-based licenses (that include embedded maintenance and support, both of which may be sold with software development services, training, and other product sales). In some cases, the Company delivers software development services bundled with the sale of the software. In multiple element arrangements, the Company uses either the stand-alone selling price or an expected cost plus margin approach to determine the fair value of each element within the arrangement, including software and software-related services such as maintenance and support. In general, elements in such arrangements are also sold on a stand-alone basis and stand-alone selling prices are available.
Revenue is allocated to each deliverable based on the fair value of each individual element and is recognized when the revenue recognition criteria described above are met, except for time-based licenses, which are not unbundled. When software development services are performed to customize the functionality of the software, the Company recognizes revenue from the software development services on a stage of completion basis, and the revenue from the software when the related development services have been completed.
We currently disaggregate revenue by reporting segment (Hardware and Software) and geographically to depict the nature of revenue in a manner consistent with our business operations and to be consistent with other communications and public filings. Refer to Note 19, Segment Information and Note 20, Major Customers, Suppliers and Related Information for additional details of revenues by reporting segment and disaggregation of revenue.
Share-Based Compensation. We account for share-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”) which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees, consultants and directors based on estimated fair values. ASC 718 requires the use of subjective assumptions, including expected stock price volatility and the estimated term of each award. We estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which is then amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. This model also utilizes the fair value of our common stock and requires that, at the date of grant, we use the expected term of the share-based award, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock over the expected term, the risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend yield of our common stock to determine the estimated fair value. We determine the amount of share-based compensation expense based on awards that we ultimately expect to vest, reduced for estimated forfeitures. ASC 718 requires forfeitures to be estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Allowance for doubtful accounts. Our products are sold to customers in many different markets and geographic locations. We estimate our bad debt reserve on a case-by-case basis due to a limited number of customers. We base these estimates on many factors including customer credit worthiness, past transaction history with the customer, current economic industry trends and changes in customer payment terms. Our judgments and estimates regarding collectability of accounts receivable have an impact on our financial statements.
Valuation of Inventory. Our inventory is comprised of raw materials, assemblies and finished products. We must periodically make judgments and estimates regarding the future utility and carrying value of our inventory. The carrying value of our inventory is periodically reviewed and impairments, if any, are recognized when the expected future benefit from our inventory is less than its carrying value.
Valuation of Intangible Assets. Intangible assets consist of technology, customer relationships, trade name portfolio and non-compete agreements acquired in the acquisition of Genasys Spain, and patents and trademarks that are amortized over their estimated useful lives. We must make judgments and estimates regarding the future utility and carrying value of intangible assets. The carrying values of such assets are periodically reviewed and impairments, if any, are recognized when the expected future benefit to be derived from an individual intangible asset is less than its carrying value. This generally occurs when certain assets are no longer consistent with our business strategy and whose expected future value has decreased.
Derivatives. We use derivative financial instruments to manage risk related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. We do not hold derivative financial instruments of a speculative nature or for trading purposes. We record all derivatives on the consolidated balance sheet at fair value using available market information and other observable data. See Note 6, Fair Value Measurements for further discussion.
Accrued Expenses. We establish a warranty reserve based on anticipated warranty claims at the time product revenue is recognized. This reserve requires us to make estimates regarding the amount and costs of warranty repairs we expect to make over a period of time. Factors affecting warranty reserve levels include the number of units sold, anticipated cost of warranty repairs, and anticipated rates of warranty claims. Warranty expense is recorded in cost of revenues. We evaluate the adequacy of this reserve each reporting period.
We use the recognition criteria of ASC 450-20, “Loss Contingencies” to estimate the bonus amount when it becomes probable a bonus liability will be incurred and we recognize expense ratably over the service period. We accrue bonus expense each quarter based on estimated year-end results, and then adjust the actual in the fourth quarter based on our final results compared to targets.
Deferred Tax Asset. We evaluate quarterly the realizability of the deferred tax assets and assess the need for a valuation allowance. We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to an amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. Realization is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income prior to expiration of the loss carryforwards. Utilization of the net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards in future years could be substantially limited due to restrictions imposed under federal and state laws upon a change in ownership or control. Included in the NOL carryforwards are deductions from stock options that, if recognized, will be recorded as a credit to additional paid-in capital rather than through our results of operations. In determining taxable income for financial statement reporting purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments. These estimates and judgments are applied in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the ability to recover deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the ability to realize its net deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis to identify whether any significant changes in circumstances or assumptions have occurred that could materially affect the ability to realize deferred tax assets and will adjust the valuation accordingly.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
New pronouncements issued for future implementation are discussed in Note 3, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements.
Segment and Related Information
We are engaged in the design, development and commercialization of critical communications hardware and software solutions designed to alert, inform and protect. The Company operates in two business segments: Hardware and Software and its principal markets are North and South America, Europe, Middle East and Asia. As reviewed by the Company’s chief operating decision maker, the Company evaluates the performance of each segment based on sales and operating income. Cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, accounts receivable, inventory, property and equipment, deferred tax assets, goodwill and intangible assets are primary assets identified by segment. The accounting policies for segment reporting are the same for the Company as a whole and transactions between the two operating segments are eliminated in consolidation. Refer to Note 19, Segment Information, in our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Comparison of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides for the periods indicated certain items of our consolidated statements of operations expressed in thousands of dollars and as a percentage of net sales. The financial information and discussion below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes contained in this Annual Report.
Revenues
Revenues increased $4.0 million, or 9.3%, in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Current fiscal year AHD revenue was $42.2 million, software revenue was $2.8 million and IMNS revenue was $2.1 million. This represented increases of $4.5 million, or 12%, for AHD and $1.2 million, or 71%, for software offset by a decrease of $1.6 or 44%, for IMNS revenue compared with the prior year. The receipt of orders is often uneven due to the timing of government budgets or approvals. The increase in software revenue in this fiscal year is largely due to fiscal year 2021 acquisitions and professional services revenue from new software contracts. As of September 30, 2021, we had aggregate deferred revenue and prepayments from customers in advance of product shipment of $10.1 million. The receipt of orders will often be uneven due to the timing of customers’ approval or budget cycles.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended September 30, 2021, increased $0.8 million or 3.5% compared with fiscal year 2020. This was primarily due to higher sales volume offset by increased costs associated with continued investment in personnel to support the growth of our software products, including the addition of engineering personnel from acquisitions in the current fiscal year. This will continue to reduce total company gross margins until annual software revenue has grown enough to achieve its expected gross margin percentage. Gross margin as a percentage of sales was 49.8% this year, compared with 52.6% in the prior year.
Our products have varying gross margins, so product mix may affect gross profits. In addition, our margins vary based on the sales channels through which our products are sold in a given period. We continue to implement product updates and changes, including raw material and component changes that may impact product costs. With such product updates and changes we have limited warranty cost experience and estimated future warranty costs can impact our gross margins. We do not believe that historical gross profit margins should be relied upon as an indicator of future gross profit margins.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $5.4 million, or 44.7%, over the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a $3.8 million increase in personnel related costs, largely associated with our 70% increase in sales and marketing personnel over the prior year to support future business and revenue growth opportunities. This includes new sales offices in the U.A.E., Canada, Singapore and Puerto Rico. Largely due to acquisition activity this fiscal year, amortization expense increased $0.9 million and professional services fees increased $0.5 million over the prior year.
Included in these employee related expenses was non-cash share-based compensation expenses allocated to selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 and 2020 of $1.3 million and $0.9 million, respectively.
We may expend additional resources on the marketing and selling of our products in future periods as we identify ways to optimize potential opportunities. Commission expense will fluctuate based on the nature of our sales.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses increased by $364 thousand, or 8.0%, primarily due to increases of $148 thousand and $208 thousand in hardware and third-party services, respectively, for development of new or improved hardware and software products.
Included in R&D expenses for the year ended September 30, 2021 was $40 thousand of non-cash share-based compensation expenses, compared to $21 thousand for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Other Income
Other income decreased by $73 thousand primarily due to a $76 thousand loss on a foreign currency forward contract.
Net Income
The net income of $0.7 million for fiscal 2021 was a decrease of $11.2 million compared to fiscal year 2020. Pretax income in fiscal year 2021 was $5.0 million less than the prior year primarily due to a $5.7 million increase in operating expenses. Income tax expense increased in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to the release in fiscal year 2020 of a $7.1 million valuation allowance. For additional details, refer to Note 14, Income Taxes, in our consolidated financial statements.
Other Metrics
We monitor a number of financial and operating metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions. Our other business metrics may be calculated in a manner different than similar other business metrics used by other companies (in thousands):
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA represents our net income before other income, net, income tax expense (benefit), depreciation and amortization expense and stock-based compensation. We do not consider these items to be indicative of our core operating performance. The items that are non-cash include depreciation and amortization expense and stock-based compensation. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to generate future operating plans, make strategic decisions regarding allocation of capital and invest in initiatives that are focused on cultivating new markets for our solutions. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating adjusted EBITDA facilitates comparisons of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). We believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. Nevertheless, use of adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are: (1) although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the intangible assets that are amortized and property and equipment that is depreciated, will need to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacement or for new capital expenditure requirements; (2) adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (3) adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation; (4) adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments or receipts that may represent a reduction or increase in cash available to us; and (5) other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces the usefulness of the metric as a comparative measure. Because of these and other limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA alongside our other U.S. GAAP-based financial performance measures, net income and our other U.S. GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents as of September 30, 2021 was $13.2 million, compared with $23.3 million at September 30, 2020. In addition, we had $5.7 million in short-term marketable securities as of September 30, 2021, compared with $4.3 million as of September 30, 2020, and long-term marketable securities of $1.9 million and $3.8 million at September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We also had restricted cash of $1.4 million as of September 30, 2021 and $0.7 million as of September 30, 2020. In addition, we have a $10 million line of credit with MUFG bank. As of September 30, 2021, the Company had no outstanding balances against the line of credit. The credit agreement requires the Company to comply with various financial and operating covenants and as of September 30, 2021, the Company was in compliance with these covenants. Other than cash and expected future cash flows from operating activities in subsequent periods and the line of credit, we have no other unused sources of liquidity at this time.
Principal factors that could affect the availability of our internally generated funds include:
•
ability to meet sales projections;
•
government spending levels;
•
introduction of competing technologies;
•
product mix and effect on margins;
•
ability to reduce and manage inventory levels; and
•
product acceptance in new markets.
Principal factors that could affect our ability to obtain cash from external sources include:
•
volatility in the capital markets; and
•
market price and trading volume of our common stock.
In December 2018, the Board of Directors approved a share buyback program beginning January 1, 2019, under which the Company is authorized to repurchase up to $5 million of its outstanding common shares. Based on our current cash position, our order backlog, and assuming the accuracy of our currently planned expenditures, we believe we have sufficient capital to fund planned levels of operations for at least the next twelve months. However, we operate in a rapidly evolving and often unpredictable business environment that may change the timing or amount of expected future cash receipts and expenditures. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that we may not be required to raise additional funds through the sale of equity or debt securities or from credit facilities. Additional capital, if needed, may not be available on satisfactory terms, if at all.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized in the table below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net income of $0.7 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, included $4.6 million of non-cash items including share-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes, operating right of use lease amortization, unrealized loss on a foreign currency forward contract, depreciation and amortization, inventory obsolescence and a provision for warranty. Cash provided by operating activities reflected a $0.6 million increase in accounts payable and a $4.9 million increase in accrued and other liabilities, which included customer deposits, accrued payroll, deferred revenue and operating lease liabilities. This was partially offset by a $1.6 million increase in prepaid expenses and other, which includes deposits paid on inventory purchases, prepaid rent and prepaid insurance, a $2.1 million increase in accounts receivable that resulted from higher current year fiscal fourth quarter shipments, and a $0.8 million increase in inventory.
Net income of $11.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, included $2.8 million of non-cash items including share-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes, operating right of use lease amortization, unrealized loss on a foreign currency forward contract, depreciation and amortization, inventory obsolescence and a provision for warranty. Cash provided by operating activities reflected a $0.5 million increase in accounts payable and a $0.9 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other, which includes deposits paid on inventory purchases, prepaid rent and prepaid insurance, offset by a $1.8 million increase in accounts receivable that resulted from higher current year fiscal fourth quarter shipments, a $0.5 million increase in inventory and a $1.2 million decrease in accrued and other liabilities, which included customer deposits, accrued payroll, deferred revenue, and operating lease liabilities.
We had accounts receivable of $7.7 million and $5.4 million as of September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Terms with individual customers vary greatly. We often offer net thirty-day terms to our customers. Our receivables can vary dramatically due to overall sales volume and quarterly variations in sales and timing of shipments to and receipts from large customers.
As of September 30, 2021 and 2020, our working capital was $18.0 million and $29.8 million, respectively. The decrease in working capital was largely the result of cash used in acquisitions.
Investing Activities
In the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we used $5.1 million of cash to purchase short and long-term marketable securities, compared with using $8.1 million to purchase short and long-term marketable securities in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. In the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we had proceeds from maturities of available for sale marketable securities of $5.6 million, compared with $5.1 million in fiscal year 2020.
In the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, we used $15.8 million in cash to complete the Amika Mobile asset purchase and Zonehaven acquisition in the first and third quarters respectively, of fiscal year 2021.
We also used cash in investing activities primarily for the purchase of product tooling, computer equipment and leasehold improvements for our operating facility. Cash used for capital expenditures was $0.2 million and $0.1 million in the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We anticipate additional expenditures for capital expenditures in fiscal year 2022 as we continue to invest in new products and technologies.
Financing Activities
In the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we received proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.2 million and $1.1 million, respectively.
In December 2018, the Board of Directors approved a new share buyback program beginning January 1, 2019, under which the Company was authorized to repurchase up to $5 million of its outstanding common shares. In December 2020, the Board extended this program’s expiration date to December 31, 2022. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, the Company repurchased 156,505 shares at an average price per share of $2.54 for a total cost of $0.4 million. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, no shares were repurchased. As of September 30, 2021, $4.1 million was available for share repurchase under this program and all repurchased shares were retired.
Commitments
We are committed for our facility lease through August 30, 2028, as more fully described in Note 13, Leases, in our consolidated financial statements.
The Company has a bonus plan for employees, in accordance with their terms of employment, whereby they can earn a percentage of their salary based on meeting targeted objectives for orders received, revenue, operating income and operating cash flow. All of the Company’s key employees are entitled to participate in the bonus plan. During the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company accrued $2.6 million and $1.6 million respectively, for bonuses, and related payroll tax expense in connection with the bonus plans. Bonus related expense is included in “Accrued liabilities” on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The Company entered into an employment agreement with our chief executive officer that provides for severance benefits including twelve months’ salary and health benefits, a pro-rata share of his annual cash bonus for the fiscal year in which the termination occurs to which he would have become entitled had he remained employed through the end of the fiscal year and vesting of a portion of stock options held by him that are subject to performance-based vesting. The agreement also has a change in control clause whereby the chief executive officer would be entitled to receive specific severance and equity vesting benefits if specified termination events occur.
There were no other employment agreements with executive officers or other employees providing future benefits or severance arrangements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financings or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons.