ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in "Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are subject to certain risks and uncertainties and are based on certain assumptions that we believe are reasonable but may prove to be inaccurate. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements reflect our current views with respect to, among other things, future events and our financial performance. These statements are often, but not always, made through the use of words or phrases such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “predict,” “potential,” “believe,” “will likely result,” “expect,” “continue,” “will,” “anticipate,” “seek,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “projection,” “would” and “outlook,” or the negative version of those words or other comparable words or phrases of a future or forward-looking nature. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, and are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, management’s beliefs and certain assumptions made by management, many of which, by their nature, are inherently uncertain and beyond our control. Accordingly, we caution you that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, assumptions and uncertainties that are difficult to predict. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable as of the date made, actual results may prove to be materially different from the results expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
There are or will be important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, the following:
•
our ability to prudently manage our growth and execute our strategy;
•
risks associated with our acquisition and de novo branching strategy;
•
business and economic conditions generally and in the financial services industry, nationally and within our primary markets;
•
deterioration of our asset quality;
•
changes in the value of collateral securing our loans;
•
changes in management personnel;
•
liquidity risks associated with our business;
•
interest rate risk associated with our business;
•
our ability to maintain important deposit customer relationships and our reputation;
•
operational risks associated with our business;
•
volatility and direction of market interest rates;
•
increased competition in the financial services industry, particularly from regional and national institutions;
•
changes in the laws, rules, regulations, interpretations or policies relating to financial institution, accounting, tax, trade, monetary and fiscal matters;
•
further government intervention in the U.S. financial system;
•
natural disasters and adverse weather, acts of terrorism, an outbreak of hostilities or public health outbreaks (such as coronavirus) or other international or domestic calamities, and other matters beyond our control; and
•
other factors that are discussed in "Item 1A. Risk Factors."
The foregoing factors should not be construed as exhaustive and should be read together with the other cautionary statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. If one or more events related to these or other risks or uncertainties materialize, or if our underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may differ materially from what we anticipate. Accordingly, you should not place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we do not undertake any obligation to publicly update or review any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict which will arise. In addition, we cannot assess the impact of each factor on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
General
The following discussion and analysis presents our financial condition and results of operations on a consolidated basis. However, because we conduct all of our material business operations through Guaranty Bank & Trust, the discussion and analysis relates to activities primarily conducted by Guaranty Bank & Trust.
As a bank holding company that operates through one segment, we generate most of our revenue from interest on loans and investments, customer service and loan fees, fees related to the sale of mortgage loans, and trust and wealth management services. We incur interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds, as well as noninterest expense, such as salaries and employee benefits and occupancy expenses. We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and control the interest expenses of our liabilities, measured as net interest income, through our net interest margin and net interest spread. Net interest income is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Net interest spread is the difference between rates earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates we earn on interest-earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest-earning assets, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions in Texas, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology, financial services, insurance, transportation, manufacturing and energy sectors within our target markets and throughout the state of Texas.
Acquisitions
The comparability of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, compared to 2018, is affected by the acquisition of Westbound Bank on June 1, 2018. Therefore, the results of the acquired operations of Westbound Bank were included in our results of operations during all of 2020 and 2019, but only for a portion of 2018.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease ("COVID-19") was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Global health concerns relating to COVID-19 have had, and will likely continue to have, a severe impact on the macroeconomic environment, leading to lower interest rates, depressed equity market valuations, heightened financial market volatility and significant disruption in banking and other financial activity in the areas we serve. During 2020, governmental responses to the pandemic included orders closing businesses not deemed essential and directing individuals to restrict their movements, observe social distancing and shelter in place. These actions, together with responses to the pandemic by businesses and individuals, resulted in rapid decreases in commercial and consumer activity, temporary or permanent closures of many businesses that led to a loss of revenues and a rapid increase in unemployment, material decreases in business valuations, disrupted global supply chains, market downturns and volatility, changes in consumer behavior related to pandemic fears, related emergency response legislation and an expectation that Federal Reserve policy will maintain a low interest rate environment for the foreseeable future. Despite the availability of a vaccine in late 2020, these risks and uncertainties remain as the demand for the vaccine outpaces the supply available, the extent to which the American public is willing to receive the vaccine remains unknown, and more contagious strains of the virus mutate both in the US and abroad.
The financial performance of the Company generally, and in particular the ability of borrowers to pay interest on and repay principal of outstanding loans and the value of collateral securing those loans, as well as demand for loans and other products and services that the Company offers and whose success it relies on to drive growth, are highly dependent upon the business environment in the primary markets in which we operate and in the United States as a whole. Unfavorable market conditions and uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic may result in a deterioration in the credit quality of borrowers, an increase in the number of loan delinquencies, defaults and charge-offs, additional provisions for credit losses, adverse asset values of the collateral securing loans and an overall material adverse effect on the quality of the loan portfolio.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act was signed into law. It contained substantial tax and spending provisions intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act included the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"), a program designed to aid small- and medium-sized businesses through federally guaranteed loans distributed through banks. PPP loans were intended to provide eligible businesses with funding for payroll and other costs to help those businesses remain viable and allow their workers to pay their bills. PPP loans are forgivable to the extent that the borrower can demonstrate that the funds were used for such costs. Any amounts not forgiven will bear interest at 1% and be repayable over a term of 24 to 60 months from origination. PPP has been subject to amendments to increase the size of the program, extend the period in which loans could be made, extend the period for which costs could be forgiven and to provide additional flexibility to borrowers. In December 2020, several portions of the CARES Act were extended as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, including additional stimulus payments to consumers and a second round of PPP loans for small businesses. It is expected that there may be further changes to PPP, either through legislation or changes to forms and applications required under PPP.
Significant uncertainties as to future economic conditions exist, and we have taken measured actions during 2020 to ensure that we have the balance sheet strength to serve our clients and communities, including increases in liquidity and reserves supported by a strong capital position. Additionally, the economic pressures, coupled with the implementation of an expected loss methodology for determining our provision for credit losses as required by the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) methodology, contributed to an increased provision for credit losses in the first half of 2020. We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 closely, as well as any effects that may result from government stimulus and relief programs; however, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our operations and financial results, as well as timing of economic recovery, remains uncertain.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates, and the potential sensitivity of our financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements are appropriate.
Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses (ACL)
Loans are stated at the amount of unpaid principal, reduced by unearned income and an allowance for credit losses. Interest on loans is recognized using the simple-interest method on the daily balances of the principal amounts outstanding. Fees associated with the origination of loans and certain direct loan origination costs are netted and the net amount is deferred and recognized over the life of the loan as an adjustment of yield.
The accrual of interest on loans is discontinued when there is a clear indication that the borrower’s cash flow may not be sufficient to meet payments as they become due, which is generally when a loan is 90 days past due. A loan may continue to accrue interest, even if it is more than 90 days past due, if the loan is both well collateralized and it is in the process of collection. When a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, all previously accrued and unpaid interest is reversed. Interest income is subsequently recognized on a cash basis as long as the remaining book balance of the asset is deemed to be collectible. If collectability is questionable, then cash payments are applied to principal. Loans are
returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured in accordance with the terms of the loan agreement.
The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the loans' amortized cost basis to present the net amount expected to be collected on the loans. Loans are charged off against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of a loan balance is confirmed. Recoveries will not exceed the aggregate of loan amounts previously charged-off and expected to be charged-off.
Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. We use the weighted-average remaining maturity method (WARM method) as the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. The WARM method uses a historical average annual charge-off rate. This average annual charge-off rate contains loss content over a historical lookback period and is used as a foundation for estimating the credit loss reserve for the remaining outstanding balances of loans in a pool or segment of our loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The average annual charge-off rate is applied to the contractual term, further adjusted for estimated prepayments, to determine the unadjusted historical charge-off rate. The calculation of the unadjusted historical charge-off rate is then adjusted for current conditions and for reasonable and supportable forecast periods. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, delinquency level, or term as well as for changes in environmental conditions, such as changes in unemployment rates, property values, or other relevant factors. These qualitative factors serve to compensate for additional areas of uncertainty inherent in the portfolio that are not reflected in our historic loss factors. In early 2020, to address the uncertainties resulting from COVID-19, an additional qualitative factor was added to specifically address COVID-related economic factors and potential credit losses, in addition to our standard qualitative factors.
The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective (pool or segment) basis when similar risk characteristics exist. Our loan portfolio segments include both regulatory call report codes and internally identified risk ratings for our commercial loan segments and delinquency status for our consumer loan segments. We also have separate segments for our warehouse lines of credit, for our internally originated SBA loans, for our SBA loans acquired from Westbound Bank, and for loans originated under the PPP program.
In general, the loans in our portfolio have low historical credit losses. The credit quality of loans in our portfolio is impacted by delinquency status and debt service coverage generated by our borrowers’ businesses and fluctuations in the value of real estate collateral. Management considers delinquency status to be the most meaningful indicator of the credit quality of one-to-four single family residential, home equity loans and lines of credit and other consumer loans. In general, these types of loans do not begin to show signs of credit deterioration or default until they have been outstanding for some period of time, a process we refer to as “seasoning.” As a result, a portfolio of older loans will usually behave more predictably than a portfolio of newer loans. We consider the majority of our consumer type loans to be “seasoned” and that the credit quality and current level of delinquencies and defaults represents the level of reserve needed in the allowance for credit losses. If delinquencies and defaults were to increase, we may be required to increase our provision for loan losses, which would adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. Delinquency statistics are updated at least monthly.
Internal risk ratings are considered the most meaningful indicator of credit quality for new commercial and industrial, construction, and commercial real estate loans. Internal risk ratings are a key factor that impacts management’s estimates of loss factors used in determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses. Internal risk ratings are updated on a continuous basis.
Loans with unique risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. Loans evaluated individually are excluded from the collective evaluation. When management determines that foreclosure is probable, expected credit losses are based on the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date, adjusted for selling costs as appropriate.
For off-balance sheet credit exposures, we estimate expected credit losses over the contractual period in which we are exposed to credit risk via a contractual obligation to extend credit, unless that obligation is unconditionally cancellable by us. The allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures is adjusted as a provision for credit loss expense. The estimate includes consideration of the likelihood that funding will occur and an estimate of expected credit losses on commitments expected to be funded over its estimated life.
From time to time, we modify our loan agreement with a borrower. A modified loan is considered a troubled debt restructuring (TDR) when two conditions are met: (i) the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty and (ii) concessions are made by us that would not otherwise be considered for a borrower with similar credit risk characteristics. Modifications to loan terms may include a lower interest rate, a reduction of principal, or a longer term to maturity. We review each troubled debt restructured loan and determine on a case by case basis if the loan can be grouped with its like segment for allowance consideration or whether it should be individually evaluated for a specific allowance for credit loss allocation. If individually evaluated, an allowance for credit loss allocation is based on either the present value of estimated future cash flows or the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral. Most modifications made as a direct result of COVID-19 are not TDRs pursuant to the CARES Act, the April 7, 2020 Interagency guidance, and GAAP.
We have certain lending policies and procedures in place that are designed to maximize loan income with an acceptable level of risk. Management reviews and approves these policies and procedures on a regular basis and makes changes as appropriate. Management receives frequent reports related to loan originations, quality, concentrations, delinquencies, non-performing and potential problem loans. Diversification in the loan portfolio is a means of managing risk associated with fluctuations in economic conditions, both by type of loan and geography.
Commercial and industrial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate profitably and effectively. Underwriting standards are designed to determine whether the borrower possesses sound business ethics and practices and to evaluate current and projected cash flows to determine the ability of the borrower to repay their obligations as agreed. Commercial and industrial loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower and, secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. Most commercial and industrial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as accounts receivable or inventory, and include personal guarantees.
Real estate loans are also subject to underwriting standards and processes similar to commercial and industrial loans. These loans are underwritten primarily based on projected cash flows and, secondarily, as loans secured by real estate collateral. The repayment of real estate loans is generally largely dependent on the successful operation of the property securing the loans or the business conducted on the property securing the loan. Real estate loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. The properties securing our real estate portfolio are generally diverse in terms of type and geographic location throughout the State of Texas. This diversity helps us reduce the exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single market or industry.
We utilize methodical credit standards and analysis to supplement our policies and procedures in underwriting consumer loans. Our loan policy addresses types of consumer loans that may be originated as well as the underlying collateral, if secured, which must be perfected. The relatively small individual dollar amounts of consumer loans that are spread over numerous individual borrowers also minimizes risk.
Emerging Growth Company
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, we have “opted out” of this provision. As a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards to the same extent that compliance is required for non-emerging growth companies. Our decision to opt out of the extended transition period under the JOBS Act is irrevocable.
Performance Summary for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net earnings were $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This performance resulted in basic earnings per share of $2.47 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $2.26 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net earnings over this period was largely due to the forgiveness and amortization of Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans and recognition of associated loan origination fees, as well as increased non-interest income from mortgage and warehouse lending activities and decreases in interest expense relative to interest income. There was also an eight basis point increase in our fully tax equivalent net interest margin from 3.69% in 2019 to 3.77% in 2020. The increase in earnings per share over this period was due to the increase in earnings described above as well as the repurchase of 658,607 shares of common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our return on average assets was 1.07% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 1.13% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our return on average equity was 10.39% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 10.37% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our return on average assets was primarily due to the 10.9% increase in the balance of total average assets caused by the addition of an average balance of $138.3 million in PPP loans to the balance sheet during the year (which earned 1% interest), while only adding $6.3 million in net loan fees on PPP loans to income during 2020.
Our fully tax equivalent net interest margin was 3.77% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 3.69% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net interest margin increased primarily due to the maturity of higher-rate CDs, as well as continued reductions in interest rates for non-maturing deposits as market conditions have allowed during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our efficiency ratio was 58.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 65.23% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The improvement in our efficiency ratio for 2020 is largely attributable to increases in net interest income and noninterest income of 14.1% and 35.8%, respectively, compared to a relatively small 6.4% increase in noninterest expense during 2020.
Our total assets increased $422.4 million, or 18.2%, to $2.74 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $2.32 billion as of December 31, 2019. Total loans increased $160.4 million, or 9.4%, to $1.87 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $1.71 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase in our total loans is primarily the result of outstanding PPP loan balances of $139.8 million, to 1,452 borrowers, as of December 31, 2020. Excluding the outstanding PPP balances as of December 31, 2020, gross loans increased $20.6 million, or 1.21% from the prior year. Total shareholders’ equity increased $11.1 million, or 4.2%, to $272.6 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $261.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in shareholders' equity was due primarily to the 4.3% increase in net earnings in 2020 and an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income of $11.4 million, which was due to a $12.0 million unrealized gain on available for sale securities during the year, partially offset by the repurchase of common stock and payment of dividends during 2020.
Large provisions for credit losses resulting from effects of COVID-19 and participation in the PPP program have created temporary extraordinary results in the calculation of net earnings and related performance ratios. With the credit outlook still uncertain as a result of COVID-19 and other economic factors, the following table illustrates net earnings and net core earnings per share, which are pre-tax, pre-provision and pre-extraordinary PPP income, as well as performance ratios for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A discussion regarding our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found under “Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 13, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at investors.gnty.com.
Net Interest Income
Our operating results depend primarily on our net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates impact the yield and rates paid on interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, respectively. Changes in the amount and type of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities also impact our net interest income. To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor (1) yields on our loans and other interest-earning assets, (2) the costs of our deposits and other funding sources, (3) our net interest spread and (4) our net interest margin. Because noninterest-bearing sources of funds, such as noninterest-bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity also fund interest-earning assets, net interest margin includes the benefit of these noninterest-bearing sources.
Net interest income, before the provision for credit losses, was $90.0 million compared to $78.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $11.1 million, or 14.1%. The increase in net interest income resulted from a $10.6 million, or 44.9%, decrease in interest expense and a $481,000, or 0.5%, increase in interest income. Although there was a $183.8 million, or 10.9%, increase in average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, that increase was offset by a 41 basis point decrease in the average yield on total loans. The increase in average loans outstanding was primarily due to loans originated through the PPP program and some organic growth. The $10.6 million decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to an average deposit rate decrease of 69 basis points, despite an $8.1 million, or 0.6%, increase in average interest-bearing deposits from 2019. Noninterest-bearing liabilities increased $195.6 million, or 39.0%, primarily due to the deposit of PPP proceeds into demand accounts at the Bank, as well as apparent changes in depositor spending habits during the year resulting from economic and other uncertainties due to COVID-19. The increases were primarily in noninterest-bearing demand accounts, offset by declines in certificate of deposits accounts. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest margin and net interest spread were 3.74% and 3.46%, respectively, compared to 3.68% and 3.25% for the year ended December 31, 2019, which reflects the decreases in interest expense discussed above relative to the increases in interest income.
Average Balance Sheet Amounts, Interest Earned and Yield Analysis
The following table presents an analysis of net interest income and net interest spread for the periods indicated, including average outstanding balances for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the interest earned or paid on such amounts, and the average rate earned or paid on such assets or liabilities, respectively. The table also sets forth the net interest margin on average total interest-earning assets for the same periods. Interest earned on loans that are classified as nonaccrual is not recognized in income; however the balances are reflected in average outstanding balances for the period. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the amount of interest income not recognized on nonaccrual loans was not material. Any nonaccrual loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield.
To illustrate core net interest margin and remove the extraordinary impacts resulting from the PPP program, the table below excludes PPP loans and their associated fees and costs, as well as the average balance of related FHLB borrowings and fed funds sold, for the year ended December 31, 2020:
The following table presents information regarding the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated to rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses is a charge to income in order to bring our allowance for credit losses to a level deemed appropriate by management based on factors such as historical loss experience, trends in classified and past due loans, volume and growth in the loan portfolio, current economic conditions in our markets and value of the underlying collateral. Loans are charged off against the allowance for credit losses when determined appropriate. Although management believes it uses the best information available to make determinations with respect to the provision for credit losses, future adjustments may be necessary if economic conditions differ from the assumptions used in making the determination. For a full description of the factors taken into account by our management in determining the allowance for credit losses see “- Financial Condition-Allowance for Credit Losses.”
The provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.2 million compared to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The provision results largely from risk grade changes in the loan portfolio and from additional qualitative factor adjustments, specifically to address virus-related concerns, that were made in the first half of 2020 under the CECL model, and were primarily derived from changes in national GDP, Texas unemployment rates and national industry related CRE trends, all of which are impacted by the effects of COVID-19. Beginning in March 2020, the Bank closely reviewed its loan portfolio and spoke to borrowers about their financial hardships, if any, due to COVID-19. As a result, many borrowers in affected industries were downgraded to an appropriate risk rating to capture the additional risk and to work with borrowers to navigate through their cash flow or other financial uncertainties. Management believes the provisions made as a result of loan downgrades and qualitative factor adjustments in the CECL model appropriately capture the current credit risks associated with COVID-19. However, the outbreak of COVID-19, or mutating strains, could worsen in the short term, leading to possible changes in customer and consumer behavior and stronger response measures by government officials, and the timing of economic recovery remains uncertain.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our allowance for credit losses was $33.6 million and $16.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, there was $15.5 million in loan balances past due 30 or more days and $12.7 million in loan balances for nonperforming (non-accrual) loans, compared to $8.3 million and $11.3 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in nonperforming loans and assets resulted primarily from one SBA 7(a), partially guaranteed (75%) loan and one commercial loan, both of which were acquired in our June 2018 acquisition of Westbound Bank. To facilitate the workout of the SBA loan, we repurchased the guaranteed portion of the loan from a third party, resulting in an increased book balance of $3.1 million and a total book balance, which remains 75% SBA guaranteed, of $3.9 million. The increased book balance from the SBA loan of $3.1 million, combined with the commercial loan book balance of $1.1 million, comprises $4.2 million of the increase from December 31, 2019, which was partially offset by decreases in smaller dollar loans. Three SBA partially guaranteed (75%) loans relating to loans acquired from Westbound Bank, including the $3.1 million repurchased portion, are included in nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 and had combined book balances of $8.7 million. These loans were internally identified as problem assets prior to COVID-19 and are properly reserved using our CECL methodology. Management continues to work toward a satisfactory resolution for these three loans. Non-performing assets as a percentage of total loans at December 31, 2020 was 0.70%. Excluding these partially guaranteed SBA loans, non-performing assets as a percentage of total loans at December 31, 2020 would be 0.24% and, excluding PPP loans, would be 0.76%. The remaining $4.0 million in non-accrual loans as of December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of smaller dollar, first lien residential home loans and included one loan relationship with an outstanding balance of $1.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $331,000, compared to net recoveries of $301,000 in 2019. The increase in net charge-offs during 2020 resulted primarily from normal levels of charge-offs and recoveries during this year, as well as a recovery in 2019 of $487,000 from proceeds received from a life insurance policy that collateralized a loan that was charged off several years ago. Without this one recovery, net charge-offs for 2019 would have been $186,000.
The following table shows the ratio of net charge-offs (recoveries) to average loans outstanding by loan category for the dates indicated:
Noninterest Income
Our primary sources of recurring noninterest income are service charges on deposit accounts, merchant and debit card fees, fiduciary income, gains on the sale of loans, and income from bank-owned life insurance. Noninterest income does not include loan origination fees to the extent they exceed the direct loan origination costs, which are generally recognized over the life of the related loan as an adjustment to yield using the interest method.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, noninterest income totaled $23.0 million, an increase of $6.1 million, or 35.8%, compared to $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest income:
Service Charges. We earn fees from our customers for deposit related services, and these fees typically constitute a significant and generally predictable component of our non-interest income. Beginning in March 2020, as a result of COVID-19, we waived certain service charges in sensitivity to our customers through June 30, 2020. Service fee income was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.7 million in 2019, a decrease of $651,000, or 17.5%, resulting largely from COVID-19 related fee waivers, as well as fewer insufficient fee charges throughout the year, presumably resulting from changes in consumer spending habits and elevated deposit balances due to PPP and stimulus payments.
Merchant and Debit Card Fees. We earn interchange income related to the activity of our customers’ merchant debit card usage. Debit card interchange income was $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.3 million in 2019, an increase of $1.3 million, or 29.3%. The increase was primarily due to a change in contract terms, an annual earnings credit received from our debit card vendor and growth in the number of DDAs and debit card usage volume during 2020. The total number of DDAs increased by 3,417 accounts, from 46,191 as of December 31, 2019 to 49,608 as of December 31, 2020.
Fiduciary and Custodial Income. We have trust powers and provide fiduciary and custodial services through our trust and wealth management division. Fiduciary income was $2.0 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $252,000, or 14.3%. The revenue increase resulted primarily from 32 new accounts that opened during 2020, which have generated additional income. Furthermore, revenue for our services fluctuates by month with the market value for all publicly-traded assets, which are primarily held in irrevocable trusts and investment management accounts that carry higher fees. Additionally, our custody-only assets are carried in a tiered percentage rate fee schedule charged against market value.
Gain on Sales of Loans. We originate long-term fixed-rate mortgage loans for resale into the secondary market. We also began selling Small Business Administration (SBA) loans on the secondary market during the second half of 2019. We sold 705 mortgage loans for $164.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 383 mortgage loans for $78.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gain on sale of loans was $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.0 million, or 139.8%, compared to $2.9 million in 2019. The gain consisted of $6.1 million in mortgage loans and $756,000 in SBA 7(a) loans sold during the year, compared to $2.6 million of mortgage loans and $233,000 in SBA 7(a) loans sold during the prior year.
Bank-Owned Life Insurance. We invest in bank-owned life insurance due to its attractive nontaxable return and protection against the loss of our key employees. We record income based on the growth of the cash surrender value of these policies as well as the annual yield net of fees and charges, including mortality charges. Income from bank-owned life insurance increased by $64,000, or 8.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The increase in income is primarily due to additional policies purchased on the lives of existing officers of the Company.
Warehouse Lending Fees. A portion of our lending involves the origination of mortgage warehouse lines of credit. Mortgage warehouse lending increased by $278,000, or 40.9% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. The large increase is primarily due to a decrease in mortgage loan rates during 2020, which resulted in an increase in mortgage refinances during the year.
Mortgage Fee Income. Mortgage fee income consists of the fees related to the origination and sale of mortgage loans to the secondary market. The increase of $448,000, or 138.7% from December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in mortgage loan rates during 2020, which resulted in an increase in new purchase mortgages and mortgage refinances during the year.
Other. This category includes a variety of other income producing activities such as wire transfer fees, check printing fees, loan administration fees, gains on sales of assets and real estate owned and other income. Other noninterest income increased $389,000, or 19.2%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Increases in other income during 2020 were primarily due to a $429,000 improvement in the fair value of our SBA servicing asset, offset by a decrease in administrative loan fee income of $46,000.
Noninterest Expense
Generally, noninterest expense is composed of all employee expenses and costs associated with operating our facilities, obtaining and retaining customer relationships and providing bank services. The largest component of noninterest expense is salaries and employee benefits. Noninterest expense also includes operational expenses, such as occupancy expenses, depreciation and amortization of our facilities and our furniture, fixtures and office equipment, professional and regulatory fees, including FDIC assessments, data processing expenses, and advertising and promotion expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, noninterest expense totaled $66.5 million, an increase of $4.0 million, or 6.4%, compared to $62.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest expense:
Employee Compensation and Benefits. Salaries and employee benefits are the largest component of noninterest expense and include payroll expense, the cost of incentive compensation, benefit plans, health insurance and payroll taxes. Employee compensation and benefits increased $1.3 million, or 3.6%, to $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $35.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase resulted from primarily from standard annual salary increases, but was offset by approximately $862,000 due to deferred origination costs associated with PPP loans.
Software and Technology. Software and technology expenses increased $763,000, or 22.8%, from $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is attributable primarily to new software investments to improve online deposit account opening, further enhance treasury management capabilities and improve connectivity to support remote working and other technology capabilities.
FDIC Insurance Assessment Fees. FDIC insurance assessment fees increased $648,000, or 374.6%, from $173,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $821,000 for year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily the result of an FDIC assessment credit of $534,000 that was received and fully realized during 2019, thus reducing the prior year’s expense. Additionally, in the current year, there was an increase in the assessment rate used to calculate the fee, based on changes in our financial ratios.
Telecommunication Expense. Telecommunication expense increased from $676,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, to $864,000 in 2020, an increase of $188,000, or 27.8%. The increase resulted primarily as a result of the beginning phase of a project designed to aggregate utility expenses for the purpose of cost control through bundled contracts and negotiated rates.
ATM and Debit Card Expense. We pay processing fees related to the activity of our customers’ ATM and debit card usage. ATM and debit card expenses were $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $604,000, or 44.8%, compared to $1.3 million in 2019 as a result of increased ATM and debit card usage by our customers.
Other. This category includes operating and administrative expenses, such as stock option expense, expenses and losses related to repossession of assets, small hardware and software purchases, expense of the value of stock appreciation rights, losses incurred on problem assets, losses on sale of other real estate owned and other assets, other real estate owned expense and write-downs, business development expenses (i.e., travel and entertainment, charitable contributions and club memberships), insurance and security expenses. Other noninterest expense increased $295,000, or 6.2%, from $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to losses as a result of disputed debit card, ACH and wire transfer transactions of $358,000 in 2020 compared to $232,000 in 2019, and additional charitable contributions of $465,000 in 2020. Additionally, stock option expense increased $85,000 as our equity awards continue to vest. These increases were offset by decreases
in expenses related to meals and entertainment, traveling, and training and education in the amounts of $128,000, $102,000, and $91,000, respectively.
Income Tax Expense
The amount of income tax expense we incur is influenced by the amounts of our pre-tax income, tax-exempt income and other nondeductible expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at current income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, income tax expense totaled $5.9 million and $5.8 million, respectively. The increase in income tax expense was primarily due to an increase in net earnings before taxes of $1.2 million. Our effective tax rates for the years ended 2020 and 2019 were 17.70% and 18.02%, respectively.
Financial Condition
Our total assets increased $422.4 million, or 18.2%, from $2.32 billion as of December 31, 2019 to $2.74 billion as of December 31, 2020. Our asset growth was primarily due to increases in total gross loans of $160.4 million and cash and cash equivalents of $261.1 million. The increase in loans resulted largely from our participation in the PPP loan program, and the increase in cash and cash equivalents resulted largely from the increase in deposit balances, also related to the PPP loan program.
Loan Portfolio
Our primary source of income is derived through interest earned on loans to small- to medium-sized businesses, commercial companies, professionals and individuals located in our primary market areas. A substantial portion of our loan portfolio consists of commercial and industrial loans and real estate loans secured by commercial real estate properties located in our primary market areas. Our loan portfolio represents the highest yielding component of our earning asset base.
Our loan portfolio is the largest category of our earning assets. As of December 31, 2020, total loans held for investment were $1.87 billion, an increase of $160.4 million, or 9.4%, from the December 31, 2019 balance of $1.71 billion. In addition to these amounts, $5.5 million and $2.4 million in loans were classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The increase in gross loans during the period included outstanding PPP loan balances of $139.8 million, to 1,452 borrowers, as of December 31, 2020. Excluding the outstanding balance of PPP loans, gross loans increased 1.2%, or $20.6 million, from December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to period-end increases in our mortgage warehouse loan balances.
Total loans, excluding those held for sale, as a percentage of deposits, were 81.6% and 87.2% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Total loans, excluding those held for sale, as a percentage of total assets, were 68.1% and 73.6% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The following table summarizes our loan portfolio by type of loan as of the dates indicated:
Commercial and Industrial Loans. Commercial and industrial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate profitably and effectively. These loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower, and secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. Most commercial and industrial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as accounts receivable or inventory, and generally include personal guarantees. Commercial and industrial loans increased $166.2 million, or 59.4%, to $445.8 million as of December 31, 2020 from $279.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in the commercial and industrial portfolio is primarily because most PPP loans are included in this group, in addition to normal variances in the balances of underlying lines of credit.
Construction and Development. Construction and land development loans are comprised of loans to fund construction, land acquisition and land development construction. The properties securing the portfolio are located throughout Texas and are generally diverse in terms of type. Construction and development loans decreased $10.0 million, or 3.6%, to $270.4 million as of December 31, 2020 from $280.5 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted from normal fluctuations in construction project volume in our markets.
1-4 Family Residential. Our 1-4 family residential loan portfolio is comprised of loans secured by 1-4 family homes, which are both owner occupied and investor owned. Our 1-4 family residential loans have a relatively small balance spread across many individual borrowers compared to our other loan categories. Our 1-4 family residential loans decreased $23.1 million, or 5.6%, to $389.1 million as of December 31, 2020 from $412.2 million as of December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily the result of fewer originations and some refinancing into secondary market channels.
Commercial Real Estate. Commercial real estate loans are underwritten primarily based on projected cash flows and, secondarily, as loans secured by real estate. These loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. The properties securing the portfolio are located primarily within our markets and are generally diverse in terms of type. This diversity helps reduce our exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single industry. Commercial real estate loans increased $26.9 million, or 4.7%, to $594.2 million as of December 31, 2020 from $567.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in commercial real estate loans during the periods was mostly driven by organic growth.
Other Loan Categories. Other categories of loans included in our loan portfolio include farmland and agricultural loans made to farmers and ranchers relating to their operations, multi-family residential loans and consumer loans. None of these categories of loans represents a significant portion of our total loan portfolio.
Contractual Loan Maturities. The contractual maturity ranges of loans in our loan portfolio and the amount of such loans with fixed and floating interest rates in each maturity range as of the dates indicated are summarized in the following tables:
Nonperforming Assets
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory provisions. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status regardless of whether or not such loans are considered past due. In general, we place loans on nonaccrual status when they become 90 days past due. We also place loans on nonaccrual status if they are less than 90 days past due if the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed from income. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received in excess of principal due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are, in management’s opinion, reasonably assured.
We believe our conservative lending approach and focused management of nonperforming assets has resulted in sound asset quality and timely resolution of problem assets. We have several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio. We have established underwriting guidelines to be followed by our bankers, and we also monitor our delinquency levels for any negative or adverse trends. There can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
We had $13.1 million in nonperforming assets as of December 31, 2020, compared to $12.3 million as of December 31, 2019. We had $12.7 million in nonperforming loans as of December 31, 2020, compared to $11.3 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in nonperforming loans and assets resulted primarily from one SBA 7(a), partially guaranteed (75%) loan and one commercial loan, both of which were acquired in our June 2018 acquisition of Westbound Bank. To facilitate the workout of the SBA loan, we repurchased the guaranteed portion of the loan from a third party, resulting in an increased book balance of $3.1 million and a total book balance, which remains 75% SBA guaranteed, of $3.9 million. The increased book balance from the SBA loan of $3.1 million, combined with the commercial loan book balance of $1.1 million, comprises $4.2 million of the increase from December 31, 2019, which was partially offset by decreases in smaller dollar loans. Three SBA partially guaranteed (75%) loans relating to loans acquired from Westbound Bank, including the $3.1 million repurchased portion, are included in nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 and had combined book balances of $8.7 million. These loans were internally identified as problem assets prior to COVID-19 and are properly reserved using our CECL methodology. Management continues to work toward a satisfactory resolution for these three loans. Excluding these partially guaranteed SBA loans, non-performing assets as a percentage of total loans at December 31, 2020 would be 0.24%.
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming assets at the dates indicated:
(1)
Excludes loans held for sale of $5.5 million, $2.4 million, $1.8 million, $1.9 million and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Potential Problem Loans
From a credit risk standpoint, we classify loans in one of five risk ratings: pass, special mention, substandard, doubtful or loss. Within the pass rating, we classify loans into one of the following five subcategories based on perceived credit risk, including repayment capacity and collateral security: superior, excellent, good, acceptable and acceptable/watch. The classifications of loans reflect a judgment about the risks of default and loss associated with the loan. We review the ratings on credits monthly. Ratings are adjusted to reflect the degree of risk and loss that is believed
to be inherent in each credit as of each monthly reporting period. Our methodology is structured so that specific ACL allocations are increased in accordance with deterioration in credit quality (and a corresponding increase in risk and loss) or decreased in accordance with improvement in credit quality (and a corresponding decrease in risk and loss).
Credits rated special mention show clear signs of financial weaknesses or deterioration in creditworthiness; however, such concerns are not so pronounced that we generally expect to experience significant loss within the short-term. Such credits typically maintain the ability to perform within standard credit terms and credit exposure is not as prominent as credits with a lower rating.
Credits rated substandard are those in which the normal repayment of principal and interest may be, or has been, jeopardized by reason of adverse trends or developments of a financial, managerial, economic or political nature, or important weaknesses which exist in collateral. A protracted workout on these credits is a distinct possibility. Prompt corrective action is therefore required to reduce exposure and to assure that adequate remedial measures are taken by the borrower. Credit exposure becomes more likely in such credits and a serious evaluation of the secondary support to the credit is performed.
Credits rated as doubtful have the weaknesses of substandard assets with the additional characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full questionable and there is a high probability of loss based on currently existing facts, conditions and values.
Credits rated as loss are charged-off. We have no expectation of the recovery of any payments in respect of credits rated as loss.
Loans that were modified for reasons related to the COVID-19 pandemic that are not currently required to pay, or are paying with interest only, are nevertheless considered performing so long as they are compliant with the terms of their modifications and are not classified as TDRs. Such loans are evaluated for classification, but the existence of a loan modification in accordance with the CARES Act does not necessarily result in an adverse classification.
Social distancing, stay-at-home orders and other measures as a result of COVID-19 have particularly affected the restaurant, hospitality, retail commercial real estate (CRE) and energy sectors. Excluding SBA partially guaranteed (75%) loans, the Bank has direct exposure, through total loan commitments with weighted average loan-to-values (“LTV”), as of December 31, 2020, of $26.4 million with 60.5% weighted average LTV to restaurants, $56.1 million with 51.5% weighted average LTV to retail CRE and $67.0 million with 56.5% weighted average LTV to hotel/hospitality borrowers. Many of the loans in these sectors were downgraded to pass-acceptable/watch or special mention risk ratings during the second quarter of 2020. Management will continue to closely monitor these borrowing relationships and work with borrowers to achieve positive outcomes, when necessary.
The following table summarizes the internal ratings of our performing loans and our nonaccrual loans by category as of:
The following table summarizes the internal ratings of our loans by category as of:
Allowance for Credit Losses
We maintain an allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) that represents management’s best estimate of the appropriate level of losses and risks inherent in our applicable financial assets under the current expected credit loss model. The amount of the allowance for credit losses should not be interpreted as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily occur in those amounts, or at all. The determination of the amount of allowance involves a high degree of judgement and subjectivity. Refer to Note 1 of the notes to the financial statements for discussion regarding our ACL methodologies for loans held for investment and available for sale securities.
For available for sale debt securities in an unrealized loss position, the Company evaluates the securities at each measurement date to determine whether the decline in the fair value below the amortized cost basis (impairment) is due to credit-related factors or noncredit-related factors. Any impairment that is not credit related is recognized in other comprehensive income, net of applicable taxes. Credit-related impairment is recognized as an ACL on the balance sheet, limited to the amount by which the amortized cost basis exceeds the fair value, with a corresponding adjustment to earnings through provision for credit loss expense. Upon adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, and as of December 31, 2020, the Company determined that all available for sale securities that experienced a decline in fair value below the amortized costs basis were due to noncredit-related factors, therefore no related ACL was recorded and there was no related provision expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In determining the ACL for loans held for investment, we primarily estimate losses on segments of loans with similar risk characteristics and where the potential loss can be identified and reasonably determined. For loans that do not share similar risk characteristics with our existing segments, they are evaluated individually for an ACL. Our portfolio is segmented by regulatory call report codes, with additional segments for warehouse mortgage loans, SBA loans acquired from Westbound Bank, SBA loans originated by us, and SBA PPP loans. The segments are further disaggregated by internally assigned risk rating classifications. The balance of the ACL is determined using the current expected credit loss model, which considers historical loan loss rates, changes in the nature of our loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, industry concentrations, delinquency trends, current economic factors and reasonable and supportable forecasts of the impact of future economic conditions on loan loss rates. Please see “Critical Accounting Policies - Allowance for Credit Losses.”
In connection with the review of our loan portfolio, we consider risk elements attributable to particular loan types or categories in assessing the quality of individual loans. Some of the risk elements we consider include:
•
for commercial and industrial loans, the debt service coverage ratio (income from the business in excess of operating expenses compared to loan repayment requirements), the operating results of the commercial, industrial or professional enterprise, the borrower’s business, professional and financial ability and expertise, the specific risks and volatility of income and operating results typical for businesses in that category and the value, nature and marketability of collateral;
•
for commercial mortgage loans and multifamily residential loans, the debt service coverage ratio, operating results of the owner in the case of owner occupied properties, the loan to value ratio, the age and condition of the collateral and the volatility of income, property value and future operating results typical of properties of that type;
•
for 1-4 family residential mortgage loans, the borrower’s ability to repay the loan, including a consideration of the debt to income ratio and employment and income stability, the loan-to-value ratio, and the age, condition and marketability of the collateral; and
•
for construction and development loans, the perceived feasibility of the project including the ability to sell developed lots or improvements constructed for resale or the ability to lease property constructed for lease, the quality and nature of contracts for presale or prelease, if any, experience and ability of the developer and loan to value ratio.
As of December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses totaled $33.6 million, or 1.80%, of total loans, excluding those held for sale, and totaled 1.95%, excluding PPP loans and loans held for sale. As of December 31, 2019, the allowance for loan losses totaled $16.2 million, or 0.95%, of total loans, excluding those held for sale. The increase in the ACL of $17.4 million, or 107.5%, was primarily driven by $4.5 million additional provision recorded upon adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020 and by $13.2 million provision for credit losses recorded during 2020 specifically as a result of COVID-19 developments. The COVID-19 related adjustments resulted from changes in qualitative risk factor assumptions considered under our CECL model (primarily derived from changes in national GDP, Texas unemployment rates and national industry-related CRE trends) and from changes in loan risk ratings reflecting the effects of COVID-19.
The following table presents, as of and for the periods indicated, an analysis of the allowance for credit losses and other related data:
(1)
Includes average outstanding balances of loans held for sale of $6.0 million, $2.7 million, $1.7 million, $1.7 million and $3.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(2)
Excludes loans held for sale of $5.5 million, $2.4 million, $1.8 million, $1.9 million and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
We believe the successful execution of our expansion strategy through organic growth and strategic acquisitions is generally demonstrated by the upward trend in loan balances from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2020. Loan balances, excluding loans held for sale, increased from $1.24 billion as of December 31, 2016, to $1.87 billion as of December 31, 2020. Total loans excluding PPP loans and loans held for sale were $1.73 billion as of December 31, 2020. Net charge-offs have been minimal, representing on average 0.05% of average loan balances during the same period.
Although we believe that we have established our allowance for credit losses in accordance with GAAP and that the allowance for credit losses was adequate to provide for known and inherent losses in the portfolio at all times shown above, future provisions for loan losses will be subject to ongoing evaluations of the risks in our loan portfolio. If our primary market areas experience economic declines, if asset quality deteriorates or if we are successful in growing the size of our loan portfolio, our allowance could become inadequate and material additional provisions for loan losses could be required.
The following table shows the allocation of the allowance for credit losses among loan categories and certain other information as of the dates indicated. The allocation of the allowance for credit losses as shown in the table should neither be interpreted as an indication of future charge-offs, nor as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily occur in these amounts or in the indicated proportions. The total allowance is available to absorb losses from any loan category.
Securities
We use our securities portfolio to provide a source of liquidity, provide an appropriate return on funds invested, manage interest rate risk, meet collateral requirements and meet regulatory capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying amount of our investment securities totaled $380.8 million, an increase of $12.6 million, or 3.4%, compared to $368.2 million as of December 31, 2019. Investment securities represented 13.9% and 15.9% of total assets as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Our investment portfolio consists of securities classified as available for sale. During the first quarter of 2020, we transferred all of our investment securities classified as held to maturity to available for sale in order to provide maximum flexibility to address liquidity and capital needs that may result from COVID-19. We believe these transfers are allowable under existing GAAP due to the isolated, non-recurring and unusual events resulting from the pandemic.
As of December 31, 2020, securities available for sale totaled $380.8 million, which includes the transfer of securities from our held to maturity portfolio, as well as purchases of mortgage backed securities at a cost of $28.7 million, municipal securities at a cost of $22.3 million, and corporate securities at a cost of $11.0 million. As of December 31, 2019, securities available for sale and securities held to maturity totaled $212.7 million and $155.5 million, respectively. Held to maturity securities represented 42.2% of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2019. The carrying values of our investment securities classified as available for sale are adjusted for unrealized gain or loss, and any gain or loss is reported on an after-tax basis as a component of other comprehensive income in shareholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2020, the Company determined that all available for sale securities that experienced a decline in fair value below their
amortized cost basis were impacted by noncredit-related factors; therefore the Company carried no ACL with respect to our securities portfolio at December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our investment securities as of the dates shown:
We do not hold any Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac preferred stock, collateralized debt obligations, structured investment vehicles or second lien elements in our investment portfolio. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our investment portfolio did not contain any securities that are directly backed by subprime or Alt-A mortgages, non-U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities or corporate collateralized mortgage obligations.
Prior to adoption of ASC 326, management evaluated securities for OTTI at least on a quarterly basis, and more frequently when economic or market conditions warranted such an evaluation. As of December 31, 2019, no OTTI was recorded.
The following tables set forth the fair value of available for sale securities and the amortized cost of held to maturity securities and, maturities and approximated weighted average yield based on estimated annual income divided by the average amortized cost of our securities portfolio as of the dates indicated. The contractual maturity of a mortgage-backed security is the date at which the last underlying mortgage matures.
The contractual maturity of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations is not a reliable indicator of their expected life because borrowers have the right to prepay their obligations at any time. Mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations are typically issued with stated principal amounts and are backed by pools of mortgage loans and other loans with varying maturities. The term of the underlying mortgages and loans may vary significantly due to the ability of a borrower to prepay. Monthly pay downs on mortgage-backed securities typically cause the average life of the securities to be much different than the stated contractual maturity. During a period of increasing interest rates, fixed rate mortgage-backed securities do not tend to experience heavy prepayments of principal, and, consequently, the average life of this security is typically lengthened. If interest rates begin to fall, prepayments may increase, thereby shortening the estimated life of this security. The weighted average life of our investment portfolio was 6.22 years with an estimated effective duration of 2.92 years as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, we did not own securities of any one issuer, other than the U.S. government and its agencies, for which aggregate adjusted cost exceeded 10.0% of the consolidated shareholders’ equity.
The average yield of our securities portfolio was 2.80% as of December 31, 2020, down from 2.87% as of December 31, 2019. The decline in average yield resulted primarily from decreases in yields on mortgage backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations of 2.54% and 2.72% at December 31, 2019, respectively, to 2.02% and 2.56% at December 31, 2020, respectively. Municipal securities, mortgage backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations comprised 46.1%, 28.1% and 17.6% of the total portfolio, respectively, as of December 31, 2020, and 42.3%, 26.8% and 25.4%, respectively, as of December 31, 2019.
Deposits
We offer a variety of deposit products, which have a wide range of interest rates and terms, including demand, savings, money market and time accounts. We rely primarily on competitive pricing policies, convenient locations and personalized service to attract and retain these deposits.
Average deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.16 billion, an increase of $203.7 million, or 10.4%, compared to $1.96 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The majority of the deposit balance increase was due to the deposit of PPP proceeds into demand accounts at the Bank, as well as apparent changes in depositor spending habits during the year resulting from economic and other uncertainties due to COVID-19. The average rate paid on total interest-bearing deposits was 0.79% and 1.48% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in average rates for 2020 was driven primarily by the Federal Reserve reducing rates starting during the third quarter of 2019, with further decreases in 2020 in response to the economic uncertainty due to COVID-19.
The following table presents the average balances and average rates paid on deposits for the periods indicated:
The ratio of average noninterest-bearing deposits to average total deposits for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 32.2% and 25.5%, respectively.
Total deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $2.29 billion, an increase of $329.6 million, or 16.8%, compared to $1.96 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase in 2020 was due primarily to the deposit of PPP proceeds into demand accounts at the Bank, as well as apparent changes in depositor spending habits during the year resulting from economic and other uncertainties due to COVID-19.
Noninterest-bearing deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $779.7 million compared to $525.9 million as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $253.9 million, or 48.3%.
Total savings and interest-bearing demand account balances as of December 31, 2020 were $1.51 billion, compared to $1.43 billion as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $75.7 million, or 5.3%.
The following table sets forth the amount of certificates of deposit greater than $100,000 by time remaining until maturity as of December 31, 2020:
Factors affecting the cost of funding interest-bearing assets include the volume of noninterest- and interest-bearing deposits, changes in market interest rates and economic conditions in our primary market areas and their impact on interest paid on deposits, as well as the ongoing execution of our balance sheet management strategy. Cost of funds is calculated as total interest expense divided by average total deposits plus average total borrowings. Our cost of funds was 0.82% and 1.54% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in our cost of funds for 2020 was primarily due to decreases in rates on interest-bearing deposits, which were 0.79% and 1.48% in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and maturities of higher rate certificates of deposit during the year. The decrease in average rates for 2020 was driven primarily by the Federal Reserve reducing rates starting during the third quarter of 2019, with further decreases in 2020 in response to the economic uncertainty due to COVID-19.
Borrowings
We utilize short-term and long-term borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investment activities, each of which is discussed below.
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) Advances. The FHLB allows us to borrow on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain securities and loans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, total borrowing capacity of $476.5 million and $560.6 million, respectively, was available under this arrangement. Our outstanding FHLB advances mature within 4 years. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $1.37 billion in real estate loans were pledged as collateral for our FHLB borrowings. We utilize these borrowings to meet liquidity needs and to fund certain fixed rate loans in our portfolio. The following table presents our FHLB borrowings as of the dates indicated:
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has an available borrower in custody arrangement, which allows us to borrow on a collateralized basis. Certain commercial and industrial and consumer loans are pledged under this arrangement. We maintain this borrowing arrangement to meet liquidity needs pursuant to our contingency funding plan. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $158.8 million and $178.7 million, respectively, was available under this arrangement. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $214.5 million in consumer and commercial and industrial loans was pledged as collateral. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, no borrowings were outstanding under this arrangement.
Other Borrowings. We have historically used a line of credit with a correspondent bank as a source of funding for working capital needs, the payment of dividends when there is a temporary timing difference in cash flows, and repurchases of equity securities. In March 2017, we entered into an unsecured revolving line of credit for $25.0 million, and in March 2020, we renewed that line of credit. The line of credit bears interest at the prime rate (3.25% as of December 31, 2020) subject to a floor of 3.50%, with quarterly interest payments, and matures in March 2021. As of December 31, 2020, there was a $12.0 million outstanding balance on the line of credit. As of December 31, 2019, there was no outstanding balance on this line of credit with the correspondent bank.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity involves our ability to raise funds to support asset growth and acquisitions or reduce assets to meet deposit withdrawals and other payment obligations, to maintain reserve requirements and otherwise to operate on an ongoing basis and manage unexpected events, such as COVID-19. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, liquidity needs were primarily met by core deposits, security and loan maturities and amortizing investment and loan portfolios. Although access to purchased funds from correspondent banks and overnight or longer term advances from the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas are available, and have been utilized on occasion to take advantage of investment opportunities, we do not generally rely on these external funding sources. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we maintained two federal funds lines of credit with commercial banks that provide for the availability to borrow up to an aggregate $60.0 million in federal funds. There were no funds under these lines of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. In addition to these federal funds lines of credit, our $25.0 million revolving line of credit discussed above in “Other Borrowings” provides an additional source of liquidity.
During the second quarter of 2020, we obtained a six-month advance of $100.0 million from the FHLB at a fixed interest rate of 0.25%, a maturity date of October 13, 2020 and no prepayment penalty, in order to provide additional liquidity for the SBA Paycheck Protection Program. The PPP loans generally self-funded with the proceeds of the loans deposited into noninterest bearing demand accounts at our Bank. As result, the $100.0 million advance was not necessary for liquidity and $50.0 million of the FHLB advance was repaid in June 2020, with the remaining $50.0 million repaid in early July 2020.
The following table illustrates, during the periods presented, the composition of our funding sources and the average assets in which those funds are invested as a percentage of average total assets for the period indicated. Average assets were $2.57 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $2.32 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our primary source of funds is deposits, and our primary use of funds is loans. We do not expect a change in the primary source or use of our funds in the foreseeable future. Our average loans, including average loans held for sale, increased 10.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. Our securities portfolio had a weighted average life of 6.22 years and an effective duration of 2.92 years as of December 31, 2020, and a weighted average life of 6.25 years and an effective duration of 3.47 years as of December 31, 2019. We predominantly invest excess deposits in overnight deposits with our correspondent banks, federal funds sold, securities, interest-bearing deposits at other banks or other short-term liquid investments until needed to fund loan growth.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $324.3 million in outstanding commitments to extend credit and $8.5 million in commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit. As of December 31, 2019, we had $440.7 million in outstanding commitments to extend credit and $9.1 million in commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the total outstanding may not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no exposure to future cash requirements associated with known uncertainties or capital expenditures of a material nature. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $351.8 million, compared to $90.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in federal funds sold of $173.6 million, and an increase in interest bearing deposits at other banks of $79.6 million.
Capital Resources
Total shareholders’ equity increased to $272.6 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $261.6 million as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $11.1 million, or 4.2%, after giving effect to $8.6 million in dividends paid to common shareholders in 2020. This increase was primarily the result of an increase in net earnings and unrealized gains on securities and was partially offset by the repurchase of 658,607 shares of common stock.
Capital management consists of providing equity and other instruments that qualify as regulatory capital to support current and future operations. Banking regulators view capital levels as important indicators of an institution’s financial soundness. As a general matter, FDIC-insured depository institutions and their holding companies are required to maintain minimum capital relative to the amount and types of assets they hold. We are subject to regulatory capital requirements at the bank holding company and bank levels. See "Item 1. Business-Guaranty Bank & Trust, N.A.-Regulation and Supervision-Capital Adequacy Requirements” for additional discussion regarding the regulatory capital requirements applicable to us and the Bank. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company and the Bank were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and the Bank was classified as “well capitalized,” for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations. As we deploy our capital and learn more about the economic impacts of COVID-19, our regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on our level of earnings and provisions for credit losses. However, we expect to closely monitor our loan portfolio, operating expenses and overall capital levels in order to remain in compliance with all regulatory capital standards applicable to us.
The following table presents the regulatory capital ratios for our Company and the Bank as of the dates indicated.
Contractual Obligations
We have issued subordinated debentures relating to the issuance of trust preferred securities. In October 2002, we formed Guaranty (TX) Capital Trust II, which issued $3.0 million in trust preferred securities to a third party in a private placement. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the trust issued common securities to the Company in the aggregate liquidation value of $93,000. The trust invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities and the common securities in $3.1 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, which will mature on October 30, 2032. In July 2006, we formed Guaranty (TX) Capital Trust III, which issued $2.0 million in trust preferred securities to a third party in a private placement. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the trust issued common securities to the Company in the aggregate liquidation value of $62,000. The trust invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities and the common securities in $2.1 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, which will mature on October 1, 2036. In March 2015, we acquired DCB Trust I, which issued $5.0 million in trust preferred securities to a third party in a private placement. Concurrent with the issuance of the trust preferred securities, the trust issued common securities to the Company in the aggregate liquidation value of $155,000. The trust invested the total proceeds from the sale of the trust preferred securities and the common securities in $5.2 million of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures, which will mature on June 15, 2037.
With certain exceptions, the amount of the principal and any accrued and unpaid interest on the debentures are subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in full of all of our senior indebtedness. The terms of the debentures are such that they qualify as Tier 1 capital under the Federal Reserve’s regulatory capital guidelines applicable to bank holding companies. Interest on Trust II Debentures is payable at a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to 3-month LIBOR plus 3.35%. Interest on the Trust III Debentures was payable at a fixed rate per annum equal to 7.43% until October 1, 2016 and is a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to 3-month LIBOR plus 1.67%. Interest on the DCB Trust I Debentures is payable at a variable rate per annum, reset quarterly, equal to 3-month LIBOR plus 1.80%. The interest is deferrable on a cumulative basis for up to five consecutive years following a suspension of dividend payments on all other capital stock. No principal payments are due until maturity for each of the debentures.
On any interest payment date on or after (1) June 15, 2012 for the DCB Trust I Debentures, (2) October 30, 2012 for the Trust II Debentures and (3) October 1, 2016 for the Trust III Debentures, and before their respective maturity dates, the debentures are redeemable, in whole or in part, for cash at our option on at least 30, but not more than 60, days’ notice at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount to be redeemed, plus accrued interest to the date of redemption.
In December 2015, the Company issued $5.0 million in debentures, of which $2.5 million were issued to directors and other related parties. As of December 31, 2019, $4.5 million of the debentures had been repaid. The final $500,000 debenture was repaid during the second quarter of 2020.
On May 1, 2020, the Company issued $10.0 million in debentures to directors and other related parties. The debentures have stated maturity dates between November 1, 2020 and November 1, 2024, and bear interest at fixed annual rates between 1.00% and 4.00%. The Company pays interest semi-annually on May 1st and November 1st in arrears during the term of the debentures. $500,000 was paid off in November of 2020. The debentures are redeemable by the Company at its option, in whole in or part, at any time on or before the due date of any debenture. The redemption price is equal to 100% of the face amount of the debenture redeemed, plus all accrued but unpaid interest.
The following table summarizes contractual obligations and other commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2020 (other than non-time deposit obligations), which consist of future cash payments associated with our contractual obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby and commercial letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets.
Our commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of the date indicated are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
Standby and commercial letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event of nonperformance by the customer, we have rights to the underlying collateral, which can include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash and/or marketable securities. Our credit risk associated with issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as the risk involved in extending loan facilities to our customers. Management evaluated the likelihood of funding the standby and commercial letters of credit as of January 1, 2020, the adoption date of ASC 326, and as of December 31, 2020, and determined the likelihood to be improbable. Therefore, no ACL was recorded for standby and commercial letters of credit as of December 31, 2020.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn upon, the total commitment amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if considered necessary by us, upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the customer.
Loan agreements executed in connection with construction loans and commercial lines of credit have standard conditions which must be met prior to the Company being required to provide additional funding, including conditions precedent that typically include: (i) no event of default or potential default has occurred; (ii) no material adverse events have taken place that would materially affect the borrower or the value of the collateral, (iii) the borrower remains in compliance with all loan obligations and covenants and has made no misrepresentations; (iv) the collateral has not been damaged or impaired; (v) the project remains on budget and in compliance with all laws and regulations; and (vi) all management agreements, lease agreements and franchise agreements that affect the value of the collateral remain in force. If the conditions precedent have not been met, the Company retains the option to cease current draws and/or future funding. As a result of these conditions within our loan agreements, management believes the credit risk of these off balance sheet items is minimal and we recorded no ACL with respect to these loan agreements upon adoption of ASC 326 or as of December 31, 2020.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are summarized and discussed in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report.
Impact of Inflation
Our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. GAAP requires the measurement of financial
position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative value of money over time due to inflation or recession.
Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates may not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, other operating expenses do reflect general levels of inflation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and the prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, we also evaluate our performance based on certain additional financial measures discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as being non-GAAP financial measures. We classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, that are included or excluded, as the case may be, in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP as in effect from time to time in the United States in our statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and other statistical measures or ratios or statistical measures calculated using exclusively either financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, operating measures or other measures that are not non-GAAP financial measures or both.
The non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate the non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss herein may differ from that of other companies reporting measures with similar names. It is important to understand how other banking organizations calculate their financial measures with names similar to the non-GAAP financial measures we have discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K when comparing such non-GAAP financial measures.
Tangible Book Value Per Common Share. Tangible book value per common share is a non-GAAP measure generally used by investors, financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate (1) tangible common equity as total shareholders’ equity, less goodwill, core deposit intangibles and other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization, and (2) tangible book value per common share as tangible common equity divided by shares of common stock outstanding. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for tangible book value per common share is book value per common share.
We believe that the tangible book value per common share measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in changes from period to period in book value per common share exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing total book value while not increasing our tangible book value.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total shareholders’ equity to tangible common equity and presents tangible book value per common share compared to book value per common share:
(1)
Excludes the dilutive effect, if any, of 32,781, 66,202, 90,940, 82,529, and 8,066 shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of outstanding stock options as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
Tangible book value per share increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to an increase in our total shareholders’ equity as a result of earnings and unrealized gains on securities, and by the repurchase of 658,607 shares of common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets. Tangible common equity to tangible assets is a non-GAAP measure generally used by investors, financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate tangible common equity as described above and tangible assets as total assets less goodwill, core deposit intangibles and other intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for tangible common equity to tangible assets is total common shareholders’ equity to total assets.
We believe that this measure is important to many investors in the marketplace who are interested in the relative changes from period to period of tangible common equity to tangible assets, each exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have the effect of increasing both total shareholders’ equity and assets while not increasing our tangible common equity or tangible assets.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total tangible common equity and total assets to tangible assets:
Core Earnings and Other COVID-19 Adjusted Measures. The following tables reconcile, as of and for the dates set forth below, various metrics impacted by the effects of COVID-19 on reported data (dollars in thousands, except per share data).
Net Core Earnings and Net Core Earnings per Common Share
Net Core Earnings to Average Assets, as Adjusted, and Average Equity
Total Non-Performing Assets to Total Loans, Excluding PPP
Total Interest-Earning Assets and Borrowings, net of PPP Effects
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin, Net of PPP Effects
Efficiency Ratio, Net of PPP Effects
Allowance to Total Loans, as Adjusted