ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” or in other sections of this report.
We operate on a fiscal year that ends on the Saturday closest to December 31st each year. References to fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019, and fiscal 2018 refer to the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019, and December 29, 2018, respectively. Our 2020 fiscal year consisted of 53 weeks, while each of the remaining years listed were 52-week years.
OVERVIEW
We are a high-growth, extreme value retailer of quality, name-brand consumables and fresh products sold through a network of independently operated stores. Our flexible buying model allows us to offer quality, name-brand opportunistic products at prices generally 40% to 70% below those of conventional retailers. Entrepreneurial independent operators (“IOs”) run our stores and create a neighborhood feel through personalized customer service and a localized product offering. This differentiated approach has driven 17 consecutive years of positive comparable store sales growth. As of January 2, 2021, we had 380 stores throughout California, Washington, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Idaho and Nevada.
Initial Public Offering
On June 24, 2019, we completed our initial public offering (“IPO”) of 19,765,625 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $22.00 per share for net proceeds of $407.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $27.1 million. We also incurred offering costs payable by us of $7.2 million which we recognized as a charge to additional paid-in-capital. The shares of common stock sold in the IPO and the net proceeds from the IPO included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares.
In connection with the closing of our IPO, we repaid in full the $150.0 million outstanding principal amount and $3.6 million accrued interest on our second lien term loan and terminated the related loan agreement. Additionally, using the remainder of the net proceeds, together with excess cash on hand, we prepaid a portion of the term loan outstanding under our first lien credit agreement, dated as of October 22, 2018 (as amended, the “First Lien Credit Agreement”) totaling $248.0 million and $3.8 million of accrued interest. On October 23, 2019, we prepaid an additional $15.0 million of principal on the term loan outstanding under our First Lien Credit Agreement. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information.
Secondary Public Offerings
On October 8, 2019, certain of our selling stockholders completed a secondary public offering of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling stockholders. We incurred related offering costs of $1.1 million which we recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2019. We received $3.2 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of 451,470 options by certain stockholders participating in this secondary public offering.
On February 3, 2020, certain of our selling stockholders completed another secondary public offering of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling stockholders. We incurred related offering costs of $1.1 million which we recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2020. We received $1.4 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of 191,470 options by certain stockholders participating in this secondary public offering.
On April 27, 2020, certain of our selling stockholders completed a third secondary public offering of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling stockholders. We incurred related offering costs of $1.0 million which we recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. We received $1.6 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of 269,000 options by certain stockholders participating in this secondary public offering.
On May 28, 2020, the H&F Investor distributed the remainder of its holdings representing 9.6 million shares of our common stock to its equity holders. We did not receive any proceeds or incur any material costs related to this distribution.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. As a result, many states, including states where we have significant operations, declared a state of emergency, closed schools and non-essential businesses and enacted limitations on the number of people allowed to gather at one time in the same space. As of the date of this filing, grocery stores are considered essential businesses in states and counties that have enacted requirements that residents leave their homes only for essential business (“shelter in place requirements”) and are able to continue operating. As COVID-19 has continued to spread and the situation has continued to evolve, there has been a surge of positive COVID-19 cases around the country during, and subsequent to, the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 as shelter in place requirements have lapsed and other businesses have begun to reopen.
Our IOs have faced and will continue to face staffing challenges as long as school and childcare closures and COVID-19-related concerns exist. In addition, in early 2021, counties in California and Washington have enacted or are considering enacting ordinances mandating "hazard pay" for grocery workers. In addition, since the start of the pandemic certain inventory items such as water, beans and bread, as well as key cleaning supplies and protective equipment have at times been, and may in the future again be, in short supply. These factors could impact the ability of stores to operate normal hours of operation or have sufficient inventory at all times which may disrupt our business and negatively impact our financial results. Further, planned construction and opening of new stores have been and may continue to be negatively impacted due to shelter in place requirements and the closure of government offices in certain areas. During fiscal 2020, from time to time we had to temporarily close certain stores for cleaning after persons at those locations tested positive for COVID-19. In the event that an employee, IO, or IO employee tests positive for COVID-19, we may have to again temporarily close a store, office or distribution center for cleaning and/or quarantine one or more employees which could negatively impact our financial results. We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, cleaning and safety costs, costs for protective equipment and supplies, and higher personnel expenses. In addition, we have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, additional expenses as a result of certain increased costs related to our IOs. For example, we are paying a portion of the costs of protective equipment and cleaning supplies for our IOs as well as reducing interest rates on outstanding IO Notes. We cannot reasonably estimate the length or severity of this pandemic, but it could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations, and consolidated cash flows in fiscal 2021. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Major health epidemics, such as the outbreak caused by COVID-19, and other outbreaks could disrupt and adversely affect our operations, financial condition and business” for additional information.
Key Factors and Measures We Use to Evaluate Our Business
We consider a variety of financial and operating measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key GAAP measures we use are net sales, gross profit and gross margin, selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) and operating income. The key operational metrics and non-GAAP measures we use are number of new stores, comparable store sales, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income.
Fiscal 2020 Overview
Key financial and operating performance results for our fiscal 2020 (53 weeks) compared to our fiscal 2019 (52 weeks) are as follows:
•Net sales increased by 22.5% to approximately $3.13 billion for fiscal 2020 from approximately $2.56 billion for fiscal 2019; comparable store sales increased by 12.7% in fiscal 2020 on a 52-week basis compared to a 5.2% increase in fiscal 2019. Fiscal 2020 contained one additional week ("53rd week") as compared to fiscal 2019. The 53rd week included $53.3 million in net sales.
•We opened 35 new stores and closed 2, ending fiscal 2020 with 380 stores in six states.
•Net income increased 592.1% to $106.7 million, or $1.08 per diluted share for fiscal 2020, compared to net income of $15.4 million, or $0.19 per diluted share, for fiscal 2019.
•Adjusted EBITDA(1) increased 32.4% to $222.9 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $168.3 million for fiscal 2019.
•Non-GAAP adjusted net income(1) increased 86.9% to $112.7 million, or $1.14 per non-GAAP diluted share, for fiscal 2020 compared to $60.3 million, or $0.74 per non-GAAP diluted share, for fiscal 2019.
_______________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA, non-GAAP adjusted net income and non-GAAP adjusted diluted earnings per share are non-GAAP financial measures and should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Beginning with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we updated our definitions of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income to simplify our presentation and enhance comparability between periods. See GAAP to non-GAAP reconciliations in the “Operating Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section below for additional information.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Net Sales
We recognize revenues from the sale of products at the point of sale, net of any taxes or deposits collected and remitted to governmental authorities. Discounts provided to customers by us are recognized at the time of sale as a reduction in sales as the products are sold. Discounts that are funded solely by IOs are not recognized as a reduction in sales as the IO bears the incidental costs arising from the discount. We do not accept manufacturer coupons. Sales consist of sales from comparable stores and non-comparable stores, described below under “Comparable Store Sales.” Growth of our sales is generally driven by expansion of our store base in existing and new markets as well as comparable store sales growth. Sales are impacted by the spending habits of our customers, product mix and availability, as well as promotional and competitive activities. Our ever-changing selection of offerings across diverse product categories supports growth in sales by attracting new customers and encouraging repeat visits from our existing customers. The spending habits of our customers are subject to changes in macroeconomic conditions, such as those experienced beginning in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and changes in discretionary income. Our customers’ discretionary income is primarily impacted by wages, fuel and other cost-of-living increases including food-at-home inflation, as well as consumer trends and preferences, which fluctuate depending on the environment. Because we offer a broad selection of merchandise at extreme values, historically we have benefited from periods of economic uncertainty.
Cost of Sales, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of sales includes, among other things, merchandise costs, inventory markdowns, inventory losses and transportation, distribution and warehousing costs, including depreciation. Gross profit is equal to our sales less our cost of sales. Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of our sales. Gross margin is a measure used by management to indicate whether we are selling merchandise at an appropriate gross profit. Gross margin is impacted by product mix and availability, as some products generally provide higher gross margins, and by our merchandise costs, which can vary. Gross margin is also impacted by the costs of distributing and transporting product to our stores, which can vary. Our gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in sales. While our disciplined buying approach has produced consistent gross margins throughout economic cycles which we believe has helped to mitigate adverse impacts on gross profit and results of operations, rapid changes in consumer demand like we experienced at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic could result in unexpected changes to our gross margins. The components of our cost of sales may not be comparable to the components of cost of sales or similar measures of our competitors and other retailers. As a result, our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to similar data made available by our competitors and other retailers.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses are comprised of both store-related expenses and corporate expenses. Store-related expenses include commissions paid to IOs, occupancy and shared maintenance costs, Company-operated store expenses, including payroll, benefits, supplies and utilities and the cost of opening new IO stores. In addition, in fiscal 2020, SG&A included incremental costs associated with COVID-19, such as cleaning and safety costs, costs for protective equipment and supplies. Corporate expenses include payroll and benefits for corporate and field support, marketing and advertising, insurance and professional services and operator recruiting and training costs. SG&A generally increases as we grow our store base and invest in our corporate infrastructure. SG&A expenses related to commissions paid to IOs are variable in nature and generally increase as gross profits rise and decrease as gross profits decline. The remainder of our expenses are primarily fixed in nature. We continue to closely manage our expenses and monitor SG&A as a percentage of sales. The components of our SG&A may not be comparable to the components of similar measures of other retailers. We expect that our SG&A will continue to increase in future periods as we continue to grow our sales revenue.
Operating Income
Operating income is gross profit less SG&A, depreciation and amortization and share-based compensation. Operating income excludes interest expense, net, debt extinguishment and modification costs and income tax expense. We use operating income as an indicator of the productivity of our business and our ability to manage expenses.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations both in dollars and as a percentage of sales (amounts in thousands, except for percentages):
_______________________
(1)Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Operating Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Number of New Stores
The number of new stores reflects the number of stores opened during a particular reporting period. New stores require an initial capital investment in the store build-outs, fixtures and equipment which we amortize over time as well as cash required for inventory and pre-opening expenses.
We expect new store growth to be the primary driver of our sales growth over the long term. We lease substantially all of our store locations. Our initial lease terms on stores are typically ten years with options to renew for two or three successive five-year periods.
Comparable Store Sales
We use comparable store sales as an operating metric to measure performance of a store during the current reporting period against the performance of the same store in the corresponding period of the previous year. Comparable store sales are impacted by the same factors that impact sales.
Comparable store sales consists of sales from our stores beginning on the first day of the fourteenth full fiscal month following the store’s opening, which is when we believe comparability is achieved. Included in our comparable store definition are those stores that have been remodeled, expanded, or relocated in their existing location or respective trade areas. Excluded from our comparable store definition are those stores that have been closed for an extended period as well as any planned store closures or dispositions. When applicable, as is the case with fiscal 2020, we exclude the sales in the non-comparable week of a 53-week year from the same store sales calculation.
Opening new stores is a primary component of our growth strategy and, as we continue to execute on our growth strategy, we expect a significant portion of our sales growth will be attributable to non-comparable store sales. Accordingly, comparable store sales is only one measure we use to assess the success of our growth strategy.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income
EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income are key metrics used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. We use EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. In addition, we use EBITDA to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate our performance in connection with compensation decisions. Management believes it is useful to investors and analysts to evaluate these non-GAAP measures on the same basis as management uses to evaluate our operating results. We believe that excluding items from operating income, net income and net income per diluted share that may not be indicative of, or are unrelated to, our core operating results, and that may vary in frequency or magnitude, enhances the comparability of our results and provides a better baseline for analyzing trends in our business.
We define EBITDA as net income before net interest expense, income taxes and depreciation and amortization expenses. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA adjusted to exclude share-based compensation expense, purchase accounting inventory adjustments, non-cash rent, asset impairment and gain or loss on disposition, provision for accounts receivable reserves and certain other expenses. Non-GAAP adjusted net income represents net income adjusted for the previously mentioned EBITDA adjustments, further adjusted for costs related to amortization of purchase accounting assets and deferred financing costs, tax impact of option exercises and vesting of restricted stock units ("RSUs"), and tax effect of total adjustments. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income are non-GAAP measures and may not be comparable to similar measures reported by other companies. EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. We address the limitations of the non-GAAP measures through the use of various GAAP measures. In the future we may incur expenses or charges such as those added back to calculate adjusted EBITDA or non-GAAP adjusted net income. Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by the adjustments we have used to derive our non-GAAP measures.
Beginning with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we updated our definitions of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income to simplify our presentation and enhance comparability between periods. We no longer exclude new store pre-opening expenses from our presentation of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income. We also updated our definition of non-GAAP adjusted net income to exclude the tax impact of options exercises and vesting of RSUs. Lastly, debt extinguishment and modification costs were reclassified to the other adjustments line item within the
presentation of both adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income. The presentation for adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income for fiscal 2019 and 2018 has been recast to reflect these changes and a reconciliation between the current and previous definitions of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income have been provided within the “-GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations” section below.
The following table summarizes key operating metrics and non-GAAP components of our results of operations for the periods presented (amounts in thousands, except for percentages and store counts):
_______________________
(1)Comparable store sales consist of sales from our stores beginning on the first day of the fourteenth full fiscal month following the store’s opening, which is when we believe comparability is achieved. For fiscal 2020, which is a 53-week year, we excluded the sales in the non-comparable week from the comparable store sales calculation.
(2)See “-GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations” section below for a reconciliation from our net income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, net income to non-GAAP adjusted net income, and GAAP to non-GAAP earnings per share for the periods presented. Beginning with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we updated our definitions of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted net income to simplify our presentation and enhance comparability between periods.
GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations
The following tables provide a reconciliation from our GAAP net income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, GAAP net income to non-GAAP adjusted net income, and our GAAP to non-GAAP earnings per share for the periods presented (amounts in thousands):
___________________________
(a)Includes depreciation related to our distribution centers which is included within the cost of sales line item in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income. See NOTE 1-Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about the components of cost of sales.
(b)Includes non-cash share-based compensation expense and $0.4 million, $3.6 million, and $10.0 million of cash dividends paid in fiscal 2020, 2019, and 2018 respectively, in respect of vested options as a result of dividends declared in connection with our recapitalizations in fiscal 2018 and 2016.
(c)Consists of the non-cash portion of rent expense, which represents the difference between our straight-line rent expense recognized under GAAP and cash rent payments. The adjustment can vary depending on the average age of our lease portfolio, which has been impacted by our significant growth in recent years.
(d)Represents impairment charges with respect to planned store closures and gains or losses on dispositions of assets in connection with store transitions to new IOs.
(e)Represents non-cash changes in reserves related to our IO Notes and accounts receivable.
(f)Represents other non-recurring, non-cash or non-operational items, such as transaction related costs, including costs related to employer payroll taxes associated with equity awards, secondary equity offerings, store closing costs, personnel-related costs, legal expenses, debt extinguishment and modification costs, strategic project costs, and miscellaneous costs.
(g)Includes marketing, occupancy and other expenses incurred in connection with store grand openings, including costs that will be the IO’s responsibility after store opening.
(h)Represents the amortization of debt issuance costs and incremental amortization of an asset step-up resulting from purchase price accounting related to the 2014 H&F Acquisition which included trademarks, customer lists, and below-market leases.
(i)Represents excess tax benefits related to stock option exercises and vesting of RSUs to be recorded in earnings as discrete items in the reporting period in which they occur.
(j)Represents the tax effect of the total adjustments. Because of the increased impact of discrete items on our effective tax rate including the excess tax benefits from the exercise and vesting of share-based awards, beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, we changed our methodology in order to tax effect the total adjustments on a discrete basis excluding any non-recurring and unusual tax items. Prior to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, the methodology we used was to calculate the tax effect of the total adjustments using our quarterly effective tax rate.
(k)All share amounts and per share disclosures for all periods presented reflect a 1.403 for 1 forward stock split effected on June 6, 2019.
Comparison of fiscal 2020 (53 weeks) to fiscal 2019 (52 weeks) (amounts in thousands, except percentages)
Net Sales
The increase in net sales for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase in comparable stores sales, non-comparable store sales growth attributable to the net 33 new stores opened during fiscal 2020, as well as $53.3 million of net sales from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020.
Comparable store sales increased 12.7% for fiscal 2020 on a 52-week basis compared to fiscal 2019, primarily driven by increases in average transaction size partially offset by traffic declines, as customer shopping behaviors changed in response to COVID-19.
Cost of Sales
The increase in cost of sales for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily the result of new store growth, an increase in comparable store sales, and cost of sales from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020.
Costs as a percentage of sales decreased due in large part to reduced product markdowns and throwaways resulting from faster inventory turnover as well as lower freight expense to stores, predominantly as a result of buying patterns since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in gross profit for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily the result of new store growth, an increase in comparable store sales, and gross profit from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020. Our gross margin increased modestly for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to lower cost of sales as a percentage of sales, as discussed previously.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)
The increase in SG&A for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily driven by increased selling expenses related to higher sales volume. These increased expenses consisted primarily of variable commission payments to IOs, store occupancy and maintenance costs, incentive compensation expenditures, as well as investments in general and administrative infrastructure to support the continued growth in the business. SG&A has also increased as a result of incremental costs associated with COVID-19 such as cleaning and safety costs, costs for protective equipment and supplies, and higher personnel expense in addition to costs to comply with public company requirements and expenses associated with our secondary offerings.
As a percentage of sales, SG&A decreased slightly for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 due to the factors noted above.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 is primarily driven by new store growth.
Share-based Compensation Expense
For fiscal 2020, share-based compensation expenses were primarily comprised of $26.1 million in expense related to 5.8 million performance-based stock options that vested in conjunction with the closing of the February 3, 2020 and April 27, 2020 secondary offerings as well as $6.7 million in expense related to RSUs and PSUs granted during fiscal 2020. For fiscal 2019, share-based compensation expenses were driven largely by $24.3 million in expense related to time-based options granted prior to our IPO, with the remaining difference primarily relating to payment of dividends declared in connection with our recapitalizations in fiscal 2018 and 2016 for outstanding stock options that became exercisable during fiscal 2019.
We did not record compensation expense for time-based stock options grants prior to our IPO in June 2019 because such time-based options were subject to a post-termination repurchase right by us until certain contingent events occurred, and such contingent events were not deemed probable prior to our IPO. When the IPO occurred and the repurchase feature lapsed, this contingent event resulted in share-based compensation expense on these options being recorded. We recognized share-based compensation expense for prior service completed as of the IPO date and began recognizing the remaining unamortized share-based compensation expense related to these outstanding time-based options over the remaining service period.
See NOTE 7-Share-based Awards to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Interest Expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily driven by lower total borrowings under our First Lien Credit Agreement and the repayment in full of our Second Lien Credit Agreement in June 2019.
In connection with the closing of our IPO in the second quarter of fiscal 2019, we repaid in full the $150.0 million outstanding principal amount on our second lien term loan and terminated the related loan agreement. Additionally, we prepaid a portion of our term loan outstanding under the First Lien Credit Agreement totaling $263.0 million.
In July 2019, we repriced and amended our existing First Lien Credit Agreement by replacing the existing term loan with a new $475.2 million senior secured term loan credit facility, The First Replacement Term Loan, discussed below under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.” The First Replacement Term Loan reduced the applicable margin rates compared to the prior term loan. On October 23, 2019, we prepaid an additional $15.0 million of principal on the First Replacement Term Loan. See NOTE 6-Long-term Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Debt Extinguishment and Modification Costs
During fiscal 2019, we wrote-off $4.1 million of debt issuance costs and $1.4 million of unamortized loan discounts and incurred $0.2 million of debt modification costs related to the repricing and amendment of our First Lien Credit Agreement, and repaid in full our outstanding second lien term loan and terminated the related loan agreement. See NOTE 6-Long-term Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
During fiscal 2020, we recorded a net income tax benefit of $19.6 million compared to a net income tax expense of $1.4 million for fiscal 2019. This change was primarily the result of excess tax benefits in the current year related to the exercise of stock options and vesting of employee RSUs. Such excess tax benefits totaled $44.1 million for fiscal year 2020. See NOTE 9-Income Taxes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Net Income
As a result of the foregoing factors, including the excess tax benefits described above, net income increased substantially in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
The increase in adjusted EBITDA for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to the increase in net sales, which was driven by an increase in comparable store sales of 12.7% for fiscal 2020 on a 52-week basis compared to fiscal 2019, net sales from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020, along with an increase in store count compared to fiscal 2019. Additionally, gross margin rate increased modestly in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 as discussed above.
Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income
The increase in non-GAAP adjusted net income for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily driven by an increase in comparable store sales of 12.7% for fiscal 2020 on a 52-week basis compared to fiscal 2019, net sales from the 53rd week of fiscal 2020, along with an increase in store count compared to fiscal 2019. In addition, non-GAAP adjusted net income benefited from lower net interest expense for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 as discussed above.
Comparison of fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2018 (amounts in thousands, except for percentages)
Net Sales
The increase in net sales for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was due to non-comparable store sales growth attributable to the net 31 stores opened during fiscal 2019 as well as an increase in comparable store sales.
Comparable store sales increased 5.2% for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018, primarily driven by strong opportunistic and every day product purchasing, continued growth of our NOSH business and expansion and effectiveness of our corporate and IO-led marketing initiatives.
Cost of Sales
The increase in cost of sales for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily the result of new store growth and an increase in comparable store sales. Costs as a percentage of sales decreased slightly due to strong purchasing and inventory management.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in gross profit for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily the result of new store growth and an increase in comparable store sales. Our gross margin increased modestly for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 due to strong purchasing and inventory management.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in SG&A for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily driven by increased selling expenses related to new store growth and higher sales volume. These increased expenses consisted primarily of commissions paid to IOs, store occupancy and shared maintenance costs, as well as investments in general and administrative infrastructure to
support the continued growth in the business. SG&A was also impacted by the adoption of ASC 842, Leases, which moved approximately $3.2 million of below-market lease amortization expense into non-cash rent.
As a percentage of sales, SG&A increased modestly for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 partially as a result of approximately $4.5 million in additional costs incurred to comply with public company requirements including incremental insurance, accounting, and legal expense as well as costs required to comply with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 is primarily driven by new store growth and other capital investments, partially offset by the adoption of ASC 842, Leases, which moved approximately $3.2 million of below-market lease amortization expense into SG&A expenses.
Share-based Compensation Expense
The increase in share-based compensation expense for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily driven by $24.3 million for share-based compensation expense related to time-based stock options granted prior to our IPO and $3.0 million for share-based compensation expense related to time-based stock options and RSUs granted as part of and subsequent to our IPO, with the remaining difference primarily relating to payment of dividends declared in connection with our recapitalizations in fiscal 2018 and 2016 for outstanding stock options that became exercisable during fiscal 2019.
We did not record compensation expense for time-based stock options grants prior to our IPO in June 2019 because such time-based options were subject to a post-termination repurchase right by us until certain contingent events occurred, and such contingent events were not deemed probable prior to our IPO. When the IPO occurred and the repurchase feature lapsed, this contingent event resulted in share-based compensation expense on these options being recorded. We recognized share-based compensation expense for prior service completed as of the IPO date and began recognizing the remaining unamortized share-based compensation expense related to these outstanding time-based options over the remaining service period.
Prior to our IPO, share-based compensation expense was primarily related to the equity awards granted to our board of directors and dividends paid in connection with our recapitalizations in fiscal 2018 and 2016.
Interest Expense, net
The decrease in interest expense, net for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily driven by lower total borrowings under our First Lien Credit Agreement and the repayment in full of our Second Lien Credit Agreement.
In connection with the closing of our IPO in the second quarter of fiscal 2019, we repaid in full the $150.0 million outstanding principal amount on our second lien term loan and terminated the related loan agreement. Additionally, we prepaid a portion of our term loan outstanding under the First Lien Credit Agreement totaling $263.0 million.
In July 2019, we repriced and amended our existing First Lien Credit Agreement by replacing the existing term loan with a new $475.2 million senior secured term loan credit facility, The First Replacement Term Loan. The First Replacement Term Loan reduced the applicable margin rates compared to the prior term loan. On October 23, 2019, we prepaid an additional $15.0 million of principal on the First Replacement Term Loan.
Debt Extinguishment and Modification Costs
During fiscal 2019, we wrote-off $4.1 million of debt issuance costs and incurred $0.2 million of debt modification costs related to the repricing and amendment of our First Lien Credit Agreement, and repaid in full our outstanding second lien term loan and terminated the related loan agreement. During fiscal 2018, we wrote-off $3.5 million of debt issuance costs and incurred $1.8 million of debt modification costs related to the 2018 recapitalization and related repayment in full of our prior first lien credit agreement.
Income Tax Expense
The decrease in income tax expense in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily the result of lower income before taxes, which was mainly due to the share-based compensation expense of $31.4 million we recognized in connection with the IPO as discussed previously. As a result, our effective tax rate decreased to 8.1% for fiscal 2019 from 27.4% for fiscal 2018 primarily due to excess tax benefits from the exercise and vesting of share-based awards.
Net Income
As a result of the foregoing, net income decreased modestly in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018.
Adjusted EBITDA
The increase in adjusted EBITDA for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily due to the aforementioned sales growth and gross margin expansion, partially offset by increased SG&A expenses including the impact of approximately $4.5 million in additional costs incurred to comply with public company requirements.
Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income
The increase in non-GAAP adjusted net income for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily due to our increase in sales, which was primarily driven by the increase in store count for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 and comparable sales of 5.2% and 3.9%, respectively. Additionally, our interest expense decreased for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 as discussed previously.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of January 2, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $105.3 million, which consisted primarily of cash held in checking and money market accounts with financial institutions.
Our liquidity requirements arise primarily from our working capital needs, capital expenditures and debt service requirements. Historically, we have funded our working capital and capital expenditures requirements with internally generated cash on hand, and most recently through our initial public offering of our common stock in June 2019 as described further below. Our current primary sources of liquidity are net cash provided by operating activities and borrowings and availability under our First Lien Credit Agreement. In addition, we also have a $100.0 million revolving credit facility available under our First Lien Credit Agreement. As of January 2, 2021, we had $3.5 million of outstanding standby letters of credit and $96.5 million of remaining borrowing capacity available under this revolving credit facility.
Public Offerings
On June 24, 2019, we completed our IPO in which we sold 19,765,625 shares of our common stock, including 2,578,125 shares from the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $22.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $407.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $27.1 million and offering costs of $7.2 million.
On October 8, 2019, certain of our selling stockholders completed a secondary public offering of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling stockholders. We incurred offering costs payable by us of $1.1 million which are included in SG&A expenses for fiscal 2019. We received $3.2 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of 451,470 options by certain stockholders participating in this secondary public offering.
On February 3, 2020, certain of our selling stockholders completed another secondary public offering of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling stockholders. We incurred offering costs payable by us of $1.1 million which were included in SG&A expenses in fiscal 2020. We received $1.4 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of 191,470 options by certain stockholders participating in this secondary public offering.
On April 27, 2020, certain of our selling stockholders completed a third secondary public offering of shares of our common stock. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of these shares by the selling stockholders. We incurred related offering costs of $1.0 million which we recognized in SG&A during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. We received $1.6 million in cash (excluding withholding taxes) in connection with the exercise of 269,000 options by certain stockholders participating in this secondary public offering.
The terms of our First Lien Credit Agreement permit voluntarily prepayment without premium or penalty. In connection with the closing of our IPO on June 24, 2019, we used the net proceeds from the offering to repay in full the outstanding $150.0 million in principal on the term loan under our second lien credit agreement, dated as of October 22, 2019 (as amended, the "Second Lien Credit Agreement"), as well as accrued and unpaid interest as of that date of $3.6 million, and terminated the Second Lien Credit Agreement. In addition, using the remainder of the net proceeds, together with excess cash on hand, we prepaid a portion of the term loan outstanding under our First Lien Credit Agreement totaling $248.0 million plus accrued interest of $3.8 million. We elected to apply the prepayment against the remaining principal installments in the direct order of maturity. No further principal payment on this term loan will be due until its maturity in October 2025.
First Lien Credit Agreement
First Incremental Agreement - On July 23, 2019, we entered into an incremental agreement (the “First Incremental Agreement”) to amend the First Lien Credit Agreement. The First Incremental Agreement refinanced the term loan outstanding under the First Lien Credit Agreement with a replacement $475.2 million senior secured term loan credit facility (the “First Replacement Term Loan”) with an applicable margin of 3.50% or 3.25% for Eurodollar loans and 2.50% or 2.25% for base rate loans, in each case depending on the public corporate family rating of GOBP Holdings. The First Replacement Term Loan was to mature on October 22, 2025, which was the same maturity date as the prior term loan under our First Lien Credit Agreement. On October 23, 2019, we prepaid $15.0 million of principal on the First Replacement Term Loan.
Second Incremental Agreement - On January 24, 2020, we entered into a second incremental agreement (the “Second Incremental Agreement”) to further amend the First Lien Credit Agreement. The Second Incremental Agreement refinanced the First Replacement Term Loan with a replacement $460.0 million senior secured term loan credit facility (the “Second Replacement Term Loan”) with an applicable margin of 2.75% for Eurodollar loans and 1.75% for base rate loans, and made certain other corresponding technical changes and updates to the previously amended First Lien Credit Agreement. The interest rate on the Second Replacement Term Loan was 2.90% as of January 2, 2021. The Second Replacement Term Loan matures on October 22, 2025, which is the same maturity date as the prior term loans under the original First Lien Credit Agreement and First Incremental Agreement.
Other than as described above, the Second Replacement Term Loan has the same terms as provided under the original First Lien Credit Agreement and the First Incremental Agreement. Additionally, the parties to the Second Incremental Agreement continue to have the same obligations set forth in the original First Lien Credit Agreement and the First Incremental Agreement (collectively, the “First Lien Credit Agreement”).
Revolving Credit Facility - On March 19, 2020, we borrowed $90.0 million under the revolving credit facility of our First Line Credit Agreement (the "Revolving Credit Facility Loan"), the proceeds of which were to be used as reserve funding for working capital needs as a precautionary measure in light of the economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. On May 26, 2020, we repaid the Revolving Credit Facility Loan in full. As of January 2, 2021, we had $96.5 million of borrowing capacity available under the revolving credit facility.
Liquidity Requirements
As of January 2, 2021, we expect to pay an additional $0.4 million related to dividends declared in our recapitalizations in 2018 and 2016 for stock options that will vest during fiscal 2021 and beyond, of which $0.2 million, $0.1 million, $0.1 million is expected to be paid in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2023 respectively. Pursuant to The Globe Holding Corp. 2014 Plan, if we are unable to make those payments, we may instead elect to reduce the per share exercise price of each such option by an amount equal to the dividend amount in lieu of making the applicable dividend payment.
Our primary working capital requirements are for the purchase of inventory, payroll, rent, issuance of IO notes, other store facilities costs, distribution costs and general and administrative costs. Our working capital requirements fluctuate during the year, driven primarily by the timing of inventory fluctuations, new store openings and capital spending.
Our capital expenditures are primarily related to new store openings, ongoing store maintenance and improvements, expenditures related to our distribution centers and infrastructure-related investments, including investments related to upgrading and maintaining our information technology systems and corporate offices. We expect to fund capital expenditures through cash generated from our operations.
Based on our new store growth plans, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents position, cash generated from our operations, and borrowings under our revolving credit facility will be adequate to finance our working capital requirements, planned capital expenditures and debt service over the next 12 months. If cash generated from our operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility are not sufficient or available to meet our liquidity requirements, then we will be required to obtain additional equity or debt financing in the future. There can be no assurance equity or debt financing will be available to us when we need it or, if available, the terms will be satisfactory to us and not dilutive to our then-current stockholders. Additionally, we may seek to take advantage of market opportunities to refinance our existing debt instruments with new debt instruments at interest rates, maturities and terms we deem attractive. We may also, from time to time, in our sole discretion, purchase or retire all or a portion of our existing debt instruments through privately negotiated or open market transactions.
Debt Covenant
The First Lien Credit Agreement contains certain customary representations and warranties, subject to limitations and exceptions, and affirmative and customary covenants. The First Lien Credit Agreement has the ability to restrict us from entering into certain types of transactions and making certain types of payments including dividends and stock repurchases and other similar distributions, with certain exceptions. Additionally, the revolving credit facility under our First Lien Credit Agreement is subject to a first lien secured leverage ratio of 7:00 to 1:00, tested quarterly if, and only if, the aggregate principal amount from the revolving facility, letters of credit (to the extent not cash collateralized or backstopped or, in the aggregate, not in excess of the greater of $10.0 million and the stated face amount of letters of credit outstanding on the closing date) and swingline loans outstanding and/or issued, as applicable, exceeds 35% of the total amount of the revolving credit facility commitments.
As of January 2, 2021, we were not subject to the first lien secured leverage ratio testing requirement. Additionally, we were in compliance with all applicable covenant requirements as of January 2, 2021 for our First Lien Credit Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $181.2 million, $132.8 million, and $105.8 million for fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019, and fiscal 2018, respectively. The improvements in net cash provided by operating activities for each fiscal year presented compared to prior fiscal years was primarily the result of increased net sales driven by new store growth and comparable store sales growth, partially offset by increased cost of sales and operating expenses, particularly commissions paid to IOs.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019, and fiscal 2018 was primarily for capital expenditures and cash advances to IOs.
Net cash used in investing activities was $133.8 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $108.0 million for fiscal 2019. The $25.8 million increase was primarily related to an increase in the number of stores opened and under construction in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. Of the $133.8 million net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020, $124.9 million represented purchases of property and equipment prior to the application of tenant improvement allowances.
Net cash used in investing activities was $108.0 million for fiscal 2019 compared to $73.6 million for fiscal 2018. The $34.5 million increase was primarily related to capital expenditures for 34 new store openings and one relocation in fiscal 2019 compared to 26 new store openings in fiscal 2018.
We expect capital expenditures of approximately $130.0 million, net of tenant improvement allowances, in fiscal year 2021.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $29.8 million for fiscal 2020 compared to $17.8 million net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2019. The net cash provided by financing activities of $29.8 million for fiscal 2020 was primarily due to proceeds received from the exercise of share-based awards slightly offset by principal payments on debt. As discussed below, the net cash used in financing activities of $17.8 million for fiscal 2019 was primarily due to principal payments on debt and offering cost payments related to our IPO, partially offset by net proceeds from the IPO.
Net cash used in financing activities was $17.8 million for fiscal 2019 compared to $17.0 million for fiscal 2018. The $0.8 million increase was primarily due to debt and interest repayments and offering cost payments related to our IPO. In June 2019, using the net proceeds from our IPO and excess cash on hand, we repaid in full the $150.0 million outstanding second lien term loan plus $3.6 million of accrued interest, and prepaid a portion of our outstanding term loan under the First Lien Credit Agreement totaling $248.0 million plus $3.8 million of accrued interest.
Additionally, on October 23, 2019, we prepaid an additional $15.0 million of principal on our outstanding term loan under the First Lien Credit Agreement. These debt and interest payments were partially offset by proceeds of $407.7 million from our IPO, net of $27.1 million of underwriting discounts and commissions paid. We also incurred offering costs of $7.2 million related to our IPO.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 2, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into long-term contractual obligations and commitments in the normal course of business, primarily operating leases. The contractual commitment amounts in the table below are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the below table.
Our contractual obligations and other commitments as of January 2, 2021 were as follows (in thousands):
______________________
(1)Represents the maturities of lease liabilities of our operating and finance leases as disclosed in NOTE 4-Leases to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)Represents the expected cash payments for interest on our long-term debt based on the amounts outstanding as of the end of each period and the interest rates applicable on such debt as of January 2, 2021.
(3)Consists of purchase commitments under non-cancelable service and supply contracts.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). A summary of our significant accounting policies can be found in NOTE 1-Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. These judgments and estimates are based on historical experience and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Management evaluated the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following involves a higher degree of judgment or complexity and is most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position, and is therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policy reflects a significant estimate and judgment used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected results can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations.
Long-lived asset impairment
We evaluate long-lived assets, including property and equipment and lease right-of-use assets, for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. For purposes of this evaluation, long-lived assets are grouped with other assets at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. Our retail stores are evaluated for impairment at the store level. A long-lived asset or asset group may be impaired if its carrying value exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows over its remaining useful life. Our estimate of future cash flows requires us to make assumptions and apply judgment, including forecasting future net sales and gross margin and estimating the useful lives of the assets. If a long-lived asset or asset group is determined to be impaired, we record an impairment loss for the amount by which the carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds its fair value. The estimated fair value of the asset or asset group is based on the estimated discounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group using a discount rate commensurate with the related risk.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to NOTE 1-Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements.