ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information that our management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The statements in this discussion regarding industry trends, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Overview
Canoo is a Delaware corporation headquartered in Torrance, California. On December 21, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), Hennessy Capital Acquisition Corp. IV (“HCAC”) consummated its Business Combination with Legacy Canoo contemplated pursuant to that certain Merger Agreement and Plan of Reorganization, dated as of August 17, 2020 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among HCAC, HCAC IV First Merger Sub, Ltd., an exempted company incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands and a direct, a wholly owned subsidiary of HCAC, EV Global Holdco LLC (f/k/a HCAC IV Second Merger Sub, LLC), a Delaware limited liability company and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of HCAC, and Canoo Holdings Ltd., an exempted company incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands (“Legacy Canoo”), which ultimately resulted in Legacy Canoo becoming a wholly-owned direct subsidiary of HCAC. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, HCAC changed its name to Canoo Inc. and we became a Nasdaq listed company.
We are a mobility technology company with a mission to bring EV’s to everyone. We have developed a technology platform, referred to as the Multi-Purpose Platform or platform, built to be highly modular and to enable us to rapidly innovate, and bring new products addressing multiple use cases to market faster than our competition and at lower cost. Our vehicle architecture and design philosophy is aimed at driving productivity and returning capital to our customers. Our software and technology capabilities packaged around a modular, customizable product will fundamentally alter the value proposition across a vehicle’s life.
Our Multi-Purpose Platform is a self-contained, fully-functional rolling chassis that directly houses all of the most critical components for operation of an EV. These include our in-house designed proprietary performance electric drivetrain, our battery systems, our advanced vehicle control electronics and software and other critical components, which all have been optimized for functional integration. Both our (1) true steer-by-wire system, believed to be the first such system applied to a production-intent vehicle, and (2) our flat composite leaf-spring suspension system are core components of our platforms’ unique functionality, enabling the development of a broad range of vehicle types and use cases due to the chassis’ flat profile and fully-variable steering positions. All of our announced vehicles will share the same platform paired with different cabins, or top hats, to create a range of uniquely customized and use-case optimized purpose-built mobility solutions targeting multiple segments of the rapidly expanding EV marketplace.
Our initial near-term vehicle lineup currently includes our Lifestyle Vehicle which is expected to launch in 2022, our first Multi-Purpose Delivery Vehicle, the MPDV1, which will have a targeted limited production availability in 2022 and estimated serial production launch in 2023, and our Pickup with anticipated availability beginning as early as 2023. This vehicle lineup offers us the unique ability to meet the demands in multiple target markets for the benefit of a wide array of potential customers. With our proprietary flat platform architecture, our vehicles will be able to offer class-leading
cargo and passenger volume on a small footprint. In addition, each vehicle has been developed to be modular and customizable in order to drive productivity and improve return on capital for our customers.
Unlike most of our peers, which are at the early stages of their vehicle development cycle, prior to our December 2020 public listing, we had already invested more than $250 million and passed critical milestones in developing and testing of our platform and product.
● Developed first Beta prototype in just 19 months from our inception in November 2017.
● Expanded our Beta fleet to 32 properties and 13 drivable units.
● Completed over 70 physical crash tests on our chassis platform and the Lifestyle Vehicle configuration.
The team has now moved into Gamma development on the Lifestyle Vehicle, putting us one step closer to bringing our first product to market in 2022. With the addition of our Executive Chairman and consistent with a focus on continuing to develop proprietary technology, our recently formed Rapid Innovation team has also accelerated the research and development of several prototype configurations, and we will continue to seek out new use cases and applications currently not addressed by any of our peers or other market participants.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On December 21, 2020, we consummated the Business Combination.
Immediately prior to closing of the Business Combination, all Legacy Canoo preference shares that were issued and outstanding were automatically converted into Legacy Canoo ordinary shares. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, each Legacy Canoo ordinary share issued and outstanding was canceled and converted into the right to receive the Per Share Merger Consideration.
Upon the closing of the Business Combination, HCAC's certificate of incorporation was amended and restated to, among other things, increase the total number of authorized shares of all classes of capital stock to 510,000,000 shares, of which 500,000,000 shares were designated Common Stock, $0.0001 par value per share, and of which 10,000,000 shares were designated preferred stock, $0.0001 par value per share.
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, HCAC entered into separate subscription agreements with a number of investors, pursuant to which the Subscribers agreed to purchase, and HCAC agreed to sell to the Subscribers, an aggregate of 32,325,000 PIPE Shares, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $323.3 million, in the PIPE. The PIPE investment closed simultaneously with the consummation of the Business Combination. For additional information on the Business Combination, see Note 4 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash increased by $672.9 million compared to that at December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the Business Combination.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse merger in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). While HCAC was the legal acquirer, because Legacy Canoo was deemed the accounting acquirer, the historical financial statements of Legacy Canoo became the historical financial statements of the combined company, upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
As a consequence of the Business Combination, we will need to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses for, among other things, directors and officers liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Covid-19 Impact
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” and on March 11, 2020, declared it to be a pandemic. Actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of COVID-19 include restrictions on travel, quarantines in certain areas and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses. COVID-19 and actions taken to mitigate its spread have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including
the geographical area in which we operate. On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted to, among other provisions, provide emergency assistance for individuals, families and businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, the ultimate extent of the impact on our businesses, operating results, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition will be primarily driven by the severity and duration of the pandemic, the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in government authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. These measures have adversely impacted our employees ability to collaborate in a discipline that requires a high degree of collaborative work. Our operations have had to change and adapt to meet these new demands. The operations of our suppliers, vendors and business partners have been impacted and our sales and marketing activities for our vehicles and other services were made increasingly difficult as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our team has worked to maintain the production schedule of our EVs but the work and collaboration with suppliers for our next phase of development would have required a significant degree of in-person work that was not feasible. Various aspects of our business cannot be conducted remotely, including the testing and manufacturing of our EVs. Further, as a growing company, the ability for us to hire, onboard and train new employees has been impacted and has required us to evaluate areas of our business that will not result in the best use of our human capital for long-term growth. The spread of COVID-19 has also caused us and many of our contractors and service providers to modify our business practices (including employee travel, recommending that all non-essential personnel work from home and cancellation or reduction of physical participation in testing activities, meetings, events and conferences), and collectively with our contractors and service providers, we have been and may further be required to take actions as required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, vendors and business partners. There is no certainty that such actions will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by the virus or otherwise be satisfactory to government authorities. If significant portions of our workforce or contractors and service providers are unable to work effectively, including due to illness, quarantines, social distancing, government actions or other restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations will be impacted. These factors related to COVID-19 are beyond our knowledge and control and, as a result, at this time, we are unable to predict the ultimate impact, both in terms of severity and duration, that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition, but it could be material if the current circumstances continue to exist for a prolonged period of time. Although we have made our best estimates based upon current information, actual results could materially differ from the estimates and assumptions developed by management. Accordingly, it is reasonably possible that the estimates made in the financial statements have been, or will be, materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions, and if so, we may be subject to future impairment losses related to long-lived assets as well as changes to valuations.
Comparability of Financial Information
Our results of operations and statements of assets and liabilities may not be comparable to historical results as a result of the Business Combination, which was completed late in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Successful Commercialization our EVs
We expect to derive significant future revenue from our first vehicle offerings including through sales and subscription programs for our Lifestyle Vehicle, MPDV1, and/or Pickup which are not expected to launch until 2022 and 2023 or later. In order to reach commercialization, we must purchase and integrate related property and equipment, as well as achieve several research and development milestones.
We expect that both our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● commercialize our EVs;
● continue to invest in our technology, research and development efforts;
● increase our investment in marketing, advertising, sales and distribution infrastructure for our EVs and services;
● obtain, maintain and improve our operational, financial and management information systems;
● hire additional personnel;
● obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● operate as a public company.
As a result, we will require substantial additional capital to develop our EVs and services and fund our operations for the foreseeable future. We will also require capital to identify and commit resources to investigate new areas of demand. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from vehicle sales, we expect to primarily finance our operations through commercialization and production with proceeds from the Business Combination, including the proceeds from the PIPE Financing, and, as needed, secondary public offerings or debt financings. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements, if any, will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our research and development efforts and our ability to successfully manage and control costs.
Key Components of Statements of Operations
Basis of Presentation
Currently, we conduct business through one operating segment. We are an early stage-growth company with no commercial operations, and our activities to date have been limited and are conducted in the United States. For more information about our basis of presentation, refer to Note 2 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements for the years ended December 2020 and 2019.
Revenue
During 2020, our revenue has been derived from the provision of engineering, development and design consulting services on a project basis. Once we reach commercialization and commence production of our EVs, we expect that the majority of our revenue will be derived initially from sales and subscription programs from our Lifestyle Vehicle, MPDV1, and other vehicles and commercial products and services when launched.
Cost of Revenue, excluding Depreciation
We have recorded cost of revenue, excluding depreciation for the consulting services rendered in relation to engineering, development and design services provided on a project basis. Once we reach commercialization and commence production of our vehicles, we expect cost of revenue to include vehicle components and parts, including batteries, direct labor costs and costs associated with the consumer subscription services.
Research and Development Expenses, excluding Depreciation
Research and development expenses, excluding depreciation consist of salaries, employee benefits and expenses for design and engineering personnel, stock-based compensation, as well as materials and supplies used in research and
development activities. In addition, research and development expenses include fees for consulting and engineering services from third party vendors. The Company allocates a portion of overhead costs which includes lease expense, utilities and worker’s compensation premiums to the research and development department expense based on headcount.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, excluding Depreciation
The principal components of our selling, general and administrative expenses are salaries, wages, benefits and bonuses paid to our employees; stock-based compensation; travel and other business expenses; professional services fees (including legal, audit and tax); and ordinary day-to-day business expenses.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation is provided on property and equipment over the estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis. Upon retirement or disposal, the cost of the asset disposed of and the related accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the loss from operations. No depreciation expense is allocated to research and development, cost of revenue and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expenses and debt discount amortization.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated:
NM = not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue was $2.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not generate any revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019. Our current year revenue was generated from the provision of engineering, development and design consulting services on a project basis.
Cost of Revenue, excluding Depreciation
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation expense, was $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not incur any cost of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019. The cost of revenue, excluding depreciation for year ended December 31, 2020 is attributable to the consulting services rendered in relation to engineering, development and design services provided on a project basis for automotive manufacturers.
Research and Development Expenses, excluding Depreciation
Research and development expenses increased by $5.5 million, or 4.0%, to $142.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $137.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases in stock-based compensation expense of $58.7 million, salary and related benefits expense of $4.4 million and professional fees of $2.1 million, partially offset by decreases in research and development costs of $58.6 million and travel and entertainment of $0.8 million.
The increase in stock-based compensation expenses of $58.7 million was primarily driven by the restricted stock awards modified and issued during the year ended December 31, 2020. Out of the $58.7 million increase, $56.1 million was related to the modification of the performance restricted stock awards to become time-based vesting with a merger trigger, which was satisfied on December 21, 2020. See further discussion on the restricted stock awards in Note 12 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
The increases in salaries and related benefits expenses of $4.4 million and professional fees of $2.1 million were primarily due to our continuing investment in personnel and contract employees to drive and reach our research and development goals.
The decrease in research and development costs of $58.6 million reflects decreases in costs related to reduced expenditures in 2020 resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including higher relative costs on prototype development in 2019, which included beta prototype development and delayed gamma prototype expenditures with suppliers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Beta prototype development costs, including engineering, design, parts and consulting expenses, totaled approximately $56.7 million in 2019 but did not re-occur in 2020. The decrease in travel and entertainment expenses of $0.8 million was largely due to COVID-19 impact.
We expect to see an overall increase in research and development expenses to support our initiatives related to the Lifestyle Vehicle, Multi-Purpose Delivery Vehicles, and Pickup expected to launch as early as 2022 and 2023, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses, excluding Depreciation
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $20.1 million, or 63.6%, to $51.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $31.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases of $23.8 million in stock-based compensation expenses and $2.4 million in professional fees, partially offset by decreases of $6.3 million in salary and related benefits.
The increase in stock-based compensation expenses of $23.8 million was primarily driven by the restricted stock awards modified and issued during the year ended December 31, 2020. Out of the $23.8 million increase, $21.7 million was related to performance restricted stock awards that were modified to become time-based vesting with a merger trigger, which was satisfied on December 21, 2020. See further discussion on the restricted stock awards in Note 12 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Professional fees increased by $2.4 million to $6.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to activities related to the Company’s business development and various consultants retained to prepare for the Business Combination.
Salary and related benefits expenses decreased $6.3 million, or 33.8% to $12.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $18.5 million in the prior year, due primarily to a decrease of $4.6 million in departmental headcount for our China operations which was terminated in 2019 and normal business attrition as well as slower than anticipated hiring efforts for 2020 as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect to see an overall increase in selling, general and administrative expenses to support our initiatives related to the Lifestyle Vehicle, Multi-Purpose Delivery Vehicles, and Pickup expected to launch as early as 2022 and 2023, respectively.
Depreciation
Depreciation increased by $2.4 million, or 50.7%, to $7.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to our significant capital expenditures on machinery, equipment and software. Total gross property and equipment was $43.3 million and $31.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The average balance of gross property and equipment was $37.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulted in higher depreciation in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $1.0 million, or 10.1%, to $10.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to interest expense related to the Legacy Canoo convertible notes ultimately converted to Common Stock on December 21, 2020 upon consummation of the Business Combination. See further discussion on the convertible notes in Note 7 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Gain on Fair Value Change in Contingent Earnout Shares Liability
We recognized a non-cash gain on fair value change of contingent Earnout Shares (defined below) liability of $115.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which was a result of the periodic remeasurement of the fair value of our contingent Earnout Shares liability. See further discussion on the contingent Earnout Shares liability in Note 11 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
We recognized a non-cash gain on extinguishment of debt of $5.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which was a result of the conversion of all of our outstanding convertible notes on August 16, 2020 to Legacy Canoo’s A series and A-1 redeemable convertible preference shares, which were subsequently exchanged to shares of Legacy Canoo ordinary shares and converted to our Common Stock in the Business Combination completed on December 21, 2020. See further discussion on the convertible note conversion in Note 7 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP measures to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as net loss before interest expense, income tax expense or benefit, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation, restructuring charges, asset impairments, and other costs associated with exit and disposal activities, acquisition and related costs, changes to the fair value of contingent earnout shares liability, and any other one-time non-recurring transaction amounts impacting the
statement of operations during the year. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe Adjusted EBITDA, when combined with net loss, and EBITDA, is beneficial to an investor’s complete understanding of our operating performance. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We manage our business utilizing EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental performance measures.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through the Business Combination, we financed our operations primarily from the private placements of Legacy Canoo ordinary shares and Legacy Canoo preference shares and the issuances of convertible notes. In December 2020, we completed the Business Combination and received $607.1 million of net cash proceeds, including the PIPE Financing. As of December 31, 2020, our principal source of liquidity was our cash balance in the amount of $702.4 million, which was primarily invested in a money market fund. See further discussion on the Business Combination in Note 4 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
As an early stage growth company in the pre-commercialization stage of development, the net losses and comprehensive losses we have incurred since inception are consistent with our strategy and budget. We will continue to incur net losses and comprehensive losses in accordance with our operating plan as we continue to expand our research and development activities to complete the development of our skateboard platform and EVs, establish our consumer subscription model and scale our operations to meet anticipated demand. We expect that both our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● commercialize our EVs;
● continue to invest in our technology, research and development efforts;
● increase our investment in marketing, advertising, sales and distribution infrastructure for our EVs and services;
● obtain, maintain and improve our operational, financial and management information systems;
● hire additional personnel;
● obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● operate as a public company.
As an early stage growth company adjusting to the long-term implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to access capital is critical. Management plans to raise additional capital through a combination of debt financing, other non-dilutive financing and/or equity financing. Additional stock financing may not be available on favorable terms and could be dilutive to current stockholders. Debt financing and other non-dilutive financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants and dilutive financing instruments. The Company's ability to access capital when needed is not assured and, if capital is not available to the Company when, and in the amounts needed, the Company could be required to delay, scale back, or abandon some or all of its development programs and other operations, which could materially harm the Company's business, financial condition and results of operations.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared by management assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. As of the date of this report, the Company's existing cash resources are sufficient to support planned operations for the next 12 months. As a result, management believes that the Company's existing financial resources are sufficient to continue operating activities for at least one year past the issuance date of the financial statements.
Cash Flows Summary
Presented below is a summary of our operating, investing and financing cash flows (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by the growth of our business primarily related to research and development as well as selling, general, and administrative activities. Our operating cash flow is also affected by our working capital needs to support growth in personnel-related expenditures and fluctuations in accounts payable and other current assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $107.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our cash outflow from operating activities primarily consist of payments related to our research & development and selling, general and administration expenses. The total expenditure as it relates to research & development excluding depreciation was $142.9 million during year ended December 31, 2020, of which $58.7 million related to stock-compensation expenses during the year. The Company also incurred selling, general and administration expenses of $51.6 million for year ended December 31, 2020, of which $24.7 million related to stock-compensation expenses during the year. The expenses include salaries and benefits paid to employees as primarily all salaries and benefits are paid in cash during the year.
Net cash used in operating activities was $171.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our cash outflow from operating activities primarily consist of payments related to our research & development and selling, general and administration expenses. The total expenditure as it relates to research & development excluding depreciation was $137.4 million during year ended December 31, 2019, of which $0.6 million related to stock-compensation expenses during the year. The Company also incurred selling, general and administration expenses of $31.6 million for year ended December 31, 2019, of which $0.9 million related to stock-compensation expenses during the year. Primarily all of research and
development and selling, general and administrative expenses were paid in cash. The expenses include salaries and benefits paid to employees as primarily all salaries and benefits are paid in cash during the year.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We continue to experience negative cash flows from investing activities as we expand our business and continue to build our infrastructure. Cash flows from investing activities primarily relate to capital expenditures to support our growth.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of purchases of machinery and equipment as well as computer hardware and software.
Net cash used in investing activities was $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consisted of purchases of machinery and equipment, computer hardware and software and leasehold improvements.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $787.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to the proceeds of $607.1 million from the Business Combination, net of transaction costs and advisory fees, issuance of convertible notes totaling $180.5 million and proceeds from long-term debt borrowing of $7.0 million, partially offset by merger offering costs of $5.8 million and payment on stock warrant redemption of $0.8 million. See further discussion on the Business Combination and the convertible note conversion in Note 4 and Note 7, respectively, of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $205.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to the issuance of convertible notes and proceeds from issuance of Legacy Canoo’s preference shares.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements for the years ended December 2020 and 2019, we believe that the following accounting policies require a greater degree of judgment and complexity and are the most critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations:
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We may elect to report certain financial instruments and other items at fair value with changes in fair value reported in earnings. The election is made upon the initial recognition of an eligible financial asset, financial liability or
firm commitment or when certain specified reconsideration events occur. The fair value election may not otherwise be revoked once an election is made. The changes in fair value are recorded in current earnings.
We have elected fair value accounting for our convertible notes. The primary reasons we have elected the fair value option are to:
● Reflect economic events in earnings on a timely basis; and
● Address simplification and cost-benefit considerations (e.g., accounting for hybrid financial instruments at fair value in their entirety versus bifurcation of embedded derivatives).
We applied the provisions of ASC No. 820 (“ASC 820”), Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, which provide a single authoritative definition of fair value, set out a framework for measuring fair value and expand on required disclosures about fair value measurement. Fair value represents the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date.
Valuation techniques used to measure fair value must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The fair value was estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis, which is a form of the income approach. For additional information regarding the methods and assumptions we utilize to assess the fair value of our convertible notes through August 16, 2020 when all outstanding convertible notes were converted to A series and A-1 series redeemable convertible preference shares of Legacy Canoo, please refer to Note 7 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements.
Contingent Earnout Shares Liability
As part of the Business Combination, certain stockholders and employees are entitled to receive additional shares of our Common Stock (“Earnout Shares”) to be issued when our Common Stock’s price reaches certain market share price milestones within specified periods following the Business Combination on December 21, 2020. The terms and conditions of the right to receive Earnout Shares are described in Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In accordance with the guidance under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, the Earnout Shares right was classified as a Level 3 fair value measurement liability, and the increase or decrease in the fair value during the reporting period is recognized as other expense or other income in our consolidated statement of operations accordingly. The fair value of the contingent Earnout Shares liability was estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation of the stock prices based on historical and implied market volatility of a peer group of public companies.
As of December 21, 2020, the initial fair value of our contingent Earnout Shares liability was recognized at $248.9 million with a corresponding reduction from the additional paid in capital in our stockholders’ equity. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of our contingent Earnout Shares liability was estimated to be $133.5 million. We recognized a gain on fair value change in contingent Earnout Shares liability of $115.4 million as other income in our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards granted to employees and members of our Board based on the awards’ estimated grant date fair value using a fair value method. For awards that vest solely based on continued service (“requisite service”), the resulting fair value is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally four years. For awards which contain performance conditions, the resulting fair value is recognized over the requisite service period using the graded vesting method, when it is probable the performance conditions will be met. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
For purposes of calculating stock-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of our stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the use of certain subjective assumptions including liquidity dates, volatility, discount rates, the risk-free rate and the fair value of our Common Stock. These assumptions generally require significant judgment and involve inherent uncertainties, which can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of our stock options and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized.
Prior to consummation of the Business Combination in December 2020, the fair value of our restricted stock units (RSUs) was based on the fair value of the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares on the date of grant. As there is no public market for the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares, the Legacy Canoo board of directors, with the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist, determined the fair value of the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares at the time of the grant of RSUs by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including the Legacy Canoo’s actual operating and financial performance, market conditions and performance of comparable publicly-traded companies, development milestones for the Legacy Canoo, the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event and transactions involving the Legacy Canoo’s ordinary shares, among other factors. The fair value of the Legacy Canoo ordinary shares was derived from the Legacy Canoo total equity value divided by the number of Legacy Canoo ordinary shares outstanding and was estimated using a probability-weighted expected return model, using different probability weightings estimated for public offering scenario, mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”) scenario and dissolution scenario. The factors and scenario weighting estimates require significant judgment and involve inherent uncertainties, which can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of our RSUs and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized.
Following the completion of the Business Combination in December 2020, we estimate the fair value of RSUs based on the market price of our Common Stock underlying the awards on the grant date. Fair value for awards with our stock price performance metrics is calculated using the Monte Carlo simulation model, which incorporates stock price correlation and other variables over the time horizons matching the performance periods.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and our management uses significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense for future periods could be materially different, including as a result of adjustments to stock-based compensation expense recorded for prior periods.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 total stock-based compensation expense was $84.3 million and $1.9 million, respectively.
Income Taxes
Beginning in 2020, for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes, we are taxed as a C-corporation. In prior years we were domiciled in the Cayman Islands and not subject to income taxes.
We recognize deferred taxes for temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statement and income tax purposes. We recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Based upon management’s assessment of all available evidence, we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets will not be realized.
At December 31, 2020, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $228.8 million and state net operating loss carryforwards of $316.8 million that may be applied against future taxable income. The majority of our net operating losses have an indefinite carryover period. Future utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards and tax-credit carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation based on changes in ownership, as defined by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
For additional information on our accounting policy on income taxes, see Note 2 and Note 15 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements for the years ended December 2020 and 2019.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as amended, and have elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards, although we may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. We expect to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and non-public companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used. See Note
2 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements for the years ended December 2020 and 2019 for the recent accounting pronouncements adopted and the recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an emerging growth company, we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things: (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (d) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) the last day of our first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of HCAC’s IPO, (b) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates or (d) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Securities and Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as the market value of our voting and non-voting Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our voting and non-voting Common Stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 of the notes to our accompanying financial statements for the years ended December 2020 and 2019 for a summary of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.