ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Please read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have omitted discussion of 2018 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Trends in Our Business
The following long-term trends have contributed to the results of our consolidated operations, and we anticipate that they will continue to affect our future results:
•Users' behaviors and advertising continue to shift online as the digital economy evolves.
The continuing shift from an offline to online world has contributed to the growth of our business since inception, contributing to revenue growth, and we expect that this online shift will continue to benefit our business.
•Users are increasingly using diverse devices and modalities to access our products and services, and our advertising revenues are increasingly coming from new formats.
Our users are accessing the Internet via diverse devices and modalities, such as smartphones, wearables and smart home devices, and want to feel connected no matter where they are or what they are doing. We seek to expand our products and services to stay in front of these trends in order to maintain and grow our business.
We generate our advertising revenues increasingly from different channels, including mobile, and newer advertising formats, and the margins from the advertising revenues from these channels and newer products have generally been lower than those from traditional desktop search. Additionally, as the market for a particular device type or modality matures, our revenues may be affected. For example, growth in the global smartphone market has slowed due to various factors, including increased market saturation in developed countries, which can affect our mobile advertising revenue growth rates.
We expect TAC paid to our distribution partners and Google Network Members to increase as our revenues grow and to be affected by changes in device mix; geographic mix; partner mix; partner agreement terms; the percentage of queries channeled through paid access points; product mix; the relative revenue growth rates of advertising revenues from different channels; and revenue share terms.
We expect these trends to continue to affect our revenue growth rates and put pressure on our overall margins.
•As online advertising evolves, we continue to expand our product offerings which may affect our monetization.
As interactions between users and advertisers change and as online user behavior evolves, we continue to expand and evolve our product offerings to serve their changing needs. Over time, we expect our monetization trends to fluctuate. For example, we have seen an increase in YouTube ads and Google Play ads, which monetize at a lower rate than our traditional search ads.
•As users in developing economies increasingly come online, our revenues from international markets continue to increase and movements in foreign exchange rates affect such revenues.
The shift to online, as well as the advent of the multi-device world, has brought opportunities outside of the U.S., including in emerging markets, such as India, where we continue to invest heavily and develop localized versions of our products and relevant advertising programs useful to our users in these markets. This has led to a trend of increased revenues from international markets over time, as regions with emerging markets, such as APAC, have demonstrated higher revenue growth rates. We expect that our results will continue to be affected by our performance in these markets, particularly as low-cost mobile devices become more available. This trend could impact our margins as developing markets initially monetize at a lower rate than more mature markets.
Our international revenues represent a significant portion of our revenues and are subject to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar. While we have a foreign exchange risk management program designed to reduce our exposure to these fluctuations, this program does not fully offset their effect on our revenues and earnings.
Alphabet Inc.
•The portion of our revenues that we derive from non-advertising revenues is increasing and may affect margins.
Non-advertising revenues have grown over time. We expect this trend to continue as we focus on expanding our offerings to our users through products and services like Google Cloud, Google Play, hardware products, and YouTube subscriptions. Across these initiatives, we currently derive non-advertising revenues primarily from sales of apps, in-app purchases, digital content products, and hardware; and licensing and service fees, including fees received for Google Cloud services and subscription and other services. The margins on these revenues vary significantly and may be lower than the margins on our advertising revenues. A number of our Other Bets initiatives are in their initial development stages, and as such, the sources of revenues from these businesses could change over time and the revenues could be volatile.
•As we continue to serve our users and expand our businesses, we will invest heavily in operating and capital expenditures.
We continue to make significant R&D investments in areas of strategic focus such as advertising, cloud, machine learning, and search, as well as in new products and services. In addition, we expect to continue to invest in land and buildings for data centers and offices, and information technology assets, which includes servers and network equipment, to support the long-term growth of our business.
In addition, acquisitions and strategic investments are an important part of our strategy and use of capital, contributing to the breadth and depth of our offerings, expanding our expertise in engineering and other functional areas, and building strong partnerships around strategic initiatives. For example, in 2020 we announced our Google for India Digitization Fund to invest approximately $10 billion into India over the next 5-7 years through a mix of equity investments, partnerships, and operational, infrastructure and ecosystem investments.
•We face continuing changes in regulatory conditions, laws and public policies, which could impact our business practices and financial results.
Changes in social, political, economic, tax, and regulatory conditions or in laws and policies governing a wide range of topics and related legal matters have resulted in fines and caused us to change our business practices. As these global trends continue, for example the recent antitrust complaints filed by the U.S. Department of Justice and a number of state Attorneys General as well as the News Media Bargaining Code drafted by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, our cost of doing business may increase and our ability to pursue certain business models or offer certain products or services may be limited.
•Our employees are critical to our success and we expect to continue investing in them.
Our employees are among our best assets and are critical for our continued success. We expect to continue hiring talented employees around the globe and to provide competitive compensation programs to our employees.
The Impact of COVID-19 on our Results and Operations
In late 2019, an outbreak of COVID-19 emerged and by March 11, 2020 was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization. Across the United States and the world, governments and municipalities instituted measures in an effort to control the spread of COVID-19, including quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, school closings, travel restrictions and the closure of non-essential businesses. The macroeconomic impacts of COVID-19 are significant and continue to evolve, as exhibited by, among other things, a rise in unemployment, changes in consumer behavior, and market volatility.
We began to observe the impact of COVID-19 and the related reductions in global economic activity on our financial results in March 2020 when, despite an increase in users' search activity, our advertising revenues declined compared to the prior year due to a shift of user search activity to less commercial topics and reduced spending by our advertisers. During the course of the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we observed a gradual return in user search activity to more commercial topics, followed by increased spending by our advertisers that continued throughout the second half of 2020.
We continue to assess the realized and potential credit deterioration of our customers due to changes in the macroeconomic environment, which has been reflected in our allowance for credit losses for accounts receivable. Additionally, over the course of the year we experienced variability in our margins as many of our expenses are less variable in nature and/or may not correlate to changes in revenues, including costs associated with our data centers and facilities as well as employee compensation. Also, market volatility has contributed to fluctuations in the valuation of our equity investments.
Alphabet Inc.
While we continued to make investments in land and buildings for data centers, offices and information technology, in 2020 we slowed the pace of our investments, primarily as it relates to office facilities, as a result of COVID-19.
The ongoing impact of COVID-19 on our business continues to evolve and be unpredictable. For example, to the extent the pandemic disrupts economic activity globally we, like other businesses, are not immune to continued adverse impacts to our business, operations and financial results from volatility in advertising spending, changes in user behavior and preferences, credit deterioration and liquidity of our customers, depressed economic activity, or volatility in capital markets. The ongoing impact will depend on a number of factors, including the duration and severity of the pandemic; the uneven impact to certain industries; advances in testing, treatment and prevention including vaccines; and the macroeconomic impact of government measures to contain the spread of the virus and related government stimulus measures.
To address the potential impact to our business, over the near-term, we continue to evaluate the pace of our investment plans, including, but not limited to, our hiring, investments in data centers, servers, network equipment, real estate and facilities, marketing and travel spending, as well as taking certain measures to support our customers, our overall workforce, and communities we operate in. As we look to return our workforce in more locations back to the office in 2021, we may experience increased costs as we prepare our facilities for a safe return to work environment and experiment with hybrid work models. At the same time, we believe the current environment is accelerating digital transformation and we remain focused on innovating and investing in the services we offer to consumers and businesses. For example, as it relates to Google Cloud, we continue to invest aggressively around the globe in our go-to-market capabilities, product development and technical infrastructure to support long term growth. The ongoing impact of COVID-19 and the extent of these measures we have taken and the additional measures that we may implement could have a material impact on our financial results. Our past results may not be indicative of our future performance, and historical trends in our financial results may differ materially.
Executive Overview
The following table summarizes our consolidated financial results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020 (in millions, except for per share information and percentages).
(1) Results for 2019 include the effect of the $1.7 billion EC fine. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
•Total revenues were $182.5 billion, an increase of 13% year over year, primarily driven by an increase in Google Services segment revenues of $16.8 billion or 11% and an increase in Google Cloud segment revenues of $4.1 billion or 46%. Revenues from the United States, EMEA, APAC, and Other Americas were $85.0 billion, $55.4 billion, $32.6 billion, and $9.4 billion, respectively.
•Total cost of revenues was $84.7 billion, an increase of 18% year over year. TAC was $32.8 billion, an increase of 9% year over year, primarily driven by an increase in revenues subject to TAC. Other cost of revenues were $51.9 billion, an increase of 24% year over year, primarily driven by an increase in data centers and other operations costs and content acquisition costs.
Alphabet Inc.
•Operating expenses were $56.6 billion, an increase of 5% year over year primarily driven by headcount growth and partially offset by declines in advertising and promotional expenses and travel and entertainment expenses.
Other information:
•Operating cash flow was $65.1 billion.
•Capital expenditures, which primarily included investments in technical infrastructure, were $22.3 billion.
•Number of employees was 135,301 as of December 31, 2020. The majority of new hires during the year were engineers and product managers.
Our Segments
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, we report our segment results as Google Services, Google Cloud, and Other Bets:
•Google Services includes products and services such as ads, Android, Chrome, hardware, Google Maps, Google Play, Search, and YouTube. Google Services generates revenues primarily from advertising; sales of apps, in-app purchases, digital content products, and hardware; and fees received for subscription-based products such as YouTube Premium and YouTube TV.
•Google Cloud includes Google’s infrastructure and data analytics platforms, collaboration tools, and other services for enterprise customers. Google Cloud generates revenues primarily from fees received for Google Cloud Platform ("GCP") services and Google Workspace (formerly known as G Suite) collaboration tools.
•Other Bets is a combination of multiple operating segments that are not individually material. Revenues from the Other Bets are derived primarily through the sale of internet services as well as licensing and R&D services.
Unallocated corporate costs primarily include corporate initiatives, corporate shared costs, such as finance and legal, including fines and settlements, as well as costs associated with certain shared research and development activities. Additionally, hedging gains (losses) related to revenue are included in corporate costs.
Financial Results
Revenues
The following table presents our revenues by type (in millions).
Google Services
Google advertising revenues
Our advertising revenue growth, as well as the change in paid clicks and cost-per-click on Google Search & other properties and the change in impressions and cost-per-impression on Google Network Members' properties and the correlation between these items, have been affected and may continue to be affected by various factors, including:
•advertiser competition for keywords;
•changes in advertising quality, formats, delivery or policy;
Alphabet Inc.
•changes in device mix;
•changes in foreign currency exchange rates;
•fees advertisers are willing to pay based on how they manage their advertising costs;
•general economic conditions including the impact of COVID-19;
•seasonality; and
•traffic growth in emerging markets compared to more mature markets and across various advertising verticals and channels.
Our advertising revenue growth rate has been affected over time as a result of a number of factors, including challenges in maintaining our growth rate as revenues increase to higher levels; changes in our product mix; changes in advertising quality or formats and delivery; the evolution of the online advertising market; increasing competition; our investments in new business strategies; query growth rates; and shifts in the geographic mix of our revenues. We also expect that our revenue growth rate will continue to be affected by evolving user preferences, the acceptance by users of our products and services as they are delivered on diverse devices and modalities, our ability to create a seamless experience for both users and advertisers, and movements in foreign currency exchange rates.
Google advertising revenues consist primarily of the following:
•Google Search & other consists of revenues generated on Google search properties (including revenues from traffic generated by search distribution partners who use Google.com as their default search in browsers, toolbars, etc.) and other Google owned and operated properties like Gmail, Google Maps, and Google Play;
•YouTube ads consists of revenues generated on YouTube properties; and
•Google Network Members' properties consist of revenues generated on Google Network Members' properties participating in AdMob, AdSense, and Google Ad Manager.
Google Search & other
Google Search & other revenues increased $5,947 million from 2019 to 2020. The overall growth was primarily driven by interrelated factors including increases in search queries resulting from ongoing growth in user adoption and usage, primarily on mobile devices, growth in advertiser spending primarily in the second half of the year, and improvements we have made in ad formats and delivery. This increase was partially offset by a decline in advertiser spending primarily in the first half of the year driven by the impact of COVID-19.
YouTube ads
YouTube ads revenues increased $4,623 million from 2019 to 2020. Growth was primarily driven by our direct response advertising products, which benefited from improvements to ad formats and delivery and increased advertiser spending. Brand advertising products also contributed to growth despite revenues being adversely impacted by a decline in advertiser spending primarily in the first half of the year driven by the impact of COVID-19.
Google Network Members' properties
Google Network Members' properties revenues increased $1,543 million from 2019 to 2020. The growth was primarily driven by strength in AdMob and Google Ad Manager.
Use of Monetization Metrics
Paid clicks for our Google Search & other properties represent engagement by users and include clicks on advertisements by end-users on Google search properties and other owned and operated properties including Gmail, Google Maps, and Google Play. Historically, we included certain viewed YouTube engagement ads and the related revenues in our paid clicks and cost-per-click monetization metrics. Over time, advertising on YouTube has expanded to multiple advertising formats and the type of viewed engagement ads historically included in paid clicks and cost-per-click metrics have increasingly covered a smaller portion of YouTube advertising revenues. As a result, we removed these ads and the related revenues from the paid clicks and cost-per-click metrics for the current and historical periods presented. The revised metrics provide a better understanding of monetization trends on the properties included within Google Search & other, as they now more closely correlate with the related changes in revenues.
Impressions for our Google Network Members' properties include impressions displayed to users served on Google Network Members' properties participating primarily in AdMob, AdSense and Google Ad Manager.
Cost-per-click is defined as click-driven revenues divided by our total number of paid clicks and represents the average amount we charge advertisers for each engagement by users.
Alphabet Inc.
Cost-per-impression is defined as impression-based and click-based revenues divided by our total number of impressions and represents the average amount we charge advertisers for each impression displayed to users.
As our business evolves, we periodically review, refine and update our methodologies for monitoring, gathering, and counting the number of paid clicks on our Google Search & other properties and the number of impressions on Google Network Members’ properties and for identifying the revenues generated by click activity on our Google Search & other properties and the revenues generated by impression activity on Google Network Members’ properties.
Paid clicks and cost-per-click
The following table presents changes in our paid clicks and cost-per-click (expressed as a percentage):
Paid clicks increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to an increase in clicks due to interrelated factors, resulting from ongoing growth in user adoption and usage, primarily on mobile devices; continued growth in advertiser activity; and improvements we have made in ad formats and delivery. Growth was also driven by an increase in clicks relating to ads on Google Play. The positive effect on our revenues from an increase in paid clicks was partially offset by a decrease in the cost-per-click paid by our advertisers. The decrease in cost-per-click was primarily driven by reduced advertiser spending in response to COVID-19 primarily during the first half of the year. The decrease in cost-per-click was also affected by changes in device mix, geographic mix, ongoing product changes, product mix, property mix, and fluctuations of the U.S. dollar compared to certain foreign currencies.
Paid clicks increased from 2018 to 2019 primarily due to an increase in clicks due to interrelated factors, including an increase in search queries resulting from ongoing growth in user adoption and usage, primarily on mobile devices; continued growth in advertiser activity; and improvements we have made in ad formats and delivery. Growth was also driven by an increase in clicks relating to ads on Google Play. The positive effect on our revenues from an increase in paid clicks was partially offset by a decrease in the cost-per-click paid by our advertisers. The decrease in cost-per-click was driven by changes in device mix, geographic mix, ongoing product changes, product mix, property mix, and fluctuations of the U.S. dollar compared to certain foreign currencies.
Impressions and cost-per-impression
The following table presents changes in our impressions and cost-per-impression (expressed as a percentage):
Impressions increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to growth in Google Ad Manager. The positive effect on our revenues from an increase in impressions was partially offset by a decrease in the cost-per-impression paid by our advertisers which was driven by a reduction in advertiser spending in response to COVID-19, primarily during the first half of the year, as well as the effect of a combination of factors including ongoing product and policy changes and improvements we have made in ad formats and delivery, changes in device mix, geographic mix, product mix, property mix, and fluctuations of the U.S. dollar compared to certain foreign currencies.
Google other revenues
Google other revenues consist primarily of revenues from:
•Google Play, which includes revenues from sales of apps and in-app purchases (which we recognize net of payout to developers) and digital content sold in the Google Play store;
•hardware, including Google Nest home products, Pixelbooks, Pixel phones and other devices;
•YouTube non-advertising, including YouTube Premium and YouTube TV subscriptions and other services; and
•other products and services.
Alphabet Inc.
Google other revenues increased $4,697 million from 2019 to 2020. The growth was primarily driven by Google Play and YouTube non-advertising. Growth for Google Play was primarily driven by sales of apps and in-app purchases, which benefited from elevated user engagement partially due to the impact of COVID-19. Growth for YouTube non-advertising was primarily driven by an increase in paid subscribers.
Over time, our growth rate for Google other revenues may be affected by the seasonality associated with new product and service launches as well as market dynamics.
Google Cloud
Our Google Cloud revenues increased $4,141 million from 2019 to 2020. The growth was primarily driven by GCP followed by our Google Workspace offerings. Our infrastructure and our data and analytics platform products were the largest drivers of growth in GCP.
Over time, our growth rate for Google Cloud revenues may be affected by customer usage, market dynamics, as well as new product and service launches.
Revenues by Geography
The following table presents our revenues by geography as a percentage of revenues, determined based on the addresses of our customers:
For further details on revenues by geography, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Use of Constant Currency Revenues and Constant Currency Revenue Percentage Change
The effect of currency exchange rates on our business is an important factor in understanding period to period comparisons. Our international revenues are favorably affected as the U.S. dollar weakens relative to other foreign currencies, and unfavorably affected as the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to other foreign currencies. Our revenues are also favorably affected by net hedging gains and unfavorably affected by net hedging losses.
We use non-GAAP constant currency revenues and non-GAAP percentage change in constant currency revenues for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe the presentation of results on a constant currency basis in addition to U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ("GAAP") results helps improve the ability to understand our performance because they exclude the effects of foreign currency volatility that are not indicative of our core operating results.
Constant currency information compares results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant period over period. We define constant currency revenues as total revenues excluding the effect of foreign exchange rate movements and hedging activities, and use it to determine the constant currency revenue percentage change on a year-on-year basis. Constant currency revenues are calculated by translating current period revenues using prior period exchange rates, as well as excluding any hedging effects realized in the current period.
Constant currency revenue percentage change is calculated by determining the change in period revenues over prior period revenues where current period foreign currency revenues are translated using prior period exchange rates and hedging effects are excluded from revenues of both periods.
These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP. Results on a constant currency basis, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and are not a measure of performance presented in accordance with GAAP.
Alphabet Inc.
The following table presents the foreign exchange effect on our international revenues and total revenues (in millions, except percentages):
(1) Total revenues and hedging gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2018 were $136,819 million and $(138) million, respectively.
EMEA revenue percentage change from 2019 to 2020 was not significantly affected by foreign currency exchange rates, primarily due to the U.S. dollar weakening relative to the Euro offset by the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to the Turkish lira and Russian ruble.
APAC revenue percentage change from 2019 to 2020 was not significantly affected by foreign currency exchange rates, primarily due to the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to the Indian rupee, partially offset by the U.S. dollar weakening relative to the Japanese yen.
Other Americas revenue percentage change from 2019 to 2020 was unfavorably affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily due to the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to the Brazilian real and Argentine peso.
Alphabet Inc.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes TAC which are paid to our distribution partners who make available our search access points and services, and amounts paid to Google Network Members primarily for ads displayed on their properties. Our distribution partners include browser providers, mobile carriers, original equipment manufacturers, and software developers.
The cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues generated from ads placed on Google Network Members' properties are significantly higher than the cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues generated from ads placed on Google properties (which includes Google Search & other and YouTube ads), because most of the advertiser revenues from ads served on Google Network Members’ properties are paid as TAC to our Google Network Members.
Additionally, other cost of revenues (which is the cost of revenues excluding TAC) includes the following:
•Content acquisition costs primarily related to payments to content providers from whom we license video and other content for distribution on YouTube advertising and subscription services and Google Play (we pay fees to these content providers based on revenues generated or a flat fee);
•Expenses associated with our data centers (including bandwidth, compensation expenses including stock-based compensation ("SBC"), depreciation, energy, and other equipment costs) as well as other operations costs (such as content review and customer support costs). These costs are generally less variable in nature and may not correlate with related changes in revenues; and
•Inventory related costs for hardware we sell.
The following tables present our cost of revenues, including TAC (in millions, except percentages):
Cost of revenues increased $12,836 million from 2019 to 2020. The increase was due to increases in other cost of revenues and TAC of $10,147 million and $2,689 million, respectively.
The increase in other cost of revenues from 2019 to 2020 was due to an increase in data center and other operations costs and an increase in content acquisition costs primarily for YouTube. This increase was partially offset by a decline in hardware costs.
The increase in TAC from 2019 to 2020 was due to increases in TAC paid to distribution partners and to Google Network Members, driven by growth in revenues subject to TAC. The TAC rate was 22.3% in both 2019 and 2020. The TAC rate on Google properties revenues and the TAC rate on Google Network revenues were both substantially consistent from 2019 to 2020.
Over time, cost of revenues as a percentage of total revenues may be affected by a number of factors, including the following:
•The amount of TAC paid to distribution partners, which is affected by changes in device mix, geographic mix, partner mix, partner agreement terms such as revenue share arrangements, and the percentage of queries channeled through paid access points;
•The amount of TAC paid to Google Network Members, which is affected by a combination of factors such as geographic mix, product mix, and revenue share terms;
•Relative revenue growth rates of Google properties and Google Network Members' properties;
•Certain costs that are less variable in nature and may not correlate with the related revenues;
•Costs associated with our data centers and other operations to support ads, Google Cloud, Search, YouTube and other products;
•Content acquisition costs, which are primarily affected by the relative growth rates in our YouTube advertising and subscription revenues;
•Costs related to hardware sales; and
•Increased proportion of non-advertising revenues, which generally have higher costs of revenues, relative to our advertising revenues.
Alphabet Inc.
Research and Development
The following table presents our R&D expenses (in millions, except percentages):
R&D expenses consist primarily of:
•Compensation expenses (including SBC) for engineering and technical employees responsible for R&D of our existing and new products and services;
•Depreciation expenses;
•Equipment-related expenses; and
•Professional services fees primarily related to consulting and outsourcing services.
R&D expenses increased $1,555 million from 2019 to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in compensation expenses of $1,619 million, largely resulting from a 11% increase in headcount and partially offset by higher compensation charges in certain Other Bets in 2019. Additionally, the increase in R&D expenses was partially offset by a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses of $383 million.
Over time, R&D expenses as a percentage of revenues may fluctuate due to certain expenses that are generally less variable in nature and may not correlate to the changes in revenues. In addition, R&D expenses may be affected by a number of factors including continued investment in ads, Android, Chrome, Google Cloud, Google Play, hardware, machine learning, Other Bets, Search and YouTube.
Sales and Marketing
The following table presents our sales and marketing expenses (in millions, except percentages):
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of:
•Advertising and promotional expenditures related to our products and services; and
•Compensation expenses (including SBC) for employees engaged in sales and marketing, sales support, and certain customer service functions.
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $518 million from 2019 to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in advertising and promotional expenses of $1,395 million, as we reduced spending and paused or rescheduled campaigns and changed some events to digital-only formats as a result of COVID-19, and a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses of $371 million. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in compensation expenses of $1,347 million, largely resulting from an 8% increase in headcount.
Over time, sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenues may fluctuate due to certain expenses that are generally less variable in nature and may not correlate to the changes in revenues. In addition, sales and marketing expenses may be affected by a number of factors including the seasonality associated with new product and service launches and strategic decisions regarding the timing and extent of our spending.
General and Administrative
The following table presents our general and administrative expenses (in millions, except percentages):
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of:
•Compensation expenses (including SBC) for employees in our finance, human resources, information technology, and legal organizations;
•Depreciation;
Alphabet Inc.
•Equipment-related expenses;
•Legal-related expenses; and
•Professional services fees primarily related to audit, information technology consulting, outside legal, and outsourcing services.
General and administrative expenses increased $1,501 million from 2019 to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in compensation expenses of $887 million, largely resulting from a 16% increase in headcount. In addition, there was an increase of $440 million related to allowance for credit losses for accounts receivable. The increase was partially offset by a $554 million charge recognized in 2019 relating to a legal settlement.
Over time, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues may fluctuate due to certain expenses that are generally less variable in nature and may not correlate to the changes in revenues, the effect of discrete items such as legal settlements, or allowances for credit losses for accounts receivable.
European Commission Fines
In March 2019, the EC announced its decision that certain contractual provisions in agreements that Google had with AdSense for Search partners infringed European competition law. The EC decision imposed a €1.5 billion ($1.7 billion as of March 20, 2019) fine, which was accrued in the first quarter of 2019.
Please refer to Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Segment Profitability
The following table presents our segment operating income (loss) (in millions). For comparative purposes, amounts in prior periods have been recast.
(1) Corporate costs, unallocated includes a fine of $5.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018 and a fine and legal settlement totaling $2.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Google Services
Google services operating income increased $5,607 million from 2019 to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in revenues partially offset by increases in content acquisition costs primarily for YouTube, data center and other operations costs, and TAC. Additionally, there was an increase in operating expenses primarily driven by an increase in compensation expenses (including SBC) largely due to increases in headcount. Operating income benefited from a decline in hardware costs.
Google services operating income increased $5,862 million from 2018 to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in revenues partially offset by increases in TAC, data center and other operations costs, and content acquisition costs primarily for YouTube. Additionally, there was an increase in operating expenses primarily driven by an increase in compensation expenses (including SBC) largely due to an increase in headcount.
Google Cloud
Google Cloud operating loss increased $962 million from 2019 to 2020 and increased $297 million from 2018 to 2019. The increase in operating loss in both periods was driven by an increase in total expenses of $5,103 million from 2019 to 2020 and $3,377 million from 2018 to 2019. Operating expenses increased primarily due to compensation expenses (including SBC), largely driven by an increase in headcount. Additionally, data center and other operating costs increased in both periods.
Other Bets
Other Bets operating loss decreased $348 million from 2019 to 2020 and increased $1,466 million from 2018 to 2019. The fluctuations were primarily driven by compensation expenses (including SBC).
Alphabet Inc.
Other Income (Expense), Net
The following table presents other income (expense), net, (in millions):
Other income (expense), net, increased $1,464 million from 2019 to 2020. The change was primarily driven by an increase in net gains on equity and debt securities of $3,519 million, partially offset by a $902 million loss resulting from our equity derivatives, which hedged the changes in fair value of certain marketable equity securities, and a decrease in interest income of $562 million.
Over time, other income (expense), net, may be affected by market dynamics and other factors. Equity values generally change daily for marketable equity securities and upon the occurrence of observable price changes or upon impairment of non-marketable equity securities. In addition, volatility in the global economic climate and financial markets, including the effects of COVID-19, could result in a significant change in the value of our investments. Fluctuations in the value of these investments has, and we expect will continue to, contribute to volatility of OI&E in future periods. For additional information about our investments, see Note 1 and Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table presents our provision for income taxes (in millions, except for effective tax rate):
Our provision for income taxes and our effective tax rate increased from 2019 to 2020. The increase in the provision for income taxes and our effective tax rate is primarily due to benefits related to the resolution of multi-year audits in 2019 that did not recur in 2020, higher earnings in countries that have higher statutory rates resulting from the change in our corporate legal entity structure implemented as of December 31, 2019, and an increase in valuation allowance for net deferred tax assets that are not likely to be realized relating to certain of our Other Bets, partially offset by an increase in the U.S. federal Foreign-Derived Intangible Income tax deduction benefits.
See Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
We expect our future effective tax rate to be affected by the geographic mix of earnings in countries with different statutory rates. Additionally, our future effective tax rate may be affected by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, or changes in tax laws, regulations, or accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items.
Alphabet Inc.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables presenting our quarterly results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have prepared the unaudited information on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements. Our operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future quarters or for a full year.
The following table presents our unaudited quarterly results of operations for the eight quarters ended December 31, 2020. This table includes all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, that we consider necessary for a fair presentation of our consolidated financial position and operating results for the quarters presented. Seasonal fluctuations in internet usage and advertiser expenditures, underlying business trends such as traditional retail seasonality and macroeconomic conditions have affected, and are likely to continue to affect, our business (including developments and volatility arising from COVID-19). Commercial queries typically increase significantly in the fourth quarter of each year. These seasonal trends have caused, and will likely continue to cause, fluctuations in our quarterly results, including fluctuations in sequential revenue growth rates.
Financial Condition
Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Marketable Securities
As of December 31, 2020, we had $136.7 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term marketable securities. Cash equivalents and marketable securities are comprised of time deposits, money market funds, highly liquid government bonds, corporate debt securities, mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities and marketable equity securities.
Sources, Uses of Cash and Related Trends
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, as well as the cash flow that we generate from our operations. The primary use of capital continues to be to invest for the long term growth of the business. We regularly evaluate our cash and capital structure, including the size, pace and form of capital return to stockholders.
Alphabet Inc.
The following table presents our cash flows (in millions):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Our largest source of cash provided by our operations are advertising revenues generated by Google Search & other properties, Google Network Members' properties and YouTube ads. Additionally, we generate cash through sales of apps, in-app purchases, digital content products, and hardware; and licensing and service fees including fees received for Google Cloud offerings and subscription-based products.
Our primary uses of cash from our operating activities include compensation and related costs, payments to our distribution partners and Google Network Members, and payments for content acquisition costs. In addition, uses of cash from operating activities include hardware inventory costs, income taxes, and other general corporate expenditures.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to the net effect of increases in cash received from revenues and cash paid for cost of revenues and operating expenses, and changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities consists primarily of maturities and sales of our investments in marketable and non-marketable securities. Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of purchases of marketable and non-marketable securities, purchases of property and equipment, and payments for acquisitions.
Net cash used in investing activities increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to a net increase in purchases of securities, partially offset by decreases in payments for acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment. The net decrease in purchases of property and equipment was driven by decreases in purchases of land and buildings for offices as well as data center construction, partially offset by increases in purchases of servers.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities consists primarily of proceeds from issuance of debt and proceeds from the sale of interest in consolidated entities. Cash used in financing activities consists primarily of repurchases of capital stock, net payments related to stock-based award activities, and repayments of debt.
Net cash used in financing activities increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to an increase in cash payments for repurchases of capital stock, partially offset by increases in net proceeds from issuance of debt and proceeds from the sale of interest in consolidated entities.
Liquidity and Material Cash Requirements
We expect existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term marketable securities, cash flows from operations and financing activities to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.
As of December 31, 2020, we had long-term taxes payable of $6.5 billion related to a one-time transition tax payable incurred as a result of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ("Tax Act"). As permitted by the Tax Act, we will pay the transition tax in annual interest-free installments through 2025.
In 2017, 2018 and 2019, the EC announced decisions that certain actions taken by Google infringed European competition law and imposed fines of €2.4 billion ($2.7 billion as of June 27, 2017), €4.3 billion ($5.1 billion as of June 30, 2018), and €1.5 billion ($1.7 billion as of March 20, 2019), respectively. While each EC decision is under appeal, we included the fines in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as we provided bank guarantees (in lieu of a cash payment) for the fines.
In January 2021, we closed the acquisition of Fitbit, a leading wearables brand, for $2.1 billion.
We have a short-term debt financing program of up to $5.0 billion through the issuance of commercial paper. Net proceeds from this program are used for general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, we had no commercial paper outstanding. As of December 31, 2020, we have $4.0 billion of revolving credit facilities expiring
Alphabet Inc.
in July 2023 with no amounts outstanding. The interest rate for the credit facilities is determined based on a formula using certain market rates.
In August 2020, we issued $10.0 billion of fixed-rate senior unsecured notes in six tranches: $1.0 billion due in 2025, $1.0 billion due in 2027, $2.25 billion due in 2030, $1.25 billion due in 2040, $2.5 billion due in 2050 and $2.0 billion due in 2060. The 2020 Notes had a weighted average duration of 21.5 years and weighted average coupon rate of 1.57%. Of the total issuance, $5.75 billion was designated as Sustainability Bonds, the net proceeds of which are used to fund environmentally and socially responsible projects in the following eight areas: energy efficiency, clean energy, green buildings, clean transportation, circular economy and design, affordable housing, commitment to racial equity, and support for small businesses and COVID-19 crisis response. The remaining net proceeds are used for general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, we have senior unsecured notes outstanding with a total carrying value of $13.8 billion. Refer to Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on the debts.
In accordance with the authorizations of the Board of Directors of Alphabet, in 2020 we repurchased and subsequently retired 21.5 million shares of Alphabet Class C capital stock for an aggregate amount of $31.1 billion. As of December 31, 2020, $17.6 billion remains authorized and available for repurchase. The repurchases are being executed from time to time, subject to general business and market conditions and other investment opportunities, through open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions, including through Rule 10b5-1 plans. The repurchase program does not have an expiration date. Refer to Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Expenditures and Leases
We make investments in land and buildings for data centers and offices and information technology assets through purchases of property and equipment and lease arrangements to provide capacity for the growth of our services and products.
Our capital investments in property and equipment consist primarily of the following major categories:
•Technical infrastructure, which consists of our investments in servers and network equipment for compute, storage and networking requirements for ongoing business activities, including machine learning, (collectively referred to as our information technology assets) and data center land and building construction; and
•Office facilities, ground up development projects and related building improvements.
Due to the integrated nature of Alphabet, our technical infrastructure and office facilities are managed centrally at a consolidated level. The associated costs, including depreciation and impairment, are allocated to operating segments as a service cost generally based on usage or headcount. Our technical infrastructure investments are designed to support all of Alphabet, including primarily ads, Google Cloud, Search, and YouTube.
Construction in progress consists primarily of technical infrastructure and office facilities which have not yet been placed in service for our intended use. The time frame from date of purchase to placement in service of these assets may extend to multiple periods. For example, our data center construction projects are generally multi-year projects with multiple phases, where we acquire qualified land and buildings, construct buildings, and secure and install information technology assets.
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, we spent $23.5 billion and $22.3 billion on capital expenditures and recognized total operating lease assets of $4.4 billion and $2.8 billion, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of total future lease payments under operating leases, which had a weighted average remaining lease term of 9 years, was $15.1 billion. As of December 31, 2020, we have entered into leases that have not yet commenced with future lease payments of $8.0 billion, excluding purchase options, that are not yet recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These leases will commence between 2021 and 2026 with non-cancelable lease terms of 1 to 25 years.
Depreciation of our property and equipment commences when the deployment of such assets are completed and are ready for our intended use. Land is not depreciated. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, our depreciation and impairment expenses on property and equipment were $10.9 billion and $12.9 billion, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, our operating lease expenses (including variable lease costs), were $2.4 billion and $2.9 billion, respectively. Finance leases were not material for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. Please refer to Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on the leases.
Alphabet Inc.
Contractual Obligations as of December 31, 2020
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1) For further information, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Represents non-cancelable contractual obligations primarily related to data center operations and build-outs; information technology assets; purchases of inventory; and digital media content licensing arrangements. The amounts included above represent the non-cancelable portion of agreements or the minimum cancellation fee. For those agreements with variable terms, we do not estimate the non-cancelable obligation beyond any minimum quantities and/or pricing as of December 31, 2020. Excluded from the table above are open orders for purchases that support normal operations, which are generally cancelable.
(3) Represents our principal and interest payments. For further information on long-term debt, refer to Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4) Represents one-time transition tax payable incurred as a result of the Tax Act. For further information, refer to Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Excluded from the table above are long-term taxes payable of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2020 primarily related to uncertain tax positions, for which we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing and outcomes of tax audits.
(5) Represents cash obligations recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, including the short-term portion of these long-term liabilities, primarily for certain commercial agreements. These amounts do not include the EC fines which are classified as current liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. For further information regarding the EC fines, refer to Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in our financial condition, revenues, or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material to investors. See Note 10 included in Part II, Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K for more information on our commitments and contingencies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In doing so, we have to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, gains and losses, as well as related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. In some cases, we could reasonably have used different accounting policies and estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations will be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which we discuss further below. We have reviewed our critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit and compliance committee of our Board of Directors.
Please see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of significant accounting policies and the effect on our financial statements.
Alphabet Inc.
Revenues
For the sale of third-party goods and services, we evaluate whether we are the principal, and report revenues on a gross basis, or an agent, and report revenues on a net basis. In this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified goods or services before they are transferred to the customer, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in establishing price.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes.
Although we believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes and the effective tax rate in the period in which such determination is made.
The provision for income taxes includes the effect of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Services ("IRS") and other tax authorities which may assert assessments against us. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations and assessments to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
Loss Contingencies
We are regularly subject to claims, suits, government investigations, and other proceedings involving competition, intellectual property, privacy, tax and related compliance, labor and employment, commercial disputes, content generated by our users, goods and services offered by advertisers or publishers using our platforms, personal injury consumer protection, and other matters. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We record a liability when we believe that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We evaluate, on a regular basis, developments in our legal matters that could affect the amount of liability that has been previously accrued, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses disclosed, and make adjustments and changes to our disclosures as appropriate. Significant judgment is required to determine both the likelihood of there being, and the estimated amount of, a loss related to such matters. Until the final resolution of such matters, there may be an exposure to loss in excess of the amount recorded, and such amounts could be material. Should any of our estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material effect on our business, consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment, long-term prepayments, and intangible assets, excluding goodwill, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows independent of other assets. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows generated from the assets are less than their carrying amount. Measurement of an impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset group over its fair value.
Fair Value Measurements
We measure certain of our non-marketable equity and debt investments, certain other instruments including stock-based compensation awards settled in the stock of certain Other Bets, and certain assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination, at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. The determination of fair value involves the use of appropriate valuation methods and relevant inputs into valuation models. The fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value whereby it gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. We maximize the use of relevant observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Our use of unobservable inputs reflects the assumptions that market participants would use and may include our own data adjusted based on reasonably available information. We apply judgment in assessing the relevance of observable market data to determine the priority of inputs under the fair value hierarchy, particularly in situations where there is very little or no market activity.
Alphabet Inc.
In determining the fair values of our non-marketable equity and debt investments, as well as assets acquired (especially with respect to intangible assets) and liabilities assumed in business combinations, we make significant estimates and assumptions, some of which include the use of unobservable inputs.
Certain stock-based compensation awards may be settled in the stock of certain of our Other Bets or in cash. These awards are based on the equity values of the respective Other Bet, which requires use of unobservable inputs.
We also have compensation arrangements with payouts based on realized investment returns, i.e. performance fees. We recognize compensation expense based on the estimated payouts, which may result in expense recognized before investment returns are realized, and may require the use of unobservable inputs.
Non-marketable Equity Securities
Our non-marketable equity securities not accounted for under the equity method are carried either at fair value or under the measurement alternative. Under the measurement alternative, the carrying value is measured at cost, less any impairment, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer. Determining whether an observed transaction is similar to a security within our portfolio requires judgment based on the rights and obligations of the securities. Recording upward and downward adjustments to the carrying value of our equity securities as a result of observable price changes requires quantitative assessments of the fair value of our securities using various valuation methodologies and involves the use of estimates.
Non-marketable equity securities are also subject to periodic impairment reviews. Our quarterly impairment analysis considers both qualitative and quantitative factors that may have a significant effect on the investment's fair value. Qualitative factors considered include the companies' financial and liquidity position, access to capital resources and the time since the last adjustment to fair value, among others. When indicators of impairment exist, we prepare quantitative assessments of the fair value of our equity investments using both the market and income approaches which require judgment and the use of estimates, including discount rates, investee revenues and costs, and comparable market data of private and public companies, among others. When our assessment indicates that an impairment exists, we write down the investment to its fair value.
Change in Accounting Estimate
In January 2021, we completed an assessment of the useful lives of our servers and network equipment and determined we should adjust the estimated useful life of our servers from three years to four years and the estimated useful life of certain network equipment from three years to five years. This change in accounting estimate will be effective beginning fiscal year 2021. For assets that are in-service as of December 31, 2020, we expect operating results to be favorably impacted by approximately $2.1 billion for the full fiscal year 2021. The effect of the change may be different due to our capital investments during the fiscal year 2021.