ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations is intended to provide investors with an understanding of the Company’s past performance, financial condition and prospects. The following will be discussed and analyzed:
Overview of Business
Overview of 2020 Results
Results of Operations
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Critical Accounting Policies
New Accounting Standards
Business Outlook
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
The Company’s objective is to strengthen its position as a leading provider of sustainable paper-based packaging solutions. To achieve this objective, the Company offers customers its paperboard, cartons, cups, lids, foodservice containers and packaging machines, either as an integrated solution or separately. Cartons, carriers and containers are designed to protect and hold products. Product offerings include a variety of laminated, coated and printed packaging structures that are produced from the Company’s CRB, CUK, and SBS paperboard. Innovative designs and combinations of paperboard, films, foils, metallization, holographics and embossing are customized to the individual needs of the customers.
The Company is implementing strategies (i) to expand market share in its current markets and to identify and penetrate new markets; (ii) to capitalize on the Company’s customer relationships, business competencies, and mills and folding carton assets; (iii) to develop and market innovative, sustainable products and applications that benefit from consumer-led sustainability trends; and (iv) to continue to reduce costs by focusing on operational improvements. The Company’s ability to fully implement its strategies and achieve its objectives may be influenced by a variety of factors, many of which are beyond its control, such as inflation of raw material and other costs, which the Company cannot always pass through to its customers, and the effect of overcapacity in the worldwide paperboard packaging industry.
Significant Factors That Impact the Company’s Business and Results of Operations
COVID-19 Pandemic. Many uncertainties remain regarding the current novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic, including the anticipated duration of the pandemic, and the extent of local and worldwide social, political, and economic disruption it may cause. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not materially impacted the Company's overall business, operations, or financial results to date, it may have far-reaching impacts on many aspects of the Company's operations, including impacts on customer and consumer behaviors, business and manufacturing operations, inventory, accounts receivable, the Company’s employees, and the market generally. The Company will continue to assess the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and intends to make adjustments to its business accordingly, such as to match the Company's supply with demand by adjusting mill maintenance outages and taking market downtime where appropriate such as the uncoated SBS cupstock paper machine market downtime that the Company took in Q3 of 2020 to reflect reduced demand for paperboard packaging from foodservice customers.
Impact of Inflation/Deflation. The Company’s cost of sales consists primarily of energy (including natural gas, fuel oil and electricity), pine and hardwood fiber, chemicals, secondary fibers, purchased paperboard, aluminum foil, ink, plastic films and resins, depreciation expense and labor. Costs increased year over year by $29.9 million in 2020 and increased year over year by $79.1 million in 2019. The higher costs in 2020 were due to costs of labor and benefits ($45.1 million), secondary fiber ($22.5 million), freight ($8.7 million), and other costs, net ($1.9 million), partially offset by lower costs of wood ($32.7 million), energy ($9.9 million) and external board ($5.7 million). The higher costs in 2019 were due to costs of labor and benefits ($40.4 million), wood ($39.6 million), external board ($12.1 million), partially offset by lower costs of secondary fiber ($10.5 million), and other costs, net ($2.5 million).
Because the price of natural gas experiences significant volatility, the Company has entered into contracts designed to manage risks associated with future variability in cash flows caused by changes in the price of natural gas. The Company has entered into natural gas swap contracts to hedge prices for a portion of its expected usage for 2021 and 2022. Since negotiated sales contracts and the market largely determine the pricing for its products, the Company is at times limited in its ability to raise prices and pass through to its customers any inflationary or other cost increases that the Company may incur.
Commitment to Cost Reduction. In light of continuing margin pressure throughout the packaging industry, the Company has programs in place that are designed to reduce costs, improve productivity and increase profitability. The Company utilizes a global continuous improvement initiative that uses statistical process control to help design and manage many types of activities, including production and maintenance. This includes a Six Sigma process focused on reducing variable and fixed manufacturing and administrative costs and the use of Lean Sigma principles in manufacturing and supply chain processes.
The Company’s ability to continue to successfully implement its business strategies and to realize anticipated savings and operating efficiencies is subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. If the Company cannot successfully implement the strategic cost reductions or other cost savings plans it may not be able to continue to compete successfully against other manufacturers. In addition, any failure to generate the anticipated efficiencies and savings could adversely affect the Company’s financial results.
Competition and Market Factors. As some products can be packaged in different types of materials, the Company’s sales are affected by competition from other manufacturers’ CRB, CUK, SBS, folding box board, and recycled clay-coated news. Additional substitute products also include plastic, shrink film and corrugated containers. In addition, while the Company has long-term relationships with many of its customers, the underlying contracts may be re-bid or renegotiated from time to time, and the Company may not be successful in renewing on favorable terms or at all. The Company works to maintain market share through efficiency, product innovation, service and strategic sourcing to its customers; however, pricing and other competitive pressures may occasionally result in the loss of a customer relationship.
In addition, the Company’s sales are driven by consumer buying habits in the markets its customers serve, and recently we have seen net organic sales growth driven by the consumers’ desire for sustainable packaging solutions and increased at home consumption. Changes in consumer dietary habits and preferences, increases in the costs of living, unemployment rates, access to credit markets, as well as other macroeconomic factors, may negatively affect consumer spending behavior. New product introductions and promotional activity by the Company’s customers and the Company’s introduction of new packaging products also impact its sales.
Debt Obligations. The Company had an aggregate principal amount of $3,666.6 million of outstanding debt obligations as of December 31, 2020. This debt has consequences for the Company, as it requires a portion of cash flow from operations to be used for the payment of principal and interest, exposes the Company to the risk of increased interest rates and may restrict the Company’s ability to obtain additional financing. Covenants in the Company’s Current Credit Agreement and Indentures may, among other things, restrict the ability of the Company to dispose of assets, incur guarantee obligations, prepay other indebtedness, repurchase stock, pay dividends, make other restricted payments and make acquisitions or other investments. The Current Credit Agreement also requires compliance with a maximum consolidated leverage ratio and a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio. The Company’s ability to comply in future periods with the financial covenants will depend on its ongoing financial and operating performance, which in turn will be subject to many other factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control. See “Covenant Restrictions” in “Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information regarding the Company’s debt obligations.
The debt and the restrictions under the Current Credit Agreement and the Indentures could limit the Company’s flexibility to respond to changing market conditions and competitive pressures. The outstanding debt obligations and the restrictions may also leave the Company more vulnerable to a downturn in general economic conditions or its business, or unable to carry out capital expenditures that are necessary or important to its growth strategy and productivity improvement programs.
OVERVIEW OF RESULTS
This management’s discussion and analysis contains an analysis of Net Sales, Income from Operations and other information relevant to an understanding of the Company's results of operations. On a consolidated basis:
• Net Sales in 2020 increased by $399.8 million or 6.5%, to $6,559.9 million from $6,160.1 million in 2019 due to organic sales growth, and the Greif, Quad and Artistic acquisitions, partially offset by lower open market volume of our paperboard and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates.
• Income from Operations in 2020 decreased by $9.8 million or 1.8%, to $524.3 million from $534.1 million in 2019. Transactions recorded in Business Combinations, Shutdown and Other Special Charges and Exit Activities, Net increased $23.4 million driven by higher charges for exit activities, including those related to our announced closures of White Pigeon, Michigan, CRB mill and West Monroe, Louisiana, PM1 containerboard machine, costs related to COVID-19, and increases in estimated liabilities related to the withdrawal from certain multi-employment benefit plans for facilities which have been closed. In addition, Income from Operations was negatively impacted in 2020 as compared to 2019 by non-commodity inflation (primarily labor and benefits), product mix, higher levels of planned maintenance and higher levels of market downtime at the uncoated SBS cupstock paper machine, and higher depreciation and amortization. Income from Operations was positively impacted in 2020 as compared to 2019 by higher volumes from organic sales growth and acquisitions, cost savings from continuous improvement and other programs, and commodity deflation.
Acquisitions, Closures, and Dispositions
•On January 31, 2020, the Company acquired a folding carton facility from Quad, a commercial printing company. The converting facility is located in Omaha, Nebraska and is included in the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment.
•On April 1, 2020, the Company acquired the Consumer Packaging Group business from Greif, a leader in industrial packaging products and services. The acquisition included seven converting facilities across the United States, which are included in the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment.
•On August 1, 2019, the Company acquired substantially all the assets of Artistic, a diversified producer of folding cartons and CRB. The acquisition included two converting facilities located in Auburn, Indiana and Elgin, Illinois (included in the Americas Paperboard Packaging reportable segment) and one CRB mill located in White Pigeon, Michigan (included in the Paperboard Mills reportable segment).
•During 2018, the Company completed the NACP Combination and the 2018 Acquisitions which included PFP and Letica Foodservice, and sold its previously closed CRB mill site in Santa Clara, California.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
•During 2020, GPHC repurchased 23.4 million shares of GPHC's outstanding common stock, for $315.6 million, at an average price of $13.48 per share. At December 31, 2020, GPHC had approximately $146.5 million available for additional repurchases under the 2019 share repurchase program.
•During 2020, GPHC declared cash dividends of $83.0 million and paid cash dividends of $84.7 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 COMPARED WITH 2019
Net Sales
The components of the change in Net Sales are as follows:
The Company's Net Sales in 2020 increased by $399.8 million or 6.5%, to $6,559.9 million from $6,160.1 million for the same period in 2019, due to Net Sales of $268.6 million from the Greif, Artistic and Quad Acquisitions and organic sales growth including new product introductions and conversions to our paperboard packaging solutions. These increases were partially offset by lower open market volume of our paperboard, product mix, and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Brazilian Real, Mexican Peso, and Canadian Dollar as well as lower selling prices. Core converting volumes were up, primarily in global beverage, dry foods, frozen foods, dairy products and cereal, offset by declines in foodservice packaging, including cups. The COVID-19 pandemic had a positive impact on volumes in 2020 for food and beverage packaging offset by a reduction in demand for some foodservice products.
Income from Operations
The components of the change in Income from Operations are as follows:
(a) Includes the Company's cost reduction initiatives, planned mill maintenance costs, mill market downtime costs, expenses related to acquisitions and integration activities, exit activities, and shutdown and other special charges.
The Company's Income from Operations for 2020 decreased $9.8 million or 1.8%, to $524.3 million from $534.1 million for the same period in 2019. Transactions recorded in Business Combinations, Shutdown and Other Special Charges and Exit Activities, Net increased $23.4 million driven by higher charges for exit activities, including those related to our announced closures of White Pigeon, Michigan, CRB mill and West Monroe, Louisiana, PM1 containerboard machine, costs related to COVID-19, and increases in estimated liabilities related to the withdrawal from certain multi-employment benefit plans for facilities which have been closed. In addition, Income from Operations was negatively impacted in 2020 as compared to 2019 by non-commodity inflation (primarily labor and benefits), product mix, higher levels of planned maintenance and higher levels of market downtime at the uncoated SBS cupstock paper machine, and higher depreciation and amortization. Income from Operations was positively impacted in 2020 as compared to 2019 by higher volumes from organic sales growth and acquisitions, cost savings from continuous improvement and other programs, and commodity deflation.
Inflation for 2020 increased due to higher costs of labor and benefits ($45.1 million), secondary fiber ($22.5 million), freight ($8.7 million), and other costs, net ($1.9 million), partially offset by lower costs for wood ($32.7 million), energy ($9.9 million) and external board ($5.7 million).
Nonoperating Pension and Postretirement Benefit
Nonoperating Pension and Postretirement Benefit was an expense of $151.5 million in 2020 versus $39.5 million in 2019. The increase was due to a settlement charge of $152.5 million incurred during the first quarter of 2020 associated with the Company's purchase of a group annuity contract that transferred the remaining pension benefit obligation under the largest U.S. Plan of approximately $713 million to an insurance company.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest Expense, Net decreased by $11.8 million to $128.8 million in 2020 from $140.6 million in 2019. Interest Expense, Net decreased due to lower interest rates, partially offset by higher debt balances as compared to prior year. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 35% of the Company’s total debt was subject to floating interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
During 2020, the Company recognized Income Tax Expense of $41.6 million on Income before Income Taxes and Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity of $244.0 million. During 2019, the Company recognized Income Tax Expense of $76.3 million on Income before Income Taxes and Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity of $354.0 million. The effective tax rate for 2020 is different than the statutory rate due to the tax effect of income attributable to noncontrolling interests as well as the mix of earnings between foreign and domestic tax jurisdictions. In addition, during 2020, the Company recorded discrete benefits of $7.6 million and $4.1 million related to the release of valuation allowances against the net deferred tax assets of two of its Canadian subsidiaries as a result of a planned internal restructuring and the tax effect of tax credit and other provision to return adjustments related to the 2019 U.S. federal income tax return, respectively. The effective tax rate in 2020 is lower than the effective tax rate in 2019 primarily due to these discrete benefits as compared to 2019. Also during 2019, the Company established a valuation allowance related to the net deferred tax assets of its Australian subsidiaries.
The Company utilized its remaining U.S. federal net operating losses during 2020. However, based on tax benefits associated with planned capital projects, the anticipated reduction of International Paper's investment in GPIP, as well as tax credit carryforwards which are available to offset future U.S. federal income tax, the Company does not expect to be a meaningful U.S. federal cash taxpayer until 2024.
Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity
Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity was $0.9 million in 2020 and $0.4 million in 2019 and is related to the Company’s equity investment through its GPIL subsidiary, in the Rengo Riverwood Packaging, Ltd. joint venture.
2019 COMPARED WITH 2018
Net Sales
The components of the change in Net Sales are as follows:
The Company’s Net Sales in 2019 increased by $130.7 million, or 2.2% to $6,160.1 million from $6,029.4 million in 2018 due to higher selling prices and Net Sales of approximately $115 million from the Artistic and 2018 Acquisitions. These increases were partially offset by modestly lower converting volumes in the first half of the year and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Euro, British Pound and Australian dollar. The higher selling prices are the result of announced price increases which benefit from inflationary pass throughs in the converting business as well as open market sales. Core converting volumes were down, in dry and frozen foods and dairy products, partially offset by higher global beverage volumes and new product introductions.
Income from Operations
The components of the change in Income from Operations are as follows:
(a) Includes the Company's cost reduction initiatives, expenses related to acquisitions and integration activities, exit activities, gain on sale of assets and shutdown and other special charges.
The Company's Income from Operations for 2019 increased $75.9 million or 16.6%, to $534.1 million from $458.2 million for the same period in 2018 due to the higher selling prices, cost savings through continuous improvement programs, the Augusta, Georgia mill outage in 2018 (approximately $52 million), and benefits from completed capital projects and synergies. These increases were partially offset by higher inflation, product mix, the gain on the sale of the Santa Clara mill site in 2018, costs to dispose of idle and abandoned assets, costs associated with exit activities, start-up costs associated with the Monroe, Louisiana folding carton facility, increased incentive costs and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates. Inflation for 2019 increased due to labor and benefit costs ($40.4 million), wood ($39.6 million), external board ($12.1 million), partially offset by lower secondary fiber cost ($10.5 million), and other costs, net ($2.5 million).
Nonoperating Pension and Postretirement Benefit
Nonoperating Pension and Postretirement Benefit was an expense of $39.5 million in 2019 versus income of $14.9 million in 2018. The increase in expense was due to a settlement charge of $39.2 million associated with lump sum payments, as well as lower expected return on assets and higher interest costs.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest Expense, Net increased by $16.9 million to $140.6 million in 2019 from $123.7 million in 2018. Interest Expense, Net increased due primarily to higher average debt balances slightly offset by lower average interest rates as compared to the prior year. As of December 31, 2019, approximately 34% of the Company’s total debt was subject to floating interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
During 2019, the Company recognized Income Tax Expense of $76.3 million on Income before Income Taxes and Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity of $354.0 million. During 2018, the Company recognized Income Tax Expense of $54.7 million on Income before Income Taxes and Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity of $347.5 million. The effective tax rate for 2019 is different than the statutory rate primarily due to the tax effect of income attributable to noncontrolling interests as well as the mix and levels of earnings between foreign and domestic tax jurisdictions. In addition, during 2019, the Company recorded discrete expense of $4.8 million for a valuation allowance against the net deferred tax assets of the Company’s subsidiary in Australia. The effective tax rate in 2019 is higher than the effective tax rate in 2018 primarily due to the valuation allowance as compared to 2018. During 2018, the Company released its valuation allowance against the net deferred tax assets of its French subsidiary and recorded discrete benefits related to the true up of the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act enacted in 2017.
Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity
Equity Income of Unconsolidated Entity was $0.4 million in 2019 and $1.2 million in 2018 and is related to the Company’s equity investment through its GPIL subsidiary in the joint venture, Rengo Riverwood Packaging, Ltd.
Segment Reporting
The Company has three reportable segments as follows:
Paperboard Mills includes the eight North American paperboard mills that produce primarily CRB, CUK, and SBS, which is consumed internally to produce paperboard packaging for the Americas and Europe Packaging segments. The remaining paperboard is sold externally to a wide variety of paperboard packaging converters and brokers. The Paperboard Mills segment Net Sales represents the sale of paperboard only to external customers. The effect of intercompany transfers to the paperboard packaging segments has been eliminated from the Paperboard Mills segment to reflect the economics of the integration of these segments.
Americas Paperboard Packaging includes paperboard packaging, primarily folding cartons, sold primarily to Consumer Packaged Good ("CPG") companies, and cups, lids and food containers sold primarily to foodservice companies and quick-service restaurants ("QSR") serving the food, beverage, and consumer product markets in the Americas.
Europe Paperboard Packaging includes paperboard packaging, primarily folding cartons, sold primarily to CPG companies serving the food, beverage and consumer product markets in Europe.
The Company allocates certain mill and corporate costs to the reportable segments to appropriately represent the economics of these segments. The Corporate and Other caption includes the Pacific Rim and Australia operating segments and unallocated corporate and one-time costs.
These segments are evaluated by the chief operating decision maker based primarily on Income from Operations, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization. The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as those described in Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
(a) Includes revenue from contracts with customers for the Australia and Pacific Rim operating segments.
(b) Includes accelerated depreciation related to exit activities in 2020 and 2019, excludes $29.6 million related to the Augusta, Georgia mill outage in 2018.
(c) Includes expenses related to business combinations, exit activities, idle and abandoned assets, gain on sale of assets and shutdown and other special charges.
2020 COMPARED WITH 2019
Paperboard Mills - Net Sales decreased from prior year due to customer mix, lower open market volume primarily of containerboard due to the shutdown of the PM1 containerboard machine and CUK as the Company internalized more paperboard tons, and lower selling prices.
Income from Operations decreased due to the lower selling prices, lower open market volume, higher levels of planned maintenance at the mills, higher levels of market downtime at the SBS cupstock paper machine, higher labor and benefits costs, increased depreciation expense including accelerated depreciation related to exit activities, and customer mix of open market volume partially offset by productivity improvements, including benefits from capital projects, and commodity deflation. The commodity deflation was primarily due to lower prices for wood and energy offset by higher prices for secondary fiber.
Americas Paperboard Packaging - Net Sales increased due to higher selling prices, the Greif, Artistic, and Quad acquisitions, organic sales growth including conversions to our paperboard packaging solutions, and new product introductions offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates. Higher volumes in global beverage, dry foods, frozen foods, dairy products and cereal were offset by declines in foodservice packaging, including cups. In beverage, volumes increased in all categories including soft drink, craft and specialty, and big beer. COVID-19 had a positive impact on volumes in 2020 for food and beverage packaging offset by a reduction in demand for some foodservice products.
Income from Operations increased due to higher volumes including from organic sales growth and acquisitions, higher selling prices, cost savings through continuous improvement and other programs, and commodity deflation, partially offset by other inflation (primarily labor and benefits), higher levels of market downtime at the SBS cupstock paper machine, and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates. The commodity deflation was primarily due to lower prices for wood, energy, and external board offset by higher prices for secondary fiber and freight.
Europe Paperboard Packaging - Net Sales increased due to higher pricing, increased volumes led by beverage, machine sales, and convenience, favorable mix, and favorable foreign currency exchange rates.
Income from Operations increased due to higher selling prices, increased volumes, commodity deflation, and favorable foreign currency exchange rates partially offset by higher labor and benefits, unfavorable mix, and COVID-19 costs.
2019 COMPARED WITH 2018
Paperboard Mills - Net Sales increased from prior year due to higher selling prices and higher open market volume of SBS and CRB, due to the White Pigeon Mill acquired as part of the Artistic acquisition, partially offset by lower open market volume for CUK. The Company also internalized more CUK and SBS paperboard.
Income from Operations increased due to the higher selling prices and productivity improvements, including benefits from capital projects. These increases were partially offset by product mix, inflation, accelerated depreciation related to exit activities and modest market downtime taken for SBS. The higher inflation was primarily due to wood and labor and benefits, partially offset by lower prices for secondary fiber and energy.
Americas Paperboard Packaging - Net Sales increased due to higher selling prices and the Artistic and 2018 Acquisitions, partially offset by modestly lower converting volumes in the first half of the year. Certain consumer products, primarily dry and frozen foods and dairy products, experienced decreased volume, which was partially offset by increased volume from new product introductions. Beverage volumes rose across all categories except big beer.
Income from Operations increased due to the higher selling prices and productivity improvements partially offset by higher inflation and start-up costs associated with the Monroe, Louisiana folding carton facility. The higher inflation was primarily for labor and benefits and external board.
Europe Paperboard Packaging - Net Sales decreased slightly as unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates were partially offset by increased beverage, consumer product and convenience volumes and higher selling prices. The higher volumes reflect the increase in multi-pack beverage and a shift from plastics into paperboard solutions.
Income from Operations increased due to the higher selling prices, the improved volumes and cost savings through continuous improvement programs, partially offset by inflation, primarily labor and benefits and external board, unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates and higher outsourcing costs.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company broadly defines liquidity as its ability to generate sufficient funds from both internal and external sources to meet its obligations and commitments. In addition, liquidity includes the ability to obtain appropriate debt and equity financing and to convert into cash those assets that are no longer required to meet existing strategic and financial objectives. Therefore, liquidity cannot be considered separately from capital resources that consist of current or potentially available funds for use in achieving long-range business objectives and meeting debt service commitments.
Cash Flows
Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-15, Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230); Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments, which required the Company to classify consideration received for beneficial interest obtained for transferring trade receivables as investing activities instead of operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 totaled $824.7 million, compared to $665.8 million in 2019. The increase was due primarily to the restructuring of certain of the Company's accounts receivable sale and securitization programs as well as improved operations as compared to prior year. Pension contributions in 2020 and 2019 were $19.1 million and $11.3 million, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 totaled $647.8 million, compared to $224.3 million in 2019. Capital spending was $646.3 million and $352.9 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, the Company paid approximately $41 million and $80 million for the Quad and Greif acquisitions, respectively. Net beneficial interest decreased as a result of the restructuring of certain of the Company's accounts receivable sale and securitization programs. In the prior year, the Company paid $54.5 million, net of cash acquired, for the 2019 Acquisitions. Net cash receipts related to the accounts receivable securitization and sale programs were $127.0 million and $187.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 totaled $152.0 million, compared to $360.8 million in 2019. Current year activities include a debt offering of $450 million aggregate principal amount of 3.50% senior notes due 2028, and a debt offering of $350 million aggregate principal amount of 3.50% senior notes due 2029. The Company used the net proceeds to repay outstanding borrowings under its senior secured revolving credit facility. The Company also paid $500 million toward the redemption of IP's ownership interest in GPIP. Additionally, the Company made borrowings under revolving credit facilities primarily for capital spending, redemption of IP's ownership interest, repurchase of common stock of $315.6 million and payments on debt of $36.5 million. The Company also paid dividends and distributions of $102.8 million and withheld $9.1 million of restricted stock units to satisfy tax withholding obligations related to the payout of restricted stock units. In the prior year, the Company had a debt offering of $300 million aggregate principal amount of 4.75% senior notes due 2027. The Company also made borrowings under revolving credit facilities primarily for capital spending, repurchase of stock of $128.8 million and payments on debt of $36.5 million. The Company also paid dividends and distributions of $112.7 million and withheld $4.1 million of restricted stock units to satisfy tax withholding payments related to the payout of restricted stock units.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's liquidity needs arise primarily from the funding of its capital expenditures, debt service on its indebtedness, ongoing operating costs, working capital, share repurchases and dividend payments. Principal and interest payments under the term loan facilities and the revolving credit facilities, together with principal and interest payments on the Company's 4.75% Senior Notes due 2021 (redeemed in January 2021), 4.875% Senior Notes due 2022, 4.125% Senior Notes due 2024, 4.75% Senior Notes due 2027, 3.50% Senior Notes due 2028, and 3.50% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “Notes”), represent liquidity requirements for the Company. Based upon current levels of operations, anticipated cost savings and expectations as to future growth, the Company believes that cash generated from operations, together with amounts available under its revolving credit facilities and other available financing sources, will be adequate to permit the Company to meet its debt service obligations, necessary capital expenditure program requirements and ongoing operating costs and working capital needs, although no assurance can be given in this regard. The Company's future financial and operating performance, ability to service or refinance its debt and ability to comply with the covenants and restrictions contained in its debt agreements (see “Covenant Restrictions” below) will be subject to future economic conditions, including conditions in the credit markets, and to financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond the Company's control, and will be substantially dependent on the selling prices and demand for the Company's products, raw material and energy costs, and the Company's ability to successfully implement its overall business and profitability strategies.
Accounts receivable are stated at the amount owed by the customer, net of an allowance for estimated uncollectible accounts, returns and allowances, and cash discounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated based on historical experience, current economic conditions and the creditworthiness of customers. Receivables are charged to the allowance when determined to be no longer collectible.
The Company has entered into agreements to sell, on a revolving basis, certain trade accounts receivable to third party financial institutions. Transfers under these agreements meet the requirements to be accounted for as sales in accordance with the Transfers and Servicing topic of the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification (the "Codification"). The loss on sale is not material and is included in Other Expense, Net line item on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The following table summarizes the activity under these programs for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
(a) Included in Other Current Assets and represents a beneficial interest in the receivables sold to the financial institutions, which is a Level 3 fair value measure.
The Company has also entered into various factoring and supply chain financing arrangements which also qualify for sale accounting in accordance with the Transfers and Servicing topic of the FASB Codification. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company sold receivables of approximately $368 million and $238 million, respectively, related to these factoring arrangements.
Receivables sold under all programs subject to continuing involvement, which consist principally of collection services, were approximately $621 million and $562 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Covenant Restrictions
Covenants contained in the Current Credit Agreement and the Indentures may, among other things, limit the ability to incur additional indebtedness, restrict the ability of the Company to dispose of assets, incur guarantee obligations, prepay other indebtedness, repurchase shares, pay dividends and make other restricted payments, create liens, make equity or debt investments, make acquisitions, modify terms of the indentures under which the Notes are issued, engage in mergers or consolidations, change the business conducted by the Company and its subsidiaries, and engage in certain transactions with affiliates. Such restrictions, together with disruptions in the credit markets, could limit the Company's ability to respond to changing market conditions, fund its capital spending program, provide for unexpected capital investments or take advantage of business opportunities.
Under the terms of the Current Credit Agreement, the Company must comply with a maximum Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio covenant and a minimum Consolidated Interest Expense Ratio covenant. The Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, which contains the definitions of these covenants, was filed as an exhibit to the Company's Form 8-K filed on January 2, 2018.
The Current Credit Agreement requires that the Company maintain a maximum Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio of less than 4.25 to 1.00. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with such covenant and the ratio was 3.07 to 1.00.
The Company must also comply with a minimum Consolidated Interest Expense Ratio of 3.00 to 1.00. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with such covenant and the ratio was 8.89 to 1.00.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's credit was rated BB+ by Standard & Poor's and Ba1 by Moody's Investor Services. Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investor Services' ratings on the Company included a stable outlook.
Capital Investment
The Company’s capital investments in 2020 were $651.3 million ($646.3 million was paid), compared to $359.1 million ($352.9 million was paid) in 2019. During 2020, the Company had capital spending of $605.7 million for improving process capabilities, $15.4 million for capital spares and $30.2 million for manufacturing packaging machinery.
Environmental Matters
Some of the Company’s current and former facilities are the subject of environmental investigations and remediations resulting from historical operations and the release of hazardous substances or other constituents. Some current and former facilities have a history of industrial usage for which investigation and remediation obligations may be imposed in the future or for which indemnification claims may be asserted against the Company. Also, closures or sales of facilities may necessitate further investigation and may result in remediation at those facilities. The Company has established reserves for those facilities or issues where liability is probable and the costs are reasonably estimable.
For further discussion of the Company’s environmental matters, see Note 14 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8., Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
A summary of our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(a) Purchase obligations primarily consist of commitments for the purchase of fiber and chip processing along with commitments associated with building the new CRB paper machine in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
(b) Certain amounts included in this table are based on management’s estimates and assumptions about these obligations. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the obligations the Company will actually pay in the future periods may vary from those reflected in the table.
International Operations
For 2020, before intercompany eliminations, net sales from operations outside of the U.S. represented approximately 21% of the Company’s net sales. The Company’s revenues from export sales fluctuate with changes in foreign currency exchange rates. At December 31, 2020, approximately 16.0% of the Company’s total assets were denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The Company has significant operations in countries that use the euro, British pound sterling, the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the Mexico peso or the Japanese yen as their functional currencies. The effect of changes in the U.S. dollar exchange rate against these currencies produced a net currency translation adjustment gain of $17.7 million, which was recorded in Other Comprehensive (Loss) Income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The magnitude and direction of this adjustment in the future depends on the relationship of the U.S. dollar to other currencies. The Company pursues a currency hedging program in order to reduce the impact of foreign currency exchange fluctuations on financial results. See “Financial Instruments” below.
Financial Instruments
The Company pursues a currency hedging program which utilizes derivatives to reduce the impact of foreign currency exchange fluctuations on its consolidated financial results. Under this program, the Company has entered into forward exchange contracts in the normal course of business to hedge certain foreign currency denominated transactions. Realized and unrealized gains and losses on these forward contracts are included in the measurement of the basis of the related foreign currency transaction when recorded. The Company also pursues a hedging program that utilizes derivatives designed to manage risks associated with future variability in cash flows and price risk related to future energy cost increases. Under this program, the Company has entered into natural gas swap contracts to hedge a portion of its forecasted natural gas usage for 2021 and 2022. Realized gains and losses on these contracts are included in the financial results concurrently with the recognition of the commodity consumed. In addition, the Company uses interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risks on future interest payments caused by interest rate changes on its variable rate term loan facility. The Company does not hold or issue financial instruments for trading purposes. See “