ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis represents management’s perspective of our business, financial condition and overall performance. This information is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our past performance, current
financial condition and outlook for the future and should be read in conjunction with “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report. The following discussion and analysis generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
We are an independent natural gas-weighted exploration and production company focused on the exploration, acquisition and production of natural gas, crude oil and NGL in the United States with primary focus in the Appalachia and Anadarko basins. Our principal properties are located in Eastern Ohio targeting the Utica formation and in central Oklahoma targeting the SCOOP Woodford and SCOOP Springer formations.
Voluntary Reorganization Under Chapter 11
On November 13, 2020, we and our subsidiaries filed voluntary petitions for relief under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas. The Chapter 11 Cases are being administered jointly under the caption In re Gulfport Energy Corporation, et al., Case No. 20-35562 (DRJ). We continue to operate our businesses as "debtors-in-possession" under the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Bankruptcy Code and the orders of the Bankruptcy Court.
The Bankruptcy Court has granted first- and second- day motions filed by us that were designed primarily to mitigate the impact of the Chapter 11 Cases on our operations, customers and employees. As a result, we are able to conduct normal business activities and pay all associated obligations for the period following the Bankruptcy Filing and are authorized to pay owner royalties, employee wages and benefits and certain vendors and suppliers in the ordinary course for goods and services provided. During the pendency of the Chapter 11 Cases, all transactions outside the ordinary course of business require the prior approval of the Bankruptcy Court.
For the duration of the Chapter 11 Cases, our operations and ability to develop and execute our business plan are subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with the Chapter 11 process as described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” As a result of these risks and uncertainties, the number of our shares of common stock and stockholders, assets, liabilities, officers and/or directors could be significantly different following the outcome of the Chapter 11 Cases, and the description of our operations, properties and capital plans included in this Form 10-K may not accurately reflect our operations, properties and capital plans following the Chapter 11 Cases.
During the Chapter 11 Cases, we expect our financial results to continue to be volatile as restructuring activities and expenses, contract terminations and rejections and claims assessments significantly impact our consolidated financial statements. As a result, our historical financial performance is likely not indicative of our financial performance after the date of the Bankruptcy Filing. In addition, we have incurred significant professional fees and other costs in connection with preparation for the Chapter 11 Cases and expect that we will continue to incur significant professional fees and costs throughout our Chapter 11 Cases.
See Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this report for a complete discussion of the Chapter 11 Cases.
Delisting of our Common Stock from Nasdaq
On November 27, 2020, our common stock was suspended from trading on NASDAQ. On November 30, 2020, our common stock began trading on the OTC Pink Marketplace maintained by the OTC Markets Group, Inc. under the symbol “GPORQ". On February 2, 2021, NASDAQ filed a Form 25 delisting our common stock from trading on NASDAQ, which delisting became effective 10 days after the filing of the Form 25. In accordance with Rule 12d2-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"), the de-registration of our common stock under section 12(b) of the Exchange Act became effective on February 12, 2021.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Impact on Global Demand for Oil and Natural Gas
In March 2020, the World Health Organization classified the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The measures have led to worldwide shutdowns and halting of commercial and interpersonal activity, as governments around the world imposed regulations in efforts to control the spread of COVID-19 such as shelter-in-place orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar restrictions.
We remain focused on protecting the health and well-being of our employees and the communities in which we operate while assuring the continuity of our business operations. We have implemented preventative measures and developed corporate and field response plans to minimize unnecessary risk of exposure and prevent infection. We have a crisis management team for health, safety and environmental matters and personnel issues, and we have established a COVID-19 Response Team to address various impacts of the situation, as they have been developing. We also have modified certain business practices (including remote working for our corporate employees and restricted employee business travel) to conform to government restrictions and best practices encouraged by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization and other governmental and regulatory authorities.
In May 2020, we began our phased transition back to the office for our corporate employees. As part of this transition, we have put into place preventative measures to focus on social distancing and minimizing unnecessary risk of exposure. Such measures include, but are not limited to, daily health surveys, protective masks in public areas of the building, no outside visitors, limiting the number of employees on elevators and additional sanitizing. As of the date of this filing, we have transitioned a majority of our corporate employees back to the corporate office; however, we continue to provide a balanced work schedule that allows for a significant portion of the work week to be performed remotely. We will continue to monitor trends and governmental guidelines and may adjust our return to office plans accordingly to ensure the health and safety of our employees.
As a result of our business continuity measures, we have not experienced significant disruptions in executing our business operations during 2020. While we did not experience significant disruptions to our operations in 2020, we are unable to predict the impact on our business, including our cash flows, liquidity, and results of operations in future periods due to numerous uncertainties. There is considerable uncertainty regarding the extent to which COVID-19 will continue to spread and the extent and duration of governmental and other measures implemented to slow the spread of the virus, such as large-scale travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business and government shutdowns. Restrictions of this nature may cause, us, our suppliers and other business counterparties to experience operational delays, or delays in the delivery of materials and supplies. We expect the principal areas of operational risk for us are the availability and reliability of service providers and potential supply chain disruption. Additionally, the operations of our midstream service providers, on whom we rely for the transmission, gathering and processing of a significant portion of our produced natural gas, NGL and oil, may be disrupted or suspended in response to containing the outbreak, or the difficult economic environment may lead to the bankruptcy or closing of the facilities and infrastructure of our midstream service providers. This may result in substantial discount in the prices we receive for our produced natural gas, NGL and oil or result in the shut-in of producing wells or the delay or discontinuance of development plans for our properties.
One of the impacts of the pandemic has been a significant reduction in global demand for oil and natural gas. The significant decline in demand has been met with a sharp decline in oil prices following the announcement of price reductions and production increases in March 2020 by members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, and other foreign, oil-exporting countries. The resulting supply/demand imbalance is having disruptive impacts on the oil and natural gas exploration and production industry and on other industries that serve exploration and production companies. These industry conditions, coupled with those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, has led to significant global economic contraction generally and in our industry in particular. We expect to see continued volatility in oil and natural gas prices for the foreseeable future, which may, over the long term, adversely impact our business. Continued depressed demand or prices for oil and natural gas would have a material adverse effect on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations.
Because of the sharp decline in oil prices since early March 2020, we chose to shut in a portion of our operated low margin, liquids-weighted production during the second quarter of 2020, largely consisting of legacy vertical production in the SCOOP. We also experienced shut-ins across both the SCOOP and Utica from our non-operated partners. All liquids-weighted volumes on both our operated assets and those of our non-operated partners have returned to production. A sharp decline in prices or a prolonged depressed environment may result in additional future shut ins. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic creates risks of
delays in new drilling and completion activities that could negatively impact us, our non-operated partners or our service providers.
In June 2020, in response to the depressed commodity price environment, we announced tiered salary reductions for most employees, senior management team and our Board of Directors as well as select furloughs to reduce costs and preserve liquidity. The employee salary reductions were re-instated in late September, while the senior management and Board of Directors reductions were re-instated at December 31, 2020. In addition, we reduced our workforce by approximately 10% in the third quarter of 2020 to align our workforce to the current and forecasted needs of operating our business plans.
We cannot predict the full impact that COVID-19 or the significant disruption and volatility currently being experienced in the oil and natural gas markets will have on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations at this time, due to numerous uncertainties. The ultimate impacts will depend on future developments, including, among others, the ultimate geographic spread of the virus, the consequences of governmental and other measures designed to prevent the spread of the virus, the development and distribution of effective treatments and vaccines, the duration of the outbreak, actions taken by members of OPEC and other foreign, oil-exporting countries, governmental authorities, customers, suppliers and other thirds parties, workforce availability, and the timing and extent to which normal economic and operating conditions resume. While we have seen meaningful recovery in demand during the second half of the year, significant uncertainty remains regarding the duration and extent of the impact of the pandemic on the energy industry, including demand and commodities pricing, although we expect to see further recovery as vaccines are distributed and more normal societal activity resumes. For additional discussion regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this report.
2020 Operational and Financial Highlights
In the current depressed commodity price environment and period of economic uncertainty, we took the following operational and financial measures in 2020 to improve our balance sheet and preserve liquidity:
•Reduced 2020 capital spending by more than 50% as compared to 2019;
•Divested our SCOOP water infrastructure assets to a third-party water service provider for $50 million;
•Reduced long-term debt related to our senior unsecured notes by $73.3 million through discounted repurchases;
•Reduced certain corporate general and administrative costs through pay reductions, furloughs and reductions in force;
•Evaluated economics across our portfolio and shut-in certain non-economical production in the second quarter of 2020;
•Continued to significantly improve operational efficiencies and reduce drilling and completion costs in both our SCOOP and Utica operating areas. In the Utica, our average spud to rig release time was 18.7 days in 2020, which was a 5% improvement from 2019 levels. In the SCOOP, our average spud to rig release time was 35.5 days, representing a 35% improvement compared to 2019 levels.
Although management's actions listed above have helped to improve the company's liquidity and leverage profile, continued macro headwinds including the depressed state of energy capital markets and extraordinarily low commodity price environment presented significant risks to the Company's ability to fund its operations going forward. On October 8, 2020, the borrowing base under our revolving credit facility was reduced for the second time in 2020 from $700 million to $580 million, thereby significantly reducing available liquidity. Considering the facts above, we elected not to make interest payments of $17.4 million due October 15, 2020 and $10.8 million due November 2, 2020 on our 2024 Notes and 2023 Notes, respectively. On November 13, 2020, we filed voluntary petitions for relief under Chapter 11 as discussed above.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
We reported a net loss of $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The graph below shows the change in the net loss from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019. The material changes are further discussed by category on the following pages. Some totals and changes throughout below section may not sum or recalculate due to rounding.
(1) Includes lease operating expenses, taxes other than income and midstream, gathering and processing expenses.
Natural Gas, Oil and NGL Sales
(1) In November 2020, the Company early terminated certain gas fixed price swaps which resulted in a cash payment of $60.2 million.
(2) In April 2020, the Company early terminated certain oil fixed price swaps which resulted in a cash receipt of $40.5 million.
(3) Includes Niobrara, Bakken and Southern Louisiana.
In 2020, our total unhedged natural gas, oil and NGL revenues decreased approximately $553.5 million, or 41%, as compared to 2019. A 25% decrease in total production volumes accounted for $323 million of lower natural gas, oil and NGL revenues. The decrease is production was primarily related to our significantly lower capital program beginning in the fourth quarter of 2019 into 2020. The remainder of the decrease in natural gas, oil and NGL revenues is related to a significant decrease in the realized prices for each of our commodities as compared to 2019 realized prices driven by depressed commodity market conditions.
The total natural gas, oil and NGL volumes hedged for 2020 and 2019 represented approximately 70% and 96%, respectively, of our total sales volumes for the applicable year.
Natural Gas, Oil and NGL Derivatives
Settlement gains (losses) in the table above represent realized cash gains or losses to the instruments described in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements. Our hedging program provided cash settlements of $159.4 million in 2020 as compared to $123.1 million in 2019.
Lease Operating Expenses
_____________________
(1) Includes Niobrara, Bakken and Southern Louisiana
The decrease in total LOE in 2020 was primarily driven by the 25% decrease in our production resulting from production declines from our Utica and SCOOP properties as a result of reduced development activities in addition to the divestiture of our Southern Louisiana properties as discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. LOE on a per unit basis was slightly lower for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 as a result of increased focus on reducing lease operating expenses within the organization as well as the divestiture of the Southern Louisiana properties which had a higher operating cost structure relative to our other assets.
Taxes Other Than Income
The decrease in production taxes in 2020 was primarily related to a decrease in revenue and production in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Midstream Gathering and Processing Expenses
The decrease in midstream gathering and processing expenses in 2020 was primarily related to the 25% decrease in our production volumes. The increase in per unit midstream gathering and processing expenses in 2020 is primarily related to Utica production volumes falling below the minimum volume commitments we have on certain of our firm transportation agreements with pipeline companies and the resulting deficiency payments.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
The decrease in DD&A in 2020 was due to a decrease in the depletion rate, driven primarily by impairment charges in 2019 and 2020, which decreased the depletion base. The decrease was further driven by an approximate 25% decrease in production.
Impairment of Oil and Gas Properties. During 2020, we had $1.4 billion oil and natural gas properties impairment charges related primarily to the continued decline in commodity prices, compared to $2.0 billion impairment charges of oil and gas properties in 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses, gross in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in non-recurring legal and consulting charges and compensation expense as a result of cash retention incentives paid to our employees during the third quarter of 2020. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion on these cash retention incentive payments. This increase was partially offset by lower salary costs resulting from the reduction in workforce that was completed in the fourth quarter of 2019 and third quarter of 2020 as well as certain furloughs and pay reductions as discussed in the overview. The decrease in capitalized general and administrative expenses in 2020 was due to lower development activities for 2020 as compared to 2019.
Restructuring and Liability Management Expenses. In the third quarter of 2020 and fourth quarter of 2019, the Company announced and completed workforce reductions representing approximately 10% and 13%, respectively, of its headcount. In connection with the reduction, the Company incurred total restructuring charges of approximately $1.5 million and $4.6 million, primarily consisting of one-time employee-related termination benefits, for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Additionally, the Company incurred charges related to financial and legal advisors engaged to assist with the evaluation of a range of liability management alternatives during 2020 prior to the filing of the Chapter 11 Cases. While we expect to continue to incur significant financial and legal advisor fees throughout the Chapter 11 process, these costs will be presented in Reorganization Items, Net in our consolidated statements of operations.
Accretion Expense. Accretion expense decreased to $3.1 million for the 2020 from $3.9 million for the 2019, primarily as a result of asset divestitures discussed in Note 3.
Interest Expense
The decrease in interest on senior notes in 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to the Chapter 11 proceedings. As of the Petition Date, we are not paying or recognizing interest expense on any of our outstanding debt other than any post-petition amounts drawn on the Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility and the DIP Credit Facility.
Gain on Debt Extinguishment. In July of 2019, our Board of Directors authorized $100 million of cash to be used to repurchase its senior notes in the open market at discounted values to par. In December 2019, our Board of Directors increased the authorized size of the senior note repurchase program to $200 million in total. During 2020, we repurchased in the open market $73.3 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding Senior Notes for $22.8 million in cash and recognized a $49.6 million gain on debt extinguishment. During 2019, we repurchased $190.1 aggregate principal amount of our outstanding Senior Notes for $138.8 million in cash and recognized a $48.6 million gain on debt extinguishment.
Equity Investments
For 2020, the loss from equity method investments stems primarily from a $10.6 million loss related to our investment in Mammoth Energy, with no impairments recorded. The loss from equity method investments during 2019 was primarily the result of a $160.8 million impairment loss related to our investment in Mammoth Energy and a $32.4 million impairment loss related to our investment in Grizzly. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion on our equity investments.
Reorganization Items, Net. The following table summarizes the components in reorganization items, net included in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020:
We expect to incur significant legal and professional fees related to our ongoing Chapter 11 case in 2021.
Other Expense, Net
The increase in other expense in 2020 is primarily the result of a $16.6 million loss on the change in fair value of our contingent consideration agreement related to the sale of our SCOOP water infrastructure assets to a third-party water service provider. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion on our contingent consideration agreement.
Income Taxes
The change in income tax in 2020 is primarily the result of the recognition of a valuation allowance against a state deferred tax asset. At December 31, 2020, we had a federal net operating loss carryforward of $1.9 billion, in addition to numerous temporary differences, which gave rise to a net deferred tax asset, and a valuation allowance of $985.5 million maintained against the net deferred asset.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview. Historically, our primary sources of capital funding and liquidity have been our operating cash flow, borrowings under our Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility and issuances of equity and debt securities. Our ability to issue additional indebtedness, dispose of assets or access the capital markets may be substantially limited or nonexistent during the Chapter 11 Cases and will require court approval in most instances. Accordingly, our liquidity will depend mainly on cash generated from operating activities and available funds under the DIP Credit Facility as discussed below.
Filing of the Chapter 11 Cases constituted an event of default with respect to certain of our secured and unsecured debt obligations. As a result of the Chapter 11 Cases, the principal and interest due under these debt instruments became immediately due and payable. However, the creditors are stayed from taking any action as a result of the default under Section 362 of the Bankruptcy Code.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of $89.9 million compared to $6.1 million as of December 31, 2019, and a net working capital deficit of $100.5 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to a net working capital deficit of $145.3 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, our working capital deficit includes $253.7 million of debt due in the next 12 months. Our total principal debt as of December 31, 2020 was $2.3 billion compared to $2.0 billion as of December 31, 2019. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings of $157.5 million on our DIP credit facility with $105.0 million of incremental borrowing capacity. See Note 6 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of our debt obligations, including principal and carrying amounts of our notes.
We believe our cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity under the DIP Credit Facility and cash on hand will provide sufficient liquidity during the Chapter 11 process. We expect to incur significant costs related to our ongoing Chapter 11 Cases in 2021, including fees for legal, financial and restructuring advisors to the Company, certain of our creditors and royalty interest owners. Therefore, our ability to obtain confirmation of the Plan in a timely manner is critical to ensuring our liquidity is sufficient during the bankruptcy process.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is contingent on our ability to comply with the financial and other covenants contained in our DIP Credit Facility, the Bankruptcy Court's approval of the Plan and our ability to successfully implement the Plan and obtain exit financing, among other factors. As a result of the Bankruptcy Filing, the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities are subject to uncertainty. While operating as debtors-in-possession under Chapter 11, we may settle liabilities, subject to the approval of the Bankruptcy Court or as otherwise permitted in the ordinary course of business (and subject to restrictions contained in the DIP Credit Facility), for amounts other than those reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Further, the Plan could materially change the amounts and classifications of assets and liabilities reported in the consolidated financial statements.
Debtor-In-Possession Credit Facility. Pursuant to the RSA, the Consenting RBL Lenders have agreed to provide the Company with a senior secured superpriority debtor-in-possession revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $262.5 million consisting of $105 million of new money and $157.5 million to roll up a portion of the existing outstanding obligations under the Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility. The proceeds of the DIP Credit Facility may be used for, among other things, post-petition working capital, permitted capital investments, general corporate purposes, letters of credit, administrative costs, premiums, expenses and fees for the transactions contemplated by the Chapter 11 Cases and payment of court approved adequate protection obligations.
Advances under our DIP Credit Facility may be in the form of either base rate loans or eurodollar loans. The interest rate for base rate loans is equal to (1) the applicable rate of 3.50%, plus (2) the base rate. The interest rate for eurodollar loans is equal to (1) the applicable rate of 4.50%, plus (2) the highest of: (a) 1% or (b) the eurodollar rate. As of December 31, 2020, amounts borrowed under our DIP Credit Facility bore interest at the weighted average rate of 5.50%.
The DIP Credit Facility includes negative covenants that, subject to significant exceptions, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, (i) create liens on assets, property revenues, (ii) make investments, (iii) incur additional indebtedness, (iv) engage in mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions, (v) sell assets, (vi) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock, (vii) cease for any reason to be the operator of its properties, (viii) enter into letters of credit without prior written consent, (ix) enter into certain commodity hedging contracts except commodity hedging contracts with terms approved by the Bankruptcy Court in the hedging order or certain interest rate contracts, (x) change lines of business, (xi) engage in certain transactions with affiliates and (xii) incur more than a certain amount in capital expenditures in any calendar month. The DIP Credit Facility includes certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default, including but not limited to defaults on account of nonpayment, breaches of representations and warranties and covenants, certain bankruptcy-related events, certain events under ERISA, material judgments and a change in control. If an event of default occurs, the lenders under the DIP Credit Facility will be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of all amounts due under the DIP Credit Facility and all actions permitted to be taken under the loan documents or application of law. In addition, the DIP Credit Facility is subject to various other financial performance covenants, including compliance with certain financial metrics and adherence to a budget approved by our DIP Credit Facility lenders.
Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility. We have entered into a senior secured revolving credit facility agreement, as amended, with The Bank of Nova Scotia, as the lead arranger and administrative agent and certain lenders from time to time party thereto. The credit agreement provides for a maximum borrowing base amount of $580 million and matures on December 31, 2021. The $292.9 million of outstanding borrowings under the Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31,
2020 that were not rolled up into the DIP Credit Facility will remain outstanding throughout the Chapter 11 Cases and will continue to accrue interest on amounts drawn after the Petition Date. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, we had an aggregate of $147.5 million of letters of credit outstanding under our Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility. This facility is secured by substantially all of our assets. Our wholly-owned subsidiaries, excluding Grizzly Holdings and Mule Sky, guarantee our obligations under our revolving credit facility.
Advances under our Pre-Petition Revolving Credit Facility may be in the form of either base rate loans or eurodollar loans. The interest rate for base rate loans is equal to (1) the applicable rate, which ranges from 0.25% to 1.25%, plus (2) the highest of: (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (b) the rate of interest in effect for such day as publicly announced from time to time by the administrative agent as its “prime rate,” and (c) the eurodollar rate for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%. The interest rate for eurodollar loans is equal to (1) the applicable rate, which ranges from 1.25% to 2.25%, plus (2) the London interbank offered rate that appears on pages LIBOR01 or LIBOR02 of the Reuters screen that displays such rate for deposits in U.S. dollars, or, if such rate is not available, the rate as administered by ICE Benchmark Administration (or any other person that takes over administration of such rate) per annum equal to the offered rate on such other page or other service that displays an average London interbank offered rate as administered by ICE Benchmark Administration (or any other person that takes over the administration of such rate) for deposits in U.S. dollars, or, if such rate is not available, the average quotations for three major New York money center banks of whom the administrative agent shall inquire as the “London Interbank Offered Rate” for deposits in U.S. dollars. As of December 31, 2020, amounts borrowed under our revolving credit facility bore interest at the weighted average rate of 3.15%.
Senior Notes. In April 2015, we issued an aggregate of $350.0 million in principal amount of our 2023 Notes. Interest on these senior notes accrues at a rate of 6.625% per annum on the outstanding principal amount thereof, payable semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year. As of December 31, 2020, after giving effect to open market repurchases of these 2023 Notes, $324.6 million principal amount remained outstanding. The 2023 Notes mature on May 1, 2023.
On October 14, 2016, we issued an aggregate of $650.0 million in principal amount of our 2024 Notes. Interest on the 2024 Notes accrues at a rate of 6.000% per annum on the outstanding principal amount thereof, payable semi-annually on April 15 and October 15 of each year. As of December 31, 2020, after giving effect to open market repurchases of these 2024 Notes, $579.6 million principal amount remained outstanding. The 2024 Notes mature on October 15, 2024.
On December 21, 2016, we issued an aggregate of $600.0 million in principal amount of our 2025 Notes. Interest on the 2025 Notes accrues at a rate of 6.375% per annum on the outstanding principal amount thereof, payable semi-annually on May 15 and November 15 of each year. As of December 31, 2020, after giving effect to open market repurchases of these 2025 Notes, $507.9 million principal amount remained outstanding. The 2025 Notes mature on May 15, 2025.
On October 11, 2017, we issued $450.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 2026 Notes. Interest on the 2026 Notes accrues at a rate of 6.375% per annum on the outstanding principal amount thereof, payable semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of each year. As of December 31, 2020, after giving effect to open market repurchases of these 2026 Notes, $374.6 million principal amount remained outstanding. The 2026 Notes mature on January 15, 2026.
All amounts outstanding on our Senior Notes have been classified as liabilities subject to compromise on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used borrowings under our revolving credit facility to repurchase in the open market approximately $73.3 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding Notes for $22.8 million. We recognized a $49.6 million gain on debt extinguishment, which included retirement of unamortized issuance costs and fees associated with the repurchased debt.
Building Loan. On June 4, 2015, we entered into a loan for the construction of our corporate headquarters in Oklahoma City, which was substantially completed in December 2016. Interest accrues daily on the outstanding principal balance at a fixed rate of 4.50% per annum. The building loan matures on June 4, 2025. As of December 31, 2020, the total borrowings under the building loan were approximately $21.9 million, which has been classified as liabilities subject to compromise on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information. The 2023 Notes, 2024 Notes, 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by all existing consolidated subsidiaries that guarantee our secured revolving credit facility or certain other debt (the “Guarantors”). The Senior Notes are not guaranteed by Grizzly Holdings or Mule Sky, LLC (the “Non-
Guarantors”). The Guarantors are 100% owned by the Parent, and the guarantees are full, unconditional, joint and several. There are no significant restrictions on the ability of the Parent or the Guarantors to obtain funds from each other in the form of a dividend or loan. The guarantees rank equally in the right of payment with all of the senior indebtedness of the subsidiary guarantors and senior in the right of payment to any future subordinated indebtedness of the subsidiary guarantors. The Senior Notes and the guarantees are effectively subordinated to all of our and the subsidiary guarantors' secured indebtedness (including all borrowings and other obligations under our amended and restated credit agreement) to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness, and structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities of any of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the Notes. Effective June 1, 2019, the Parent contributed interests in certain oil and gas assets and related liabilities to certain of the Guarantors.
SEC Regulation S-X Rule 13-01 requires the presentation of "Summarized Financial Information" to replace the "Condensed Consolidating Financial Information" required under Rule 3-10. Rule 13-01 allows the omission of Summarized Financial Information if assets, liabilities and results of operations of the Guarantors are not materially different than the corresponding amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements. The Parent and Guarantor subsidiaries comprise our material operations. Therefore, we concluded that the presentation of the Summarized Financial Information is not required as our Summarized Financial Information of the Guarantors is not materially different from our consolidated financial statements.
Derivatives and Hedging Activities. We seek to mitigate risks related to unfavorable changes in natural gas, oil and NGL prices, which are subject to significant and often volatile fluctuation, by entering into over-the-counter fixed price swaps, basis swaps, collars and various types of option contracts. These contracts allow us to mitigate the impact of declines in future natural gas, oil and NGL prices by effectively locking in floor price for a certain level of our production. However, these hedge contracts also limit the benefit to us in periods when the future market prices of natural gas, oil and NGL that are higher than the hedged prices.
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following open natural gas derivative instruments (we had no oil or NGL derivative instruments in place):
See Note 13 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of derivatives and hedging activities.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and as of March 1, 2021, we entered into the following natural gas, oil, and NGL derivative contracts as we work toward fulfilling minimum hedging requirements as provided for in the RSA:
(1) Volume units for gas instruments are presented as MMBtu/day while oil and NGL is presented in Bbls/day.
Contractual and Commercial Obligations. The following table sets forth our contractual and commercial obligations at December 31, 2020:
_____________________
(1) The maturities of our debt obligations and associated interest reflect their original expiration dates and do not reflect any acceleration due to any events of default pertaining to these obligations. See Note 6 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for a description of our long-term debt.
(2) Includes all contractual interest on amounts classified as liabilities subject to compromise, including interest accrued on Senior Notes as of the Petition Date.
(3) Our commitments under our firm transportation and gathering contracts do not reflect contracts expected to be rejected through our Chapter 11 proceedings. See Note 17 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for a description of our firm transportation and gathering contracts.
(4) See Note 10 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for a description of our operating lease liabilities.
(5) This table does not include derivative liabilities or the estimated discounted cost for future abandonment of oil and natural gas properties. See Notes 13 and 4 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report, respectively.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements. We may enter into off-balance sheet arrangements and transactions that can give rise to material off-balance sheet obligations. As of December 31, 2020, our material off-balance sheet arrangements and transactions include $147.5 million in letters of credit outstanding against our revolving credit facility and $111.4 million in surety bonds issued. Both the letters of credit and surety bonds are being used as financial assurance on certain firm transportation agreements. There are no other transactions, arrangements or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect our liquidity or availability of our capital resources.
Capital Expenditures. Our capital commitments have been primarily for the execution of our operations. Our capital investment strategy is focused on prudently developing our existing properties in an effort to generate sustainable cash flow considering current and forecasted commodity prices.
We continually monitor market conditions and are prepared to adjust our development program if commodity prices dictate. We believe our cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity under the DIP Credit Facility and cash on hand will provide sufficient liquidity during the Chapter 11 process. We expect to incur significant costs associated with our ongoing Chapter 11 Cases in 2021, including fees for legal, financial and restructuring advisors to the Company, certain of our creditors and royalty interest owners. Therefore, our ability to obtain confirmation of the Plan in a timely manner is critical to ensuring our liquidity is sufficient during the bankruptcy process.
Commodity Price Risk. The volatility of the energy markets makes it extremely difficult to predict future oil and natural gas price movements with any certainty. During 2019, WTI prices ranged from $46.31 to $66.24 per barrel and the Henry Hub spot market price of natural gas ranged from $1.75 to $4.25 per MMBtu. During 2020, WTI prices ranged from $(36.98) to $63.27 per barrel and the Henry Hub spot market price of natural gas ranged from $1.33 to $3.14 per MMBtu. If the prices of oil and natural gas decline further, our operations, financial condition and level of expenditures for the development of our oil and natural gas reserves may be materially and adversely affected. In addition, lower oil and natural gas prices may reduce the amount of oil and natural gas that we can produce economically. This may result in our having to make substantial downward adjustments to our estimated proved reserves. If this occurs or if our production estimates change or our exploration or development activities are curtailed, full cost accounting rules may require us to write down, as a non-cash charge to earnings, the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties. Reductions in commodity prices and/or our reserves could also negatively impact the borrowing base under our revolving credit facility, which could limit our liquidity and ability to fund development activities.
See