Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
The following discussion and analysis includes information management believes is relevant to understand and assess our financial condition and results of operations. This section should be read together with our consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and risk factors contained in this report.
Overview
We are a master limited partnership formed by our parent to be its principle provider of fuel storage and transportation services. On July 1, 2015, we completed our IPO, and, in addition to the interests of BlendStar, obtained the assets and liabilities of the ethanol storage and leased railcar assets contributed by our parent in a transfer between entities under common control. We also entered into long-term, fee-based commercial agreements for storage and transportation services with Green Plains Trade, which are supported by minimum volume or take-or-pay capacity commitments.
Our profitability is dependent on the volume of ethanol and other fuels handled at our facilities and the amount of railcar volumetric capacity we are able to provide. Our long-term, fee-based commercial agreements generate stable, predictable cash flows supported by minimum volume or take-or-pay capacity commitments.
Information about our business, properties and strategy can be found under Item 1 - Business and a description of our risk factors can be found under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Industry Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
U.S. Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the EIA, domestic ethanol production averaged 0.91 million barrels per day in 2020, which was 12% lower than the 1.03 million barrels per day in 2019. Refiner and blender input volume decreased 13% to 798 thousand barrels per day for 2020, compared with 921 thousand barrels per day in 2019. Gasoline demand decreased 1.2 million barrels per day, or 13% in 2020. U.S. domestic ethanol ending stocks increased by approximately 2.5 million barrels, or 12%, year over year to 23.5 million barrels. As of December 31, 2020, according to Prime the Pump, there were approximately 2,300 retail stations selling E15 in 30 states, up from 2,080 at the beginning of the year, as well as 203 pipeline terminal locations now offering E15 to wholesale customers.
Global Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service, domestic ethanol exports through November 30, 2020 were approximately 1.22 bgy, down 7.6% from 1.32 bgy for the same period of 2019. Canada was the largest export destination for U.S. ethanol accounting for 25% of domestic ethanol export volume. Brazil, India, and South Korea accounted for 16%, 15%, and 8%, respectively, of U.S. ethanol exports. We currently estimate that net ethanol exports will range from 1.3 to 1.5 billion gallons in 2021, excluding any significant exports to China, based on historical demand from a variety of countries and certain countries who seek to improve their air quality and eliminate MTBE from their own fuel supplies.
On April 1, 2018, China announced it would add an additional 15% tariff to the existing 30% tariff it had earlier imposed on ethanol imports from the United States and Brazil. China later raised the tariff further to 70% as the trade war escalated. In January 2020, China and the United States struck a “Phase I” trade agreement, which included commitments on agricultural commodity purchases. Ethanol, corn and distillers grains were included as potential purchases in the agreement. China has been purchasing large quantities of corn, which has raised domestic prices of this feedstock for our ethanol production process. In addition, in October 2020 it was announced that China had purchased a shipment of U.S. ethanol for the first time since March 2018.
Legislation and Regulation
We are sensitive to government programs and policies that affect the supply and demand for ethanol and other fuels, which in turn may impact the volume of ethanol and other fuels we handle. Over the past few years, various bills and amendments have been proposed in the House and Senate which would eliminate the RFS II entirely, eliminate the corn based ethanol portion of the mandate, and make it more difficult to sell fuel blends with higher levels of ethanol. We believe it is unlikely that any of these bills will become law in the current Congress. In addition, the manner in which the EPA administers the RFS II and related regulations can have a significant impact on the actual amount of ethanol blended into the domestic fuel supply.
Federal mandates and state-level clean fuel programs supporting the use of renewable fuels are a significant driver of ethanol demand in the U.S. Ethanol policies are influenced by concerns for the environment, diversifying our fuel supply, and reducing the country’s dependence on foreign oil. Consumer acceptance of flex-fuel vehicles and higher ethanol blends of ethanol in non-flex-fuel vehicles may be necessary before ethanol can achieve further growth in U.S. market share. In addition, expansion of clean fuel programs in other states, or a national low carbon fuel standard could increase the demand for ethanol, depending on how it is structured.
Congress first enacted CAFE in 1975 to reduce energy consumption by increasing the fuel economy of cars and light trucks. Flexible-fuel vehicles (FFVs), which are designed to run on a mixture of fuels, including higher blends of ethanol such as E85, receive preferential treatment in the form of CAFE credits. There are approximately 21 million FFVs on the road in the U.S. today, 16 million of which are light duty trucks. FFV credits have been decreasing since 2014 and were completely phased out in 2020. Absent CAFE preferences, auto manufacturers may not be willing to build flexible-fuel vehicles, which has the potential to slow the growth of E85 markets. However, California’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard program (LCFS) has driven growth in E85 usage, and other state/regional LCFS programs have the potential to do the same.
The RFS II sets a floor for ethanol usage in the United States. When the RFS II was established in 2010, the required volume of “conventional” or corn-based ethanol to be blended with gasoline was to increase each year until it reached 15.0 billion gallons in 2015, which left the EPA to address existing limitations in both supply and demand. The EPA has not yet released a draft RVO rule for the 2021 volumes, despite the fact they typically release a draft mid-year and finalize the rule by November 30 each year. It is unclear when they will release the RVO for 2021.
According to the RFS II, if mandatory renewable fuel volumes are reduced by at least 20% for two consecutive years, the EPA is required to modify, or reset, statutory volumes through 2022 - the year through which the statutorily prescribed volumes run. While conventional ethanol maintained 15 billion gallons, 2019 was the second consecutive year that the total proposed RVO was more than 20% below the statutory volumes levels. Thus, the EPA was expected to initiate a reset rulemaking, and modify statutory volumes through 2022, and do so based on the same factors they are to use in setting the RVOs post-2022. These factors include environmental impact, domestic energy security, expected production, infrastructure impact, consumer costs, job creation, price of agricultural commodities, food prices, and rural economic development. However, in late 2019, the EPA announced it would not be moving forward with a reset rulemaking in 2020. It is unclear when or if they will propose a reset rulemaking.
Under the RFS, RINs and SREs are important tools impacting supply and demand. The EPA assigns individual refiners, blenders, and importers the volume of renewable fuels they are obligated to use based on their percentage of total domestic transportation fuel sales. Obligated parties use RINs to show compliance with the RFS II mandated volumes. Ethanol producers assign RINs to renewable fuels and the RINs are detached when the renewable fuel is blended with transportation fuel domestically. Market participants can trade the detached RINs in the open market. The market price of detached RINs affects the price of ethanol in certain markets and can influence purchasing decisions by obligated parties. As it relates to SREs, a small refinery is defined as one that processes fewer than 75,000 barrels of petroleum per day. Small refineries can petition the EPA for a SRE which, if approved, waives their portion of the annual RVO requirements. The EPA, through consultation with the DOE and the USDA can grant them a full or partial waiver, or deny it outright within 90 days of submittal. The EPA granted significantly more of these waivers for 2016, 2017 and 2018 than they had in the past, totaling 790 mmg of waived requirements for the 2016 compliance year, 1.82 billion gallons for 2017 and 1.43 billion gallons for 2018. In doing so, the EPA effectively reduced the RFS II mandated volumes for those compliance years by those amounts respectively, and as a result, RIN values declined significantly.
The One-Pound Waiver that was extended in May 2019 to allow E15 to be sold year-round to all vehicles model year 2001 and newer is being challenged in an action filed in Federal District Court for the D.C. Circuit. However, the One-Pound Waiver remains in effect, and E15 is sold year-round in approximately 30 states.
Biofuels groups have filed a lawsuit in the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, challenging the 2019 RVO rule over the EPA’s failure to address small refinery exemptions in the rulemaking. This was the first RFS II rulemaking since the expanded use of the exemptions came to light; however, the EPA had declined to cap the number of waivers it grants, and until late 2019, had declined to alter how it accounts for the retroactive waivers in its annual volume calculations. The EPA has a statutory mandate to ensure the volume requirements are met, which are achieved by setting the percentage standards for obligated parties. The EPA’s recent approach accomplished the opposite. Even if all the obligated parties complied with their respective percentage obligations for 2019, the nation’s overall supply of renewable fuel would not meet the total volume requirements set by the EPA. This undermines Congressional intent to increase the consumption of renewable fuels in the domestic transportation fuel supply. Biofuels groups have argued the EPA must therefore adjust its percentage standard calculations to make up for past retroactive waivers and adjust the standards to account for any waivers it reasonably expects to grant in the future.
In 2017, the D.C. Circuit ruled in favor of biofuel groups against the EPA related to its decision to lower the 2016 volume requirements by 500 mmg. As a result, the Court remanded to the EPA to make up for the 500 mmg. Despite this, in the proposed 2020 RVO rulemaking released in July 2019, the EPA stated it does not intend to make up the 500 mmg as the court directed, citing potential burden on obligated parties. The EPA had indicated that it plans to address this court ordered remand in conjunction with the 2021 RVO rulemaking, however that rulemaking has been delayed indefinitely for political reasons.
In 2019, in a supplemental rulemaking to the 2020 RVO rule, the EPA changed their approach, and for the first time accounted for the gallons that they anticipate they will be waiving from the blending requirements due to small refinery exemptions. To accomplish this, they added in the trailing three year average of gallons the DOE recommended be waived, in effect raising the blending volumes across the board in anticipation of waiving the obligations in whole or in part for certain refineries that qualify for the exemptions. Though the EPA has often disregarded the recommendations of the DOE in years past, they stated in the rule their intent to adhere to these recommendations going forward, including granting partial waivers rather than an all or nothing approach. The EPA will be adjudicating the 2020 compliance year small refinery exemption applications in early 2021, but have indicated they will adhere to the DOE recommendations for the 2019 compliance year applications as well.
In January 2020, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit ruled on RFA et. al. vs. EPA in favor of biofuels interests, overturning EPA’s granting of refinery exemptions to three refineries on two separate grounds. The Court agreed that, under the Clean Air Act, refineries are eligible for SREs for a given RVO year only if such exemptions are extensions of exemptions granted in previous RVO years. In this case, the three refineries at issue did not qualify for SREs in the year prior to the year that EPA granted them. They were thus ineligible for additional SRE relief because there were no immediately prior SREs to extend. In addition, the Court agreed that the disproportionate economic hardship prong of SRE eligibility should be determined solely by reference to whether compliance with the RFS II creates such hardship, not whether compliance plus other issues create disproportionate economic hardship. The Court thus vacated EPA's grant of SREs for certain years and remanded the grants back to EPA. The refiners appealed for a rehearing which was denied. Two of the refiners appealed the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court and in January 2021, the Supreme Court announced they would hear the case. If the decision against the EPA is upheld by the Supreme Court, it is uncertain how the EPA will propose to remedy the situation.
In light of the 10th Circuit ruling, a number of refineries have applied for “gap year” SREs in an effort to establish a continuous string of relief and to ensure they are able to qualify for SREs going forward. A total of 64 gap year requests were filed with the EPA and reviewed by the DOE. In September 2020 the EPA announced that they were denying 54 of the gap year requests that had been scored and returned by DOE, regardless of how they had been scored. The EPA will be adjudicating the 2020 compliance year SRE applications in early 2021 and has indicated they will adhere to the DOE recommendations of the 2019 compliance year applications as well. Without a string of continuous SRE approvals, almost no small refinery would be eligible to apply for hardship relief in this manner, unless the Supreme Court overturns the 10th Circuit ruling, which we believe is unlikely.
In October 2019, the White House directed the USDA and EPA to move forward with rulemaking to expand access to higher blends of biofuels. This includes funding for infrastructure, labeling changes and allowing E15 to be sold through E10 infrastructure. The USDA rolled out the Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program in the summer of 2020, providing competitive grants to fuel terminals and retailers for installing equipment for dispensing higher blends of ethanol and biodiesel. The EPA had indicated it would move forward with notice of proposed rulemaking on E15 labeling reforms, but they have not as of this filing. In 2020, five Governors and 15 Republican Senators sent letters to the EPA requesting a general waiver from the RFS due to the drop in demand caused by COVID-19 travel restrictions. As of this filing the EPA had indicated only that they are watching the situation closely and reviewing the letters.
To respond to the COVID-19 health crisis and attempt to offset the subsequent economic damage, Congress passed multiple relief measures, most notably the CARES Act in March 2020, which created and funded multiple programs that have impacted our industry. The USDA was given additional resources for the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) and they are using those funds to provide direct payments to farmers, including corn farmers from whom our parent purchases most of its feedstock for ethanol production. Similar to the trade aid payments made by the USDA over the past two years, this cash injection for farmers could cause them to delay marketing decisions and increase the price our parent pays to purchase corn. The CARES Act also allowed for certain net operating loss carrybacks, which has allowed our parent to receive certain tax refunds. In December 2020, Congress passed and the former President signed into law an annual spending package coupled with another COVID relief bill which included additional funds for the Secretary of Agriculture to distribute to those impacted by the pandemic. The language of the bill specifically includes biofuels producers as eligible for some of this aid.
The CARES Act provided a tax exclusion on the shipment of undenatured ethanol for use in manufacturing hand sanitizer, a key ingredient of which is undenatured ethanol of specific grades. The FDA has also provided expanded guidance to allow for more denaturants to be used in ethanol intended for hand sanitizer production, and has expanded the grades of ethanol allowed for the duration of the public health crisis.
Government actions abroad can significantly impact the demand for U.S. ethanol. In September 2017, China’s National Development and Reform Commission, the National Energy Agency and 15 other state departments issued a joint plan to expand the use and production of biofuels containing up to 10% ethanol by 2020. China, the number three importer of U.S. ethanol in 2016, imported negligible volumes during 2018 and 2019 due to a 30% tariff on U.S. ethanol, which increased to 70% in early 2018. There is no assurance that China’s joint plan to expand blending to 10% will be carried to fruition, nor that it will lead to increased imports of U.S. ethanol in the near term. Ethanol is included as an agricultural commodity under the “Phase I” agreement with China, wherein they are to purchase upwards of $40 billion in agricultural commodities from the U.S. in both 2020 and 2021. In 2020, there were few meaningful purchases of U.S. ethanol by China.
In Brazil, the Secretary of Foreign Trade had issued a tariff rate quota which expired in December of 2020. Exports to Brazil were on pace for 120 mmg in 2020. All U.S. ethanol gallons now face a 20% tariff into Brazil. Our parent’s exports also face tariffs, rate quotas, countervailing duties, and other hurdles in the European Union, India, Peru, Columbia and elsewhere, which limits the ability to compete in some markets. We believe some countries are using the COVID-19 crisis as justification for raising duties on imports of U.S. ethanol, or blocking imports entirely.
In June 2017, the Energy Regulatory Commission of Mexico (CRE) approved the use of 10% ethanol blends, which was challenged by multiple lawsuits, of which several were dismissed. The remaining four cases follow one of two tracks: 1) to determine the constitutionality of the CRE regulation, or 2) to determine the benefits, or lack thereof, of introducing E10 to Mexico. An injunction was granted in October 2017, preventing the blending and selling of E10, but was overturned by a higher court in June 2018 making it legal to blend and sell E10 by PEMEX throughout Mexico except for its three largest metropolitan areas. On January 15, 2020, the Mexican Supreme Court ruled that the expedited process for the CRE regulation was unconstitutional, and that after a 180 day period the maximum ethanol blend allowed in the country would revert to 5.8%. There is an effort underway to go through the full regulatory process to allow for 10% blends countrywide, including in the three major metropolitan areas. The 180 day window was extended due to COVID-19, and the new deadline is March 20, 2021.
In January 2020, the updated North American Free Trade Agreement, known as the United States Mexico Canada Agreement or USMCA was signed. The USMCA went into effect on July 1, 2020, and maintains the duty free access of U.S. agricultural commodities, including ethanol, into Canada and Mexico. According to the Department of Commerce, exports to Canada were 303.5 mmg and exports to Mexico were 61.5 mmg through November 30, 2020.
Environmental and Other Regulation
Our operations are subject to environmental regulations, including those that govern the handling and release of ethanol, crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbon materials. Compliance with existing and anticipated environmental laws and regulations may increase our overall cost of doing business, including capital costs to construct, maintain, operate, and upgrade equipment and facilities. Our business may also be impacted by government policies, such as tariffs, duties, subsidies, import and export restrictions and outright embargos. Our parent employs maintenance and operations personnel at each of its facilities, which are regulated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
The U.S. ethanol industry relies heavily on tank cars to deliver its product to market. In 2015, the DOT finalized the Enhanced Tank Car Standard and Operational Controls for High-Hazard and Flammable Trains, or DOT specification 117, which established a schedule to retrofit or replace older tank cars that carry crude oil and ethanol, braking standards intended to reduce the severity of accidents and new operational protocols. The deadline for compliance with DOT specification 117 is May 1, 2023. The rule may increase our lease costs for railcars over the long term, which will in turn result in an increase in the fees we charge for railcar capacity. Additionally, existing railcars may be out of service for a period of time while upgrades are made, tightening supply in an industry that is highly dependent on railcars to transport product. We intend to strategically manage our leased railcar fleet to comply with the new regulations and have commenced transition of our fleet to DOT 117 compliant railcars. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 50% of our railcar fleet was DOT 117 compliant. We anticipate that an additional 20% of our railcar fleet will be DOT 117 compliant by the end of 2021, and that our entire fleet will be fully compliant by 2023.
Our Parent’s Production Levels
Our parent’s operating margins are sensitive to commodity price fluctuations, particularly for corn, ethanol, corn oil, distillers grains and natural gas, which are impacted by factors that are outside of its control, including weather conditions, corn yield, changes in domestic and global ethanol supply and demand, government programs and policies and the price of crude oil, gasoline and substitute fuels. Our parent uses various financial instruments to manage and reduce its exposure to price variability.
Our parent’s operating margins influence its production levels, which in turn affects the volume of ethanol we store, throughput and transport. During periods of commodity price variability or compressed margins, our parent may slow down or temporarily idle operations at certain ethanol plants. Slowing production increases the ethanol yield per bushel of corn, optimizing cash flow in lower margin environments. In 2020, our parent’s ethanol facilities maintained an average utilization rate of approximately 71% of capacity, compared with 76% of capacity for the prior year. The reduction in the average utilization rate was primarily due to continued poor margins driven in part by a reduction in motor fuel demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our parent’s quarterly actual production, daily average production capacity and utilization are highlighted in the following chart:
Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Our Parent
Our parent guarantees Green Plains Trade’s obligations under our storage and throughput agreement and rail transportation service agreements, which account for a substantial portion of our revenues. Any change in our parent’s business or financial strategy, or event that negatively impacts its financial condition, results of operations or cash flows may materially and adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. For additional information, please refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Availability of Railcars
The long-term growth of our business depends on the availability of railcars, which we currently lease, to transport ethanol and other fuels on reasonable terms. Railcars may become unavailable due to increased demand, maintenance or other logistical constraints. Railcar shortages caused by increased demand for rail transportation or changes in regulatory standards that apply to railcars could negatively impact our business and our ability to grow.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Our management uses a variety of GAAP and non-GAAP financial and operating metrics, including among others, throughput volume and capacity, operations and maintenance expense, adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow. Management views each of these metrics as important factors to evaluate our operating results and measure profitability.
Throughput Volume and Capacity
Our revenues are dependent on the volume of ethanol and other fuels we store, throughput, or transport at our ethanol storage and fuel terminal facilities, and the volumetric capacity that is used to transport ethanol and other fuels by railcars. These volumes are affected by our parent’s operating margins at its ethanol production plants as well as the overall supply and demand for ethanol and other fuels in markets served directly or indirectly by our assets.
Green Plains Trade is obligated to meet minimum volume or take-or-pay capacity commitments under our commercial agreements. Our results of operations may be impacted by our parent’s use of our assets in excess of its minimum volume commitments, and our ability to capture incremental volumes or capacity from Green Plains Trade or third parties, retain Green Plains Trade as a customer, enter into contracts with new customers and increase volume commitments.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses
Our management seeks to maximize the profitability of our operations by effectively managing operations and maintenance expenses. Our expenses are relatively stable across a broad range of storage, throughput and transportation volumes and usage, but can fluctuate from period to period depending on maintenance activities and growth. We manage our expenses by scheduling maintenance activities over time to avoid significant variability in our cash flows.
Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization excluding the amortization of right-of-use assets and debt issuance costs, plus adjustments for transaction costs related to acquisitions or financing transactions, unit-based compensation expense, net gains or losses on asset sales, and our proportional share of EBITDA adjustments of our equity method investee.
Distributable cash flow is defined as adjusted EBITDA less interest paid or payable, income taxes paid or payable, maintenance capital expenditures, which are defined under our partnership agreement as cash expenditures (including expenditures for the construction or development of new capital assets or the replacement, improvement or expansion of existing capital assets) made to maintain our operating capacity or operating income, and our proportional share of distributable cash flow adjustments of our equity method investee.
We believe the presentation of adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow are supplemental financial measures that we use to assess our financial performance. However, these presentations are not made in accordance with GAAP. The GAAP measure most directly comparable with adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow is net income. Since adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions of adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow may not be comparable with similarly titled measures of other companies, diminishing its utility. Adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP to analyze our results. Refer to Item 6 - Selected Financial Data for reconciliations of net income to adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow.
Components of Revenues and Expenses
Revenues. Our revenues consist primarily of fee-based commercial agreements for receiving, storing, transferring and transporting ethanol and other fuels.
For more information about these charges and the services covered by these agreements, please refer to Note 15 - Related Party Transactions to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses. Our operations and maintenance expenses consist primarily of lease expenses related to our transportation assets, labor expenses, outside contractor expenses, insurance premiums, repairs and maintenance expenses and utility costs. These expenses also include fees for certain management, maintenance and operational services to support our facilities, trucks and leased railcar fleet allocated by our parent under our operational services and secondment agreement.
General and Administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of allocated employee salaries, incentives and benefits, office expenses, professional fees for accounting, legal, and consulting services, and other costs allocated by our parent. Our general and administrative expenses include direct monthly charges for the management of our assets and certain expenses allocated by our parent under our omnibus agreement for general corporate services, such as treasury, accounting, human resources and legal services. These expenses are charged or allocated to us based on the nature of the expense and our proportionate share of employee time or capital expenditures.
For more information about fees we reimburse our parent for services received, please read Note 15 - Related Party Transactions to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Other Income (Expense). Other income (expense) includes interest earned, interest expense and other non-operating items.
Income (Loss) from Equity Method Investee. Income (loss) from equity method investee consists of the income or loss associated with our 50% ownership in the NLR joint venture.
For the commercial agreements, operational services and secondment agreement and the omnibus agreement in their entirety and any subsequent amendments required to be filed, please refer to Item 15 - Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
Results of Operations
Comparability of our Financial Results
The following summarizes certain events that affect the comparability of our operating results over the course of the past three years:
On November 15, 2018, our parent closed on the sale of three of its ethanol plants located in Bluffton, Indiana, Lakota, Iowa, and Riga, Michigan to Valero. Correspondingly, the storage assets located adjacent to such plants were sold to our parent for $120.9 million. As consideration, we received from our parent 8.7 million Green Plains units and a portion of the general partner interest equating to 0.2 million equivalent limited partner units to maintain the general partner’s 2% interest. These units were retired upon receipt. In addition, we also received cash consideration of $2.7 million from Valero for the assignment of certain railcar operating leases.
On November 15, 2018, our parent announced the permanent closure of its ethanol plant located in Hopewell, Virginia. The closure did not affect our quarterly storage and throughput minimum volume commitment with Green Plains Trade.
On December 28, 2020, our parent closed on the sale of its ethanol plant located in Hereford, Texas to Hereford Ethanol Partners, L.P. Correspondingly, the storage assets located adjacent to the Hereford plant were sold to our parent for $10.0 million, along with the transfer of associated railcar operating leases. Since this transaction closed on December 28, 2020, the impact to the comparability of our operating results was not material.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020.
Selected Financial Information and Operating Data
The following table reflects selected financial information (in thousands):
The following table reflects selected operating data (in mmg, except railcar capacity billed):
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Consolidated revenues increased $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. Storage and throughput services revenue increased $1.5 million due to an increase in the rate per gallon charged to Green Plains Trade beginning on July 1, 2020. Trucking and other revenue increased $0.4 million primarily due to an increase in volumes transported for Green Plains Trade. Railcar transportation services revenue increased $0.2 million primarily due to an increase in average volumetric capacity provided and the average capacity fee charged of $0.7 million, offset by a decrease in railcar sublease revenue of $0.5 million. Terminal services revenue decreased $1.1 million as a result of a reduction in fees associated with minimum volume commitments.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses
Operations and maintenance expenses increased $0.5 million in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to increases in railcar lease expense of $0.3 million and repair and maintenance expense of $0.2 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $0.2 million in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to an increase in insurance expense of $0.3 million, partially offset by a reduction in expenses allocated by our parent under the secondment agreement of $0.1 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity include cash generated from operating activities and borrowings under our credit facility. We expect operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs. We consider opportunities to repay or refinance our debt, depending on market conditions, as part of our normal course of doing business. Our ability to meet our debt service obligations and other capital requirements depends on our future operating performance, which is subject to general economic, financial, business, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other conditions, many of which are beyond our control. We plan to utilize a combination of operating cash, refinancing and other strategic actions, to repay debt obligations as they come due.
Recently, we announced the sale to our parent of the Ord, Nebraska ethanol storage assets, along with the transfer of associated railcar operating leases, for $27.0 million. This transaction is anticipated to close within 45 days, and the proceeds will be used to repay our debt.
Subordinated Unit Conversion
The requirements under the partnership agreement for the conversion of all of the outstanding subordinated units into common units were satisfied upon the payment of the distribution with respect to the quarter ended June 30, 2018. Accordingly, the subordination period ended on August 13, 2018, the first business day after the date of the distribution payment, and all of the 15,889,642 outstanding subordinated units were converted into common units on a one-for-one basis. The conversion of the subordinated units did not impact the amount of cash distributions paid or the total number of units outstanding.
Retirement of Units
On November 15, 2018, the storage assets associated with the ethanol plants located in Bluffton, Indiana, Lakota, Iowa, and Riga, Michigan were sold to our parent for $120.9 million. As consideration, we received from our parent 8,692,736 Green Plains units and a portion of the general partner interest equating to 177,403 equivalent limited partner units to maintain the general partner’s 2% interest.
Distributions to Unitholders
Quarterly distributions are made from available cash within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter, assuming we have available cash, up to an aggregate amount not to exceed $0.12 per outstanding unit, subject to the terms of the credit agreement which matures December 31, 2021. Available cash generally means all cash and cash equivalents on hand at the end of that quarter less cash reserves established by our general partner plus all or any portion of the cash on hand resulting from working capital borrowings made subsequent to the end of that quarter. For more information, see Note 11 - Partners’ Deficit to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
The table below summarizes the quarterly cash distributions for the periods presented:
Cash Flows
On December 31, 2020, we had $2.5 million of cash and cash equivalents and $5.0 million available under the revolving portion of our credit facility.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $47.8 million in 2020 compared with $46.7 million in 2019. Increased cash flows from operating activities resulted primarily from the distribution received from NLR, partially offset by changes in net working capital. Net cash provided by investing activities increased $9.8 million in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily as a result of the Hereford disposition in the fourth quarter of 2020. Net cash used in financing activities was $55.4 million in 2020, compared with $47.0 million in 2019. This increase was due to principal payments on our term loan and the payment of loan fees, partially offset by a decrease in our quarterly distributions paid.
Capital Resources
We incurred capital expenditures of $0.2 million in 2020 for various maintenance projects at our storage facilities. We do not anticipate significant capital spending for 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received a distribution of $1.0 million from our NLR joint venture. We did not make any equity method investee contributions in 2020 and we do not anticipate making significant equity contributions to NLR in 2021. We expect to receive future distributions from NLR as excess cash becomes available.
Credit Facility
Green Plains Operating Company has a credit facility to fund working capital, capital expenditures and other general partnership purposes. The credit facility was amended on June 4, 2020, decreasing the size of the facility from $200.0 million to $135.0 million. The amended credit facility includes a $130.0 million term loan and a $5.0 million revolving credit facility, maturing on December 31, 2021. Payments of $30.0 million were made on the term loan principal during the year ended December 31, 2020, including $10.0 million related to the sale of the storage assets located adjacent to the Hereford, Texas ethanol plant. As of December 31, 2020, no additional prepayments on the term loan were required or paid. Monthly principal payments of $2.5 million are required through April 15, 2021, with a step up to monthly payments of $3.2 million beginning May 15, 2021 through maturity. As of December 31, 2020, the term loan had a balance of $100.0 million and an interest rate of 6.00%, and there were no outstanding swing line loans.
In certain situations we are required to make prepayments on the outstanding principal balance on the credit facility. If at any time subsequent to July 15, 2020, our cash balance exceeds $2.5 million for more than five consecutive business days, prepayments of outstanding principal are required in an amount equal to the excess cash. We are also required to prepay outstanding principal on the credit facility with 100% of net cash proceeds from any asset disposition or recovery event. Any prepayments on the term loan are applied to the remaining principal balance in inverse order of maturity, including the final payment.
The credit facility, which is supported by a group of financial institutions, will mature on December 31, 2021 unless extended by agreement of the lenders or replaced by another funding source. While we have not yet renegotiated the credit facility or secured additional funding necessary to repay the loan, we believe it is probable that we will source appropriate funding given our consistent and stable fee-based cash flows, ongoing profitability, low leverage and history of obtaining financing on reasonable commercial terms. In the unlikely scenario that we are unable to refinance the debt with the lenders prior to its maturity, we will consider other financing sources, including but not limited to, the restructuring or issuance of new debt with a different lending group, the issuance of additional common units, other strategic actions to extinguish the debt, or support from our parent.
We use LIBOR as a reference rate for our credit facility. LIBOR is set to be phased out at the end of 2021. It is unclear if LIBOR will cease to exist at that time or if new methods of calculating LIBOR will be established such that it continues to exist after 2021. We may need to amend our credit facility to determine the interest rate to replace LIBOR with the new standard that is established. The potential effect of any such event on interest expense cannot yet be determined.
For more information related to our debt, see Note 8 - Debt to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, were as follows (in thousands):
(1) Includes the current portion of long-term debt and excludes the effect of any debt discounts.
(2) Interest amounts are calculated over the terms of the loans using current interest rates, assuming scheduled principal and interest amounts are paid pursuant to the debt agreements. Includes administrative and/or commitment fees on debt obligations.
(3) Operating lease costs are primarily for property and railcar leases and exclude leases not yet commenced with undiscounted future lease payments of approximately $6.5 million.
(4) Service agreements are related to minimum commitments on railcar unloading contracts at our fuel terminals.
(5) Includes asset retirement obligations to return property and equipment to its original condition at the termination of lease agreements.
Effects of Inflation
Inflation in the United States has been relatively low in recent years; therefore, we do not expect it to have a material impact on our future results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires that we use estimates that affect the reported assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures for contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on experience and assumptions we believe are proper and reasonable. While we regularly evaluate the appropriateness of these estimates, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. The following accounting policies, in particular, may be impacted by judgments, assumptions and estimates used to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied, which generally occurs with the completion of services or the transfer of control of products to the customer or another specified third party. For contracts with customers in which a take-or-pay commitment exists, any minimum volume deficiency charges are recognized as revenue in the period incurred and are not allowed to be credited towards excess volumes in future periods.
We generate a substantial portion of our revenues under fee-based commercial agreements with Green Plains Trade. Operating lease revenue related to minimum volume commitments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Under the terms of the storage and throughput agreement with Green Plains Trade, to the extent shortfalls associated with minimum volume commitments in the previous four quarters continue to exist, volumes in excess of the minimum volume commitment are applied to those shortfalls. Remaining excess volumes generating operating lease revenue are recognized as incurred.
Please refer to Note 3 - Revenue to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Goodwill
Our long-lived assets consist of property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets. We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We measure recoverability by comparing the carrying amount of the asset with the estimated undiscounted future cash flows the asset is expected generate. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, we record an impairment charge for the amount in excess of the fair value. No impairment charges were recorded for the periods presented.
Our goodwill consists of amounts related to our predecessor’s acquisition of its fuel terminal and distribution business. We review goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment at least annually, as of October 1, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred.
We estimate the amount and timing of projected cash flows that will be generated by an asset over an extended period of time when we review our long-lived assets and goodwill. Circumstances that may indicate impairment include a decline in future projected cash flows, a decision to suspend plant operations for an extended period of time, sustained decline in our market capitalization or market prices for similar assets or businesses, or a significant adverse change in legal or regulatory matters or business climate. Significant management judgment is required to determine the fair value of our long-lived assets and goodwill and measure impairment, which includes projected cash flows. Fair value is determined by using various valuation techniques, including discounted cash flow models, sales of comparable properties and third-party independent appraisals. Changes in estimated fair value could result in an impairment of the asset.
During the first half of 2020, a decline in our stock price resulted in a decrease in our market capitalization. As such, we determined a triggering event had occurred that required an interim impairment assessment for the BlendStar reporting unit as of both March 31, 2020 and June 30, 2020. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies for goodwill impairment testing were employed and include market capitalization, prospective financial information, growth rates, discount rates, inflationary factors, and cost of capital. Based on our quantitative evaluations, we determined that the fair value of the BlendStar reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value, and that the goodwill assigned to the BlendStar reporting unit was not impaired. During the three months ended September 30, 2020, we did not identify any triggering events, and as such, no impairment assessment was deemed necessary.
We performed the annual goodwill assessment as of October 1, 2020 using a qualitative assessment, which resulted in no goodwill impairment. Please refer to Note 7 - Goodwill to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the amended guidance in ASC 842, Leases, and all related amendments, and applied it to all leases using the optional transition method which requires the amended guidance to be applied at the date of adoption. The standard does not require the guidance to be applied to the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements. As such, comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
We lease certain facilities, parcels of land, and railcars. Our leases are accounted for as operating leases, with lease expense recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The term of the lease may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise one of those options. For leases with initial terms greater than 12 months, we record operating lease right-of-use assets and corresponding operating lease liabilities. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet.
Operating lease right-of-use assets represent our right to control an underlying asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. These assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on information available at commencement date to determine the present value of future payments.
We record operating lease revenue as part of our operating lease agreements for storage and throughput services, rail transportation services, and certain terminal services. In addition, we may sublease certain of our railcars to third parties on a short-term basis. These subleases are classified as operating leases, with the associated sublease revenue recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Please refer to Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements for further details on operating lease expense and revenue. Please refer to Note 3 - Revenue to the consolidated financial statements for further details on the operating lease agreements in which we are a lessor.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information related to recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements in this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.