Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
General
The following discussion and analysis includes information management believes is relevant to understand and assess our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. This section should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, accompanying notes and the risk factors contained in this report.
Overview
Green Plains is an Iowa corporation, founded in June 2004 as a producer of low carbon fuels and has grown to be one of the leading corn processors in the world. We continue the transition from a commodity-processing business to a value-add agricultural technology company focusing on creating diverse, non-cyclical, higher margin products. In addition, we are currently undergoing a number of project initiatives to improve margins. Through our Project 24 initiative, we anticipate reductions in operating expense per gallon across our non-ICM plants and with our high-protein initiative, we expect to produce various Ultra-High Protein feed ingredients further increasing margins per gallon.
Our first Ultra-High Protein installation was completed at our Shenandoah plant during the first quarter of 2020 with shipments of dried product beginning in April 2020. Installation at our Wood River plant began during the third quarter 2020 with shipments expected to begin in the third quarter of 2021. We anticipate that additional locations will be completed over the course of the next several years.
We have also upgraded our York facility to include USP grade alcohol capabilities and it will be further upgraded to GNS by adding additional distillation and processing capabilities to serve other high-value markets, including the beverage alcohol market and will continue to produce USP grade alcohol during construction. The GNS upgrade is expected to be completed during the second quarter of 2021. We expect to complete the CST production facility at York in the first quarter of 2021, which will allow for the production of both food and industrial grade dextrose. We anticipate modifying one or more biorefineries to CST production facilities to meet anticipated future customer demands.
We recently completed the purchase of a majority interest in Fluid Quip Technologies, LLC. The acquisition capitalizes on the core strengths of each company to develop and implement proven, value-added agriculture, food and industrial biotechnology systems and rapidly expand installation and production of Ultra-High Protein across Green Plains facilities, as well as offer these technologies to partnering biofuel facilities.
Additionally, we have taken advantage of opportunities to divest certain assets in recent years. We are focused on generating stable operating margins through our business segments and risk management strategy. We own and operate assets throughout the ethanol value chain: upstream, with grain handling and storage; through our ethanol production facilities; and downstream, with marketing and distribution services to mitigate commodity price volatility. Our other businesses leverage our supply chain, production platform and expertise.
Our profitability is highly dependent on commodity prices, particularly for ethanol, distillers grains, corn oil, corn, and natural gas. Since market price fluctuations of these commodities are not always correlated, our operations may be unprofitable at times. We use a variety of risk management tools and hedging strategies to monitor price risk exposure at our ethanol plants and lock in favorable margins or reduce production when margins are compressed.
More information about our business, properties and strategy can be found under Item 1 - Business and a description of our risk factors can be found under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Industry Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
U.S. Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the EIA, domestic ethanol production averaged 0.91 million barrels per day in 2020, which was 12% lower than the 1.03 million barrels per day in 2019. Refiner and blender input volume decreased 13% to 798 thousand barrels per day for 2020, compared with 921 thousand barrels per day in 2019. Gasoline demand decreased 1.2 million barrels per day, or 13% in 2020. U.S. domestic ethanol ending stocks increased by approximately 2.5 million barrels, or 12%, year over year to 23.5 million barrels. As of December 31, 2020, according to Prime the Pump, there were approximately 2,300 retail stations selling E15 in 30 states, up from 2,080 at the beginning of the year, as well as 203 pipeline terminal locations now offering E15 to wholesale customers.
Global Ethanol Supply and Demand
According to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service, domestic ethanol exports through November 30, 2020 were approximately 1.22 bgy, down 7.6% from 1.32 bgy for the same period of 2019. Canada was the largest export destination for U.S. ethanol accounting for 25% of domestic ethanol export volume. Brazil, India, and South Korea accounted for 16%, 15%, and 8%, respectively, of U.S. ethanol exports. We currently estimate that net ethanol exports will range from 1.3 to 1.5 billion gallons in 2021, excluding any significant exports to China, based on historical demand from a variety of countries and certain countries who seek to improve their air quality and eliminate MTBE from their own fuel supplies.
On April 1, 2018, China announced it would add an additional 15% tariff to the existing 30% tariff it had earlier imposed on ethanol imports from the United States and Brazil. China later raised the tariff further to 70% as the trade war escalated. In January 2020, China and the United States struck a “Phase I” trade agreement, which included commitments on agricultural commodity purchases. Ethanol, corn and distillers grains were included as potential purchases in the agreement. China has been purchasing large quantities of corn, which has raised domestic prices of this feedstock for our ethanol production process. In addition, in October 2020 it was announced that China had purchased a shipment of U.S. ethanol for the first time since March 2018.
The cost to produce the equivalent amount of starch found in sugar from $3.50-per-bushel corn is 7 cents per pound. The average price of sugar was approximately 12.9 cents per pound during 2020.
Year-to-date U.S. distillers grains exports through November 30, 2020, were 10.1 million metric tons, or 1% higher than the same period last year, according to the USDA Foreign Agriculture Service. Mexico, Vietnam, South Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, and Turkey accounted for approximately 62.5% of total U.S. distillers export volumes.
Legislation and Regulation
We are sensitive to government programs and policies that affect the supply and demand for ethanol and other fuels, which in turn may impact the volume of ethanol and other fuels we handle. Over the past few years, various bills and amendments have been proposed in the House and Senate which would eliminate the RFS II entirely, eliminate the corn based ethanol portion of the mandate, and make it more difficult to sell fuel blends with higher levels of ethanol. We believe it is unlikely that any of these bills will become law in the current Congress. In addition, the manner in which the EPA administers the RFS II and related regulations can have a significant impact on the actual amount of ethanol blended into the domestic fuel supply.
Federal mandates and state-level clean fuel programs supporting the use of renewable fuels are a significant driver of ethanol demand in the U.S. Ethanol policies are influenced by concerns for the environment, diversifying our fuel supply, and reducing the country’s dependence on foreign oil. Consumer acceptance of flex-fuel vehicles and higher ethanol blends of ethanol in non-flex-fuel vehicles may be necessary before ethanol can achieve further growth in U.S. market share. In addition, expansion of clean fuel programs in other states, or a national low carbon fuel standard could increase the demand for ethanol, depending on how it is structured.
Congress first enacted CAFE in 1975 to reduce energy consumption by increasing the fuel economy of cars and light trucks. Flexible-fuel vehicles (FFVs), which are designed to run on a mixture of fuels, including higher blends of ethanol such as E85, receive preferential treatment in the form of CAFE credits. There are approximately 21 million FFVs on the road in the U.S. today, 16 million of which are light duty trucks. FFV credits have been decreasing since 2014 and were completely phased out in 2020. Absent CAFE preferences, auto manufacturers may not be willing to build flexible-fuel vehicles, which has the potential to slow the growth of E85 markets. However, California’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard program (LCFS) has driven growth in E85 usage, and other state/regional LCFS programs have the potential to do the same.
The RFS II sets a floor for ethanol usage in the United States. When the RFS II was established in 2010, the required volume of “conventional” or corn-based ethanol to be blended with gasoline was to increase each year until it reached 15.0 billion gallons in 2015, which left the EPA to address existing limitations in both supply and demand. The EPA has not yet released a draft RVO rule for the 2021 volumes, despite the fact they typically release a draft mid-year and finalize the rule by November 30 each year. It is unclear when they will release the RVO for 2021.
According to the RFS II, if mandatory renewable fuel volumes are reduced by at least 20% for two consecutive years, the EPA is required to modify, or reset, statutory volumes through 2022 - the year through which the statutorily prescribed volumes run. While conventional ethanol maintained 15 billion gallons, 2019 was the second consecutive year that the total proposed RVO was more than 20% below the statutory volumes levels. Thus, the EPA was expected to initiate a reset
rulemaking, and modify statutory volumes through 2022, and do so based on the same factors they are to use in setting the RVOs post-2022. These factors include environmental impact, domestic energy security, expected production, infrastructure impact, consumer costs, job creation, price of agricultural commodities, food prices, and rural economic development. However, in late 2019, the EPA announced it would not be moving forward with a reset rulemaking in 2020. It is unclear when or if they will propose a reset rulemaking.
Under the RFS, RINs and SREs are important tools impacting supply and demand. The EPA assigns individual refiners, blenders, and importers the volume of renewable fuels they are obligated to use based on their percentage of total domestic transportation fuel sales. Obligated parties use RINs to show compliance with the RFS II mandated volumes. Ethanol producers assign RINs to renewable fuels and the RINs are detached when the renewable fuel is blended with transportation fuel domestically. Market participants can trade the detached RINs in the open market. The market price of detached RINs affects the price of ethanol in certain markets and can influence purchasing decisions by obligated parties. As it relates to SREs, a small refinery is defined as one that processes fewer than 75,000 barrels of petroleum per day. Small refineries can petition the EPA for a SRE which, if approved, waives their portion of the annual RVO requirements. The EPA, through consultation with the DOE and the USDA can grant them a full or partial waiver, or deny it outright within 90 days of submittal. The EPA granted significantly more of these waivers for 2016, 2017 and 2018 than they had in the past, totaling 790 mmg of waived requirements for the 2016 compliance year, 1.82 billion gallons for 2017 and 1.43 billion gallons for 2018. In doing so, the EPA effectively reduced the RFS II mandated volumes for those compliance years by those amounts respectively, and as a result, RIN values declined significantly.
The One-Pound Waiver that was extended in May 2019 to allow E15 to be sold year-round to all vehicles model year 2001 and newer is being challenged in an action filed in Federal District Court for the D.C. Circuit. However, the One-Pound Waiver remains in effect, and E15 is sold year-round in approximately 30 states.
Biofuels groups have filed a lawsuit in the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, challenging the 2019 RVO rule over the EPA’s failure to address small refinery exemptions in the rulemaking. This was the first RFS II rulemaking since the expanded use of the exemptions came to light; however, the EPA had declined to cap the number of waivers it grants, and until late 2019, had declined to alter how it accounts for the retroactive waivers in its annual volume calculations. The EPA has a statutory mandate to ensure the volume requirements are met, which are achieved by setting the percentage standards for obligated parties. The EPA’s recent approach accomplished the opposite. Even if all the obligated parties complied with their respective percentage obligations for 2019, the nation’s overall supply of renewable fuel would not meet the total volume requirements set by the EPA. This undermines Congressional intent to increase the consumption of renewable fuels in the domestic transportation fuel supply. Biofuels groups have argued the EPA must therefore adjust its percentage standard calculations to make up for past retroactive waivers and adjust the standards to account for any waivers it reasonably expects to grant in the future.
In 2017, the D.C. Circuit ruled in favor of biofuel groups against the EPA related to its decision to lower the 2016 volume requirements by 500 mmg. As a result, the Court remanded to the EPA to make up for the 500 mmg. Despite this, in the proposed 2020 RVO rulemaking released in July 2019, the EPA stated it does not intend to make up the 500 mmg as the court directed, citing potential burden on obligated parties. The EPA had indicated that it plans to address this court ordered remand in conjunction with the 2021 RVO rulemaking, however that rulemaking has been delayed indefinitely for political reasons.
In 2019, in a supplemental rulemaking to the 2020 RVO rule, the EPA changed their approach, and for the first time accounted for the gallons that they anticipate they will be waiving from the blending requirements due to small refinery exemptions. To accomplish this, they added in the trailing three year average of gallons the DOE recommended be waived, in effect raising the blending volumes across the board in anticipation of waiving the obligations in whole or in part for certain refineries that qualify for the exemptions. Though the EPA has often disregarded the recommendations of the DOE in years past, they stated in the rule their intent to adhere to these recommendations going forward, including granting partial waivers rather than an all or nothing approach. The EPA will be adjudicating the 2020 compliance year small refinery exemption applications in early 2021, but have indicated they will adhere to the DOE recommendations for the 2019 compliance year applications as well.
In January 2020, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit ruled on RFA et. al. vs. EPA in favor of biofuels interests, overturning EPA’s granting of refinery exemptions to three refineries on two separate grounds. The Court agreed that, under the Clean Air Act, refineries are eligible for SREs for a given RVO year only if such exemptions are extensions of exemptions granted in previous RVO years. In this case, the three refineries at issue did not qualify for SREs in the year prior to the year that EPA granted them. They were thus ineligible for additional SRE relief because there were no immediately prior SREs to extend. In addition, the Court agreed that the disproportionate economic hardship prong of SRE eligibility should be determined solely by reference to whether compliance with the RFS II creates such hardship, not whether
compliance plus other issues create disproportionate economic hardship. The Court thus vacated EPA's grant of SREs for certain years and remanded the grants back to EPA. The refiners appealed for a rehearing which was denied. Two of the refiners appealed the decision to the U.S. Supreme Court and in January 2021, the Supreme Court announced they would hear the case. If the decision against the EPA is upheld by the Supreme Court, it is uncertain how the EPA will propose to remedy the situation.
In light of the 10th Circuit ruling, a number of refineries have applied for “gap year” SREs in an effort to establish a continuous string of relief and to ensure they are able to qualify for SREs going forward. A total of 64 gap year requests were filed with the EPA and reviewed by the DOE. In September 2020 the EPA announced that they were denying 54 of the gap year requests that had been scored and returned by DOE, regardless of how they had been scored. Without a string of continuous SRE approvals, almost no small refinery would be eligible to apply for hardship relief in this manner, unless the Supreme Court overturns the 10th Circuit ruling, which we believe is unlikely.
In October 2019, the White House directed the USDA and EPA to move forward with rulemaking to expand access to higher blends of biofuels. This includes funding for infrastructure, labeling changes and allowing E15 to be sold through E10 infrastructure. The USDA rolled out the Higher Blend Infrastructure Incentive Program in the summer of 2020, providing competitive grants to fuel terminals and retailers for installing equipment for dispensing higher blends of ethanol and biodiesel. The EPA had indicated it would move forward with notice of proposed rulemaking on E15 labeling reforms, but they have not as of this filing. In 2020, five Governors and 15 Republican Senators sent letters to the EPA requesting a general waiver from the RFS due to the drop in demand caused by COVID-19 travel restrictions. As of this filing the EPA had indicated only that they are watching the situation closely and reviewing the letters.
To respond to the COVID-19 health crisis and attempt to offset the subsequent economic damage, Congress passed multiple relief measures, most notably the CARES Act in March 2020, which created and funded multiple programs that have impacted our industry. The USDA was given additional resources for the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) and they are using those funds to provide direct payments to farmers, including corn farmers from whom we purchase most of our feedstock for ethanol production. Similar to the trade aid payments made by the USDA over the past two years, this cash injection for farmers could cause them to delay marketing decisions and increase the price we have to pay to purchase corn. The CARES Act also allowed for certain net operating loss carrybacks, which has allowed us to receive certain tax refunds. In December 2020, Congress passed and the President signed into law an annual spending package coupled with another COVID relief bill which included additional funds for the Secretary of Agriculture to distribute to those impacted by the pandemic. The language of the bill specifically includes biofuels producers as eligible for some of this aid.
The CARES Act provided a tax exclusion on the shipment of undenatured ethanol for use in manufacturing hand sanitizer, a key ingredient of which is undenatured ethanol of specific grades. The FDA has also provided expanded guidance to allow for more denaturants to be used in ethanol intended for hand sanitizer production, and has expanded the grades of ethanol allowed for the duration of the public health crisis.
Government actions abroad can significantly impact the demand for U.S. ethanol. In September 2017, China’s National Development and Reform Commission, the National Energy Agency and 15 other state departments issued a joint plan to expand the use and production of biofuels containing up to 10% ethanol by 2020. China, the number three importer of U.S. ethanol in 2016, imported negligible volumes during 2018 and 2019 due to a 30% tariff on U.S. ethanol, which increased to 70% in early 2018. There is no assurance that China’s joint plan to expand blending to 10% will be carried to fruition, nor that it will lead to increased imports of U.S. ethanol in the near term. Ethanol is included as an agricultural commodity under the “Phase I” agreement with China, wherein they are to purchase upwards of $40 billion in agricultural commodities from the U.S. in both 2020 and 2021. In 2020, there were few meaningful purchases of U.S. ethanol by China.
In Brazil, the Secretary of Foreign Trade had issued a tariff rate quota which expired in December of 2020. Exports to Brazil were on pace for 120 mmg in 2020. All U.S. ethanol gallons now face a 20% tariff into Brazil. Our exports also face tariffs, rate quotas, countervailing duties, and other hurdles in the European Union, India, Peru, Columbia and elsewhere, which limits the ability to compete in some markets. We believe some countries are using the COVID-19 crisis as justification for raising duties on imports of U.S. ethanol, or blocking our imports entirely.
In June 2017, the Energy Regulatory Commission of Mexico (CRE) approved the use of 10% ethanol blends, which was challenged by multiple lawsuits, of which several were dismissed. The remaining four cases follow one of two tracks: 1) to determine the constitutionality of the CRE regulation, or 2) to determine the benefits, or lack thereof, of introducing E10 to Mexico. An injunction was granted in October 2017, preventing the blending and selling of E10, but was overturned by a higher court in June 2018 making it legal to blend and sell E10 by PEMEX throughout Mexico except for its three largest metropolitan areas. On January 15, 2020, the Mexican Supreme Court ruled that the expedited process for the CRE regulation was unconstitutional, and that after a 180 day period the maximum ethanol blend allowed in the country would revert to
5.8%. There is an effort underway to go through the full regulatory process to allow for 10% blends countrywide, including in the three major metropolitan areas. The 180 day window was extended due to COVID-19, and the new deadline is March 20, 2021.
In January 2020, the updated North American Free Trade Agreement, known as the United States Mexico Canada Agreement or USMCA was signed. The USMCA went into effect on July 1, 2020, and maintains the duty free access of U.S. agricultural commodities, including ethanol, into Canada and Mexico. According to the Department of Commerce, exports to Canada were 303.5 mmg and exports to Mexico were 61.5 mmg through November 30, 2020.
Environmental and Other Regulation
Our operations are subject to environmental regulations, including those that govern the handling and release of ethanol, crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbon materials. Compliance with existing and anticipated environmental laws and regulations may increase our overall cost of doing business, including capital costs to construct, maintain, operate, and upgrade equipment and facilities. Our business may also be impacted by government policies, such as tariffs, duties, subsidies, import and export restrictions and outright embargos. We employ maintenance and operations personnel at each of its facilities, which are regulated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
The U.S. ethanol industry relies heavily on tank cars to deliver its product to market. In 2015, the DOT finalized the Enhanced Tank Car Standard and Operational Controls for High-Hazard and Flammable Trains, or DOT specification 117, which established a schedule to retrofit or replace older tank cars that carry crude oil and ethanol, braking standards intended to reduce the severity of accidents and new operational protocols. The deadline for compliance with DOT specification 117 is May 1, 2023. The rule may increase our lease costs for railcars over the long term, which will in turn result in an increase in fees the partnership charges for railcar capacity. Additionally, existing railcars may be out of service for a period of time while upgrades are made, tightening supply in an industry that is highly dependent on railcars to transport product. We intend to strategically manage our leased railcar fleet to comply with the new regulations and have commenced transition of our fleet to DOT 117 compliant railcars. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 50% of our railcar fleet was DOT 117 compliant. We anticipate that an additional 20% of our railcar fleet will be DOT 117 compliant by the end of 2021, and that our entire fleet will be fully compliant by 2023.
In September 2015, the FDA issued rules for Current Good Manufacturing Practice, Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based Preventative Controls for food for animals in response to FSMA. The rules require FDA-registered food facilities to address safety concerns for sourcing, manufacturing and shipping food products and food for animals through food safety programs that include conducting hazard analyses, developing risk-based preventative controls and monitoring, and addressing intentional adulteration, recalls, sanitary transportation and supplier verification. We believe we have taken sufficient measures to comply with these regulations.
Variability of Commodity Prices
Our business is highly sensitive to commodity price fluctuations, particularly for corn, ethanol, corn oil, distillers grains and natural gas, which are impacted by factors that are outside of our control, including weather conditions, corn yield, changes in domestic and global ethanol supply and demand, government programs and policies and the price of crude oil, gasoline and substitute fuels. We use various financial instruments to manage and reduce our exposure to price variability. For more information about our commodity price risk, refer to