Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A)
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including but not limited to, those discussed in Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This MD&A is organized as follows:
•Overview. Discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting the Company in order to provide context for the remainder of MD&A.
•Components of Our Results of Operations. Description of the items contained in each revenue, cost of revenue and operating expense caption in the consolidated statements of operations.
•Results of Operations. Analysis of our financial results comparing 2020 to 2019 is presented below. An analysis of our financial results comparing 2019 to 2018 can be found under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 14, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at https://investor.gopro.com.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources. Analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows, and discussion of our financial condition and potential sources of liquidity.
•Contractual Commitments. Overview of our contractual obligations, including expected payment schedules and indemnifications as of December 31, 2020.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
•Non-GAAP Financial Measures. A reconciliation and discussion of our GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures.
Overview
GoPro helps the world capture and share itself in immersive and exciting ways. We are committed to developing solutions that create an easy, seamless experience for consumers to capture, create, and share engaging personal content. When consumers use our products and services, they often generate and share content that organically increases awareness for GoPro, driving a virtuous cycle and a self-reinforcing demand for our products. We believe revenue growth may be driven by the introduction of new cameras, accessories, lifestyle gear, and software and subscription offerings. We believe new camera features drive a replacement cycle among existing users and attract new users, expanding our total addressable market. Our investments in image stabilization, mobile app editing and sharing solutions, modular accessories, auto-upload capabilities, local language user-interfaces and voice recognition in more than 12 languages drive the expansion of our global market.
In 2020, we began shipping our HERO9 Black flagship camera which features a 23.6MP sensor that provides stunning 5K video, the highest resolution ever for a HERO camera, 20MP photos and HyperSmooth 3.0 video stabilization. The HERO9 Black camera also features a new front-facing display, a larger rear touch display, an extended battery life, new Power Tools, TimeWarp 3.0, SuperPhoto, live streaming, webcam mode, built-in mounting, cloud connectivity and voice control. HyperSmooth 3.0 is our most advanced stabilization ever and includes in-camera horizon leveling that keeps shots smooth and level. TimeWarp Video 3.0 features Real Speed, which allows users to slow down footage to real speed and capture audio while recording, and Half Speed, which allows users to slow down footage even more for epic slow motion. Webcam Mode enables users to connect their HERO9 Black camera to a computer with the included USB-C cable to use the camera as a 1080p high-definition wide-angle webcam. We also introduced new Power Tools including HindSight, Scheduled Capture and Duration
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Capture to help users capture the perfect shot. HindSight allows users to capture and save up to 30 seconds of video before the shutter button is pressed. Scheduled Capture allows users to set up their cameras to automatically capture photos or videos up to 24 hours in advance and Duration Capture allows users to set their HERO9 Black to record for a specified length of time. In addition, we introduced a Max Lens Mod accessory that brings Max HyperSmooth video stabilization and Max SuperView’s ultra wide-angle photo and video to the HERO9 Black camera. Our HERO9 Black, HERO8 Black, HERO7 Black, HERO7 Silver and MAX cameras are compatible with our ecosystem of mountable and wearable accessories. The GoPro subscription includes unlimited cloud storage supporting source video and photo quality, camera replacement and damage protection, access to a high-quality live streaming service on GoPro.com as well as discounts on GoPro gear, mounts and accessories.
In December 2019, reports of a potentially deadly virus began to surface and in March 2020, the World Health Organization (the WHO) characterized the deadly virus, now called COVID-19, as a pandemic. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition or results of operations remains uncertain and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. In the first quarter of 2020, we temporarily closed all of our offices and required most of our employees to work remotely. These changes remained largely in effect in the fourth quarter of 2020 and in most locations, we plan on maintaining closed offices through the middle of 2021. At this point, the duration and impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement is uncertain, but changes we have implemented have not affected and are not expected to affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. See section Item 1A Risk Factors for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
The following is a summary of measures presented in our consolidated financial statements and key metrics used to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions.
(1) Represents the number of camera units that are shipped during a reporting period, net of any returns.
(2) One basis point (bps) is equal to 1/100th of 1%.
(3) We define adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude the impact of provision for income taxes, interest income, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, point of purchase (POP) display amortization, stock-based compensation, intangible asset impairment charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, and restructuring and other costs, including right-of-use asset impairment charges.
(4) We define non-GAAP net income (loss) as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation, acquisition-related costs, restructuring and other costs, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, non-cash interest expense, gain on sale and license of intellectual property, loss on extinguishment of debt and income tax adjustments. Acquisition-related costs include the amortization of acquired intangible assets and impairment charges (if applicable), as well as third-party transaction costs for legal and other professional services.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Reconciliations of non-GAAP adjusted measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures are presented under Non-GAAP Financial Measures.
Full year and fourth quarter 2020 financial performance
Revenue was $891.9 million for the full year 2020 compared to $1.195 billion in 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic, which began surfacing in December 2019, unfavorably impacted our financial performance in 2020 as certain retailers temporarily closed. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated a shift in our sales channel strategy to focus on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. In the second half of 2020, revenue improved significantly with the launch of our HERO9 Black camera and strong holiday sales through GoPro.com, and we generated $208.3 million in cash flow from operations, reflecting our transition to a more efficient and profitable direct-to-consumer business. The gross margin percentage for 2020 was 35.3%, up from 34.6% in 2019. The year-over-year margin percentage improvement was primarily due to a favorable sales mix, partially offset by an increase in logistics related expenses and sales incentives. We shipped 2.8 million camera units in 2020, compared to 4.3 million camera units in 2019; however our average selling price in 2020 was $316, or a 13% increase from 2019. The increase in our average selling price was primarily due to cameras sold with a suggested retail price equal to or greater than $300, which represented 89% of our camera revenue mix in 2020, and growth in GoPro subscribers to 761,000 as of December 31, 2020 or a 145% increase year-over-year. Average selling price is defined as total revenue divided by the number of camera units shipped.
Our fourth quarter of 2020 financial results reflected the shift in our sales channel strategy to focus on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. Comparisons of our fourth quarter of 2020 financial performance to the same period in 2019 were impacted by a late stage production delay resulting in the launch of HERO8 Black in the fourth quarter of 2019 as opposed to the launch of HERO9 Black in the third quarter of 2020. Revenue in the fourth quarter of 2020 was $357.8 million compared to $528.3 million in the same period in 2019, while the gross margin percentage was 38.0% in the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to 38.2% in the same period in 2019. The slight decrease in the gross margin percentage was primarily due to an increase in tariff and logistics related charges. In the fourth quarter of 2020, revenue from GoPro.com increased 91% year-over-year. Revenue from GoPro.com in the fourth quarter of 2020 was $116.4 million, or 33% of total revenue, compared to $61.1 million, or 12% of total revenue in the same period in 2019. We shipped 1.1 million camera units in the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to 1.9 million camera units in the same period in 2019. Our average selling price was $323, representing a 14% increase year-over-year. The increase in our average selling price was primarily due to cameras sold with a suggested retail price equal to or greater than $300, which represented 91% of our camera revenue mix in the fourth quarter of 2020, and growth in GoPro subscribers.
Our fourth quarter of 2020 and full year of 2020 operating expenses decreased 23.6% and 15.4%, respectively, primarily attributable to our continued focus on cost management and the cost reductions recognized from our restructuring actions.
We were profitable on a GAAP and non-GAAP basis in the fourth quarter of 2020 with net income of $44.4 million and $61.1 million, respectively. For the full year of 2020, we incurred a net loss of $66.8 million on a GAAP basis but were profitable on a non-GAAP basis with net income of $12.8 million.
Factors affecting performance
We believe that our future success will be dependent on many factors, including those further discussed below. While these areas represent opportunities for us, they also represent challenges and risks that we must successfully address in order to operate our business and improve our results of operations.
Driving profitability through improved efficiency, lower costs and better execution. We incurred operating losses in 2020, 2019, and 2018. However, our restructuring actions have significantly reduced our on-going operating expenses in 2020, 2019, and 2018, resulting in a flatter, more efficient global organization that has allowed for improved communication and better alignment among our functional teams. Primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took additional restructuring actions in April 2020 to further reduce our operating expenses in marketing, sales, and general and administrative functions, and to reduce our global facility footprint. Operating expense reductions related to research and development were minor in order to protect our product roadmap and innovation. Additionally, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated a shift in our sales channel strategy to reduce the number of distributors and retailers that we work with to focus more on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. Revenue from GoPro.com for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
was $282.6 million and $141.1 million, respectively, and represented 31.7% and 11.8% of revenue, respectively. The growth in revenue from GoPro.com contributed to the increase in gross margin, which was 35.3% and 34.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from retailers represented 68.3% and 88.2% of total revenue, respectively. If we are unable to generate adequate revenue growth, particularly in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, successfully implement our direct-to-consumer sales model, or continue to manage our expenses, we may incur significant losses in the future and may not be able to achieve profitability.
Investing in research and development and enhancing our customer experience. Our performance is significantly dependent on the investments we make in research and development, including our ability to attract and retain highly skilled and experienced research and development personnel. We expect the timing of new product releases to continue to have a significant impact on our revenue and we must continually develop and introduce innovative new cameras, mobile applications and other new offerings. We plan to further build upon our integrated mobile and cloud-based storytelling solutions, and subscription offerings. Our investments, including those for marketing and advertising, may not successfully drive increased revenue and our customers may not accept our new offerings. If we fail to innovate and enhance our brand, our products, our integrated storytelling solutions, the value proposition of our subscriptions, our market position and revenue will be adversely affected. Further, we have incurred substantial research and development expenses and if our efforts are not successful, we may not recover the value of these investments.
Improving Profitability. We believe that shifting the way we sell, and focusing on growing our direct-to-consumer sales and subscription services will accelerate our ability to achieve profitability due to an improved margin structure and lower operating expenses to support this shift in channel, particularly in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of this shift toward direct sales, we believe we can reach profitability with lower overall unit sales. We continue to believe that international markets represent a significant opportunity to achieve profitability. While the total market for digital cameras has continued to decline as smartphone and tablet camera quality has improved, we continue to believe that our consumers’ differentiated use of GoPro cameras, our integrated storytelling solutions, our continued innovation of product features desired by our users, and our brand, all help support our business from many of the negative trends facing this market. However, we expect that the markets in which we conduct our business will remain highly competitive as we face new product introductions from competitors. We will continue to leverage the brand recognition of our Company to increase our global presence through GoPro.com with the active promotion of our brand, the expansion of localized products in international markets with region-specific marketing, and an investment focus on the biggest opportunities.
Our profitability also depends on expanding our subscription service offerings. If we are not successful in our shift to a direct-to-consumer sales model, expanding our product and subscription offerings and increasing our paid subscriber base, we might not be able to become consistently profitable and we may not recognize benefits from our investment in new areas.
Marketing the improved GoPro experience. We intend to focus our marketing resources to increase traffic, improve the consumer experience on GoPro.com, and further improve brand recognition. Historically, our growth has largely been fueled by the adoption of our products by people looking to self-capture images of themselves participating in exciting physical activities. Our goal of maintaining profitability depends on continuing to reach, expand and re-engage with this core user base in alignment with our strategic priorities. Sales and marketing investments will often occur in advance of any sales benefits from these activities, and it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating our resources in this area.
Seasonality. Historically, we have experienced the highest levels of revenue in the fourth quarter of the year, coinciding with the holiday shopping season, particularly in the United States and Europe. While we have implemented operational changes aimed at reducing the impact of fourth quarter seasonality on full year performance, timely and effective product introductions and forecasting, whether just prior to the holiday season or otherwise, are critical to our operations and financial performance.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue. Our revenue is primarily comprised of product sales and subscription services, net of returns and sales incentives. Revenue is derived from the sale of our cameras and accessories directly to retailers, through our network of domestic and international distributors, and on GoPro.com. See Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates and Note 1 Summary of business and significant accounting policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding revenue recognition.
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue primarily consists of product costs, including costs of contract manufacturing for production, third-party logistics and procurement costs, warranty repair costs, tooling and equipment depreciation, excess and obsolete inventory write-downs, amortization of acquired developed technology, license fees, tariffs and certain allocated costs related to our manufacturing team, facilities, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, and personnel-related expenses.
Operating expenses. We classify our operating expenses into three categories: research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative.
Research and development. Our research and development expense consists primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation and employee benefits. Research and development expense also includes consulting and outside professional services costs, materials, and allocated facilities, restructuring, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses associated with the development of our product and service offerings.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expense consists primarily of advertising and marketing promotions of our products and services, and personnel-related costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation and employee benefits. Sales and marketing expense also includes point of purchase (POP) display expenses and related amortization, sales commissions, trade show and event costs, sponsorship costs, consulting and contractor expenses, and allocated facilities, restructuring, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation and employee benefits for our finance, legal, human resources, information technology and administrative personnel. The expense also includes professional service costs related to accounting, tax, legal services, and allocated facilities, restructuring, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the components of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for each of the periods presented, and each component as a percentage of revenue:
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019. Revenue was $891.9 million in 2020 compared to $1.195 billion in 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic, which began surfacing in December 2019, unfavorably impacted our financial performance in the first half of 2020. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated a shift in our sales channel strategy to focus on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com. Revenue in the second half improved significantly with the launch of our HERO9 Black camera and strong holiday sales through GoPro.com. Revenue from GoPro.com was $282.6 million, or 32% of total revenue in 2020, compared to 12% of total revenue in 2019. We shipped 2.8 million camera units in 2020, compared to 4.3 million camera units in 2019; however our average selling price in 2020 was $316, which was a 13% increase from 2019. The increase in our average selling price was primarily due to cameras sold with a suggested retail price equal to or greater than $300, which represented 89% of our camera revenue mix in 2020, and growth in GoPro subscribers to 761,000 as of December 31, 2020 or a 145% increase year-over-year. Average selling price is defined as total revenue divided by the number of camera units shipped.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
2020 Compared to 2019. Gross margin of 35.3% in 2020 increased from 34.6% in 2019, or 70 bps, primarily due to a favorable camera revenue mix, 657 bps, and growth in our subscription services, 43 bps, partially offset by higher operational expenses, (326) bps, higher sales incentives, (249) bps, and higher average camera costs, (53) bps.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Research and development
2020 Compared to 2019. The year-over-year decrease of $11.3 million, or 8%, in total research and development expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflected a $9.6 million decrease in cash-based personnel-related costs due to a reduction in global research and development headcount, a $3.8 million decrease in stock-based compensation, a $3.2 million decrease in depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses, and a $2.0 million decrease in travel related expenses, partially offset by a $7.5 million increase in restructuring costs.
Sales and marketing
2020 Compared to 2019. The year-over-year decrease of $55.1 million, or 27%, in total sales and marketing expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflected a $45.9 million decrease in overall advertising and marketing expenses attributable to reduced online campaigns, sponsorships and marketing events, a $14.1 million decrease in cash-based personnel-related costs due to a reduction in global sales and marketing headcount, a $3.4 million decrease in travel related expenses, a $3.2 million decrease allocated facilities, depreciation and other supporting overhead expenses, and a $2.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation, partially offset by a $10.4 million increase in restructuring costs and a $3.6 million increase in payment processing fees related to sales through GoPro.com.
General and administrative
2020 Compared to 2019. The year-over-year increase of $2.6 million, or 4%, in total general and administrative expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 reflected a $7.0 million increase in legal and professional services costs and a $4.9 million increase in restructuring charges, partially offset by a $4.7 million decrease in cash-based personnel-related costs due to a reduction in global general and administrative headcount, a $2.3 million decrease in allocated facilities and other supporting overhead expenses, a $1.0 million lease termination fee recorded in 2019, a $0.9 million decrease in stock-based compensation and a $0.8 million decrease in travel related expenses.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Restructuring costs
Second quarter 2020 restructuring plan. On April 14, 2020, we approved a restructuring plan that provided for a reduction of our global workforce by approximately 20% and the consolidation of certain leased office facilities. Under the second quarter 2020 restructuring plan, we recorded restructuring charges of $25.5 million, including a $12.5 million right-of-use asset impairment primarily related to our headquarter campus, $7.3 million related to severance, and $5.8 million related to accelerated depreciation and other charges. The right-of-use asset impairment charge was recorded as a restructuring expense, primarily in the operating expense financial statement line items in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
We ceased using a portion of our headquarters campus in the third quarter of 2020 as part of the second quarter 2020 restructuring plan. The unused portion of our headquarters campus has its own identifiable expenses and is not dependent on other parts of our business, and thus was considered its own asset group. As a result, we impaired a part of the carrying value of the related right-of-use asset to its estimated fair value using the discounted future cash flows method. The discounted future cash flows were based on future sublease rental rates, future sublease market conditions and a discount rate based on the weighted-average cost of capital. Based on the results of our assessment, we recognized a $12.3 million impairment.
First quarter 2017 restructuring plan. On March 15, 2017, we approved a restructuring plan that provided for a reduction of our workforce by approximately 17% and the consolidation of certain leased office facilities. Under the first quarter 2017 restructuring plan, we recorded restructuring charges of $23.1 million, including $10.3 million related to severance and $12.8 million related to accelerated depreciation and other charges. The actions associated with the first quarter 2017 restructuring plan were substantially completed by the fourth quarter of 2017.
See Note 11 Restructuring charges, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other income (expense)
2020 Compared to 2019. Total other expense, net, increased $8.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $5.4 million loss on the partial extinguishment of our 3.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2022 (2022 Notes) in 2020, a $1.4 million increase in the amortization of our debt discount primarily due to the issuance in 2020 of our 1.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (2025 Notes), and a $1.1 million decrease in interest income due to less investment activity in 2020.
Income taxes
We recorded an income tax expense of $4.8 million in 2020 on a pre-tax net loss of $62.0 million, which resulted in a negative effective tax rate of 7.8%. Our income tax expense was primarily related to a significant benefit on pre-tax book losses, offset by the valuation allowance on United States federal and state deferred tax assets and by income taxes paid or accrued in profitable foreign jurisdictions (primarily wholly owned subsidiaries in Europe). Our 2019 effective tax rate of 23.2% resulted primarily from a tax benefit related to an overall decrease in losses before income taxes, a benefit from the reversal of previously accrued tax provision on uncertain tax positions that were no longer necessary due to the expiration of the statute of limitations and settlements with certain taxing jurisdictions, partially offset by the valuation allowance on United States federal and state net deferred tax assets and a shortfall tax impact from stock-based compensation.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
See Note 8 Income taxes, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Quarterly results of operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for each of the eight quarterly periods in the two-year period ended December 31, 2020.
(1) Included in operating expenses were restructuring charges of $13.7 million for the quarter ended September 30, 2020, $11.0 million for the quarter ended June 30, 2020 and $1.6 million for the quarter ended June 30, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial information as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Our primary source of cash is receipts from sales of our products and services. Other sources of cash are from proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, employee participation in the employee stock purchase plan, the exercise of employee stock options, tax refunds and facility subleases. The primary uses of cash are for inventory procurement, payroll-related expenses, general operating expenses, including advertising, marketing and office rent, purchases of property and equipment, other costs of revenue and repurchases of convertible notes.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $325.7 million. In addition, we had $2.0 million of restricted cash as of December 31, 2020. The overall cash provided by operations of $93.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to positive operating cash (net loss of $66.8 million, offset by non-cash expenses of $90.1 million) and changes in working capital of $70.5 million. Working capital changes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were the result of a decrease in accounts receivable of $93.1 million and a decrease in inventory of $46.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities of $87.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, $15.8 million of cash was held by our foreign subsidiaries.
Convertible Notes
In April 2017, we issued $175.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes in a private placement to purchasers for resale to qualified institutional buyers. The 2022 Notes mature on April 15, 2022, unless earlier repurchased or converted into shares of Class A common stock subject to certain conditions. The 2022 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of the Class A common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election, at an initial conversion rate of 94.0071 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2022 Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $10.64 per share of common stock, subject to
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
adjustment. We pay interest on the 2022 Notes semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year. Proceeds received from the issuance of the 2022 Notes were allocated between a liability component (long-term debt) and an equity component (additional paid-in capital). The fair value of the liability component was measured using rates determined for similar debt instruments without a conversion feature.
In connection with the 2022 Notes offering, we entered into a prepaid forward stock repurchase transaction agreement (Prepaid Forward) with a financial institution. Pursuant to the Prepaid Forward, we used approximately $78.0 million of the proceeds from the offering of the 2022 Notes to pay the prepayment amount. The aggregate number of shares of our Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward is approximately 9.2 million shares. The expiration date for the Prepaid Forward is April 15, 2022, although it may be settled earlier in whole or in part. Upon settlement of the Prepaid Forward, at expiration or upon any early settlement, the forward counterparty will deliver to us the number of shares of Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward or the portion thereof being settled early. The shares purchased under the Prepaid Forward were treated as treasury stock on the Consolidated Balance Sheets (and not outstanding for purposes of the calculation of basic and diluted income (loss) per share), but remain outstanding for corporate law purposes, including for purposes of any future stockholders’ votes, until the forward counterparty delivers the shares underlying the Prepaid Forward to us. The net proceeds from the 2022 Convertible Senior Notes offering of approximately $91 million were used for general corporate purposes.
In October 2020, 8.8 million shares out of the 9.2 million shares of Class A common stock underlying the Prepaid Forward entered into as part of our 2022 Notes were early settled and delivered to us. There was no financial statement impact due to the return of shares; however, shares outstanding for corporate law purposes were reduced by the early settlement.
In November 2020, we issued $143.8 million aggregate principal amount of 2025 Notes in a private placement to purchasers for resale to qualified institutional buyers. The 2025 Notes mature on November 15, 2025, unless earlier repurchased or converted into shares of Class A common stock subject to certain conditions. The 2025 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of the Class A common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election, at an initial conversion rate of 107.1984 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2025 Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $9.3285 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment. We pay interest on the 2025 Notes semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year. Proceeds received from the issuance of the 2025 Notes were allocated between a liability component (long-term debt) and an equity component (additional paid-in capital). The fair value of the liability component was measured using rates determined for similar debt instruments without a conversion feature.
In connection with the offering of the 2025 Notes, the Company entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain financial institutions (Capped Calls). We used $10.2 million of the net proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Notes to purchase the Capped Calls and $56.2 million of the net proceeds to repurchase $50.0 million of aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes. The remaining net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes.
Liquidity
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our financial results in 2020, and as a result, we took several actions to optimize liquidity, including the acceleration of a shift in our sales channel strategy to reduce the number of distributors and retailers that we work with to focus more on direct-to-consumer sales through GoPro.com, reducing our marketing expenses to reflect the appropriate levels of support for our shift to a direct-to-consumer model, and announced a restructuring plan in April 2020, which included a reduction in our global workforce by approximately 20% and reductions in leased facilities. These actions positively impacted our financial results beginning in the second quarter of 2020. With a more direct-to-consumer sales channel strategy, we expect to increase sales from GoPro.com relative to total revenue. We expect these actions to accelerate our ability to achieve profitability and continue to reduce operating expenses. Based on our most current projections which incorporate these actions, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to address our working capital needs, capital expenditures, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In the future, we may require additional financing to respond to business opportunities, challenges or unforeseen circumstances. If we are unable to obtain adequate debt or equity financing when we require it or on terms acceptable to us, especially in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to grow or support our business, repay debt and respond to business challenges could be significantly limited. Although we believe we have adequate sources of liquidity over the long term, the success of our operations and the global economic outlook, in each case, in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors, could impact our business and liquidity.
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities of $93.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to non-cash expenses of $90.1 million and a net cash inflow of $70.5 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a net loss of $66.8 million. Cash inflows related to operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a decrease in accounts receivable of $93.1 million and a decrease in inventory of $46.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities of $87.5 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $14.8 million from maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by net purchases of property and equipment of $4.9 million.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $72.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $143.8 million proceeds from the issuance of our 2025 Notes, and $5.4 million received from stock purchases made through our employee stock purchase plan and employee stock option exercises, partially offset by $56.0 million used in the partial repurchase of our 2022 Notes, $10.2 million used in the purchase of Capped Calls and $6.2 million in tax payments for net RSU settlements.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) The Company's convertible senior notes are due in April 2022 and November 2025. The balances include accrued and unpaid interest as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 4 Financing Arrangements.
See Note 4 Financing Arrangements, for a discussion regarding our 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes, and Note 9 Commitments, contingencies and guarantees, for a discussion regarding facility leases and other contractual commitments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Indemnifications
We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and executive officers which require us to indemnify our directors and executive officers against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service. In addition, in the normal course of business, we enter into agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties, and provide for general indemnification. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future, but have not yet been made. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount under these indemnification agreements due to our limited history with indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we have not paid any claims, nor has it been required to defend any action related to its indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. Note 1 Summary of business and significant accounting policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Our senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the audit committee of our board of directors.
Revenue recognition
We derive substantially all of our revenue from the sale of cameras, mounts and accessories, the related implied post contract support to customers and subscription services. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The transaction price we expect to be entitled to is primarily comprised of product revenue, net of returns and variable consideration, including sales incentives provided to customers.
For most of our revenue, revenue is recognized at the time the product is delivered and when collection is considered probable. For the Company’s subscription services, revenue is recognized on a ratable basis over the subscription term, with payments received in advanced of services being rendered recorded in deferred revenue.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For customers who purchase products directly from GoPro.com, we retain a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit, which are accounted for as fulfillment costs.
Our standard terms and conditions for non-web based sales do not allow for product returns other than under warranty. However, we grant limited rights to return product for certain large retailers. Estimates of expected future product returns are recognized at the time of sale based on analyses of historical return trends by customer class and other factors. An estimated return liability along with a right to recover assets are recorded for future product returns. Return trends are influenced by product life cycles, new product introductions, market acceptance of products, product sell-through, the type of customer, seasonality and other factors. Return rates may fluctuate over time, but are sufficiently predictable to allow us to estimate expected future product returns. Actual returns in any future period could differ from our estimates, which could impact the revenue that we report.
Our camera sales contain multiple performance obligations that can include the following four separate obligations: a) a hardware component (camera and/or accessories) and the embedded firmware essential to the functionality of the hardware component delivered at the time of sale, b) the implicit right to our downloadable free apps and software solutions, c) the implied right for the customer to receive post contract support after the initial sale (PCS), and d) a subscription service. PCS includes the right to receive, on a when and if available basis, future unspecified firmware upgrades and features as well as bug fixes, and email and telephone support. Judgment is required to properly identify the accounting units of multiple performance obligations and to determine the manner in which revenue should be allocated among the obligations. We allocate the transaction price to the PCS performance obligation based on a cost-plus method. The transaction price is allocated to the remaining performance obligations on a residual value methodology or based on standalone selling price. Our process to allocate the transaction price considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable, including: the level of support provided to customers, estimated costs to provide our support, the amount of time and cost that is allocated to our efforts to develop the undelivered elements, market trends in the pricing for similar offerings, and the standalone selling price. While changes in the allocation of the transaction price among the performance obligations will not affect the amount of total revenue ultimately recognized for a particular sales arrangement, any material changes in these allocations could impact the timing of revenue recognition, which could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
We provide our customers with sales incentives through various programs, including cooperative advertising, marketing development funds and other incentives. Sales incentives are considered to be variable consideration, which we estimate and record as a reduction to revenue at the date of sale. Sales incentives are influenced by historical experience, product sell-through and other factors. Actual sales incentives and their impact on reported revenue could differ from our estimates.
Inventory valuation
Inventory consists of finished goods and component parts, and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value on a first-in, first-out basis. Our inventory balances were $97.9 million and $144.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our assessment of market value requires the use of estimates regarding the net realizable value of our inventory balances, including an assessment of excess or obsolete inventory. We determine excess or obsolete inventory based on multiple factors, including market conditions, an estimate of the future demand for our products within a specified time horizon, generally 12 months, product life cycle status, product development plans and current sales levels.
Warranty
We establish a liability for estimated product warranty costs at the time product revenue is recognized. We generally provide a 12-month warranty coverage on all of our products except in the European Union where we provide a 2-year warranty. The Company also offers extended warranty programs for a fee. Our estimate of costs to service our warranty obligations are based on historical experience of repair and replacement of the associated products and expectations of future conditions. The warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates and the related use of materials, labor costs and freight incurred in correcting any product failure. Should actual product failure rates, use of materials or other costs differ from our estimates, additional warranty liabilities could be required, which could materially affect our results of operations.
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and multiple foreign jurisdictions. Our effective tax rates differ from the United States federal statutory rate, primarily due to changes in our valuation allowance, the effect of non-United States operations, deductible and non-deductible stock-based compensation expense, state taxes, federal research and development tax credits and other adjustments. Our effective tax rate was negative 7.8%, 23.2% and negative 1.3% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The calculation of our provision for income taxes involves the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments while taking into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of future tax audits. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. Our income tax rate is primarily affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings.
Due to our history of net losses in the United States and the difficulty in predicting future results, we believe that we cannot rely on projections of future taxable income to realize most of our deferred tax assets. Accordingly, we have established a full valuation allowance against our United States federal and states net deferred tax assets. Significant management judgement is required in assessing our ability to realize any future benefit from our net deferred tax assets. We intend to maintain this valuation allowance until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Our income tax expense recorded in the future will be reduced to the extent that sufficient positive evidence materializes to support a reversal, or decrease in, our valuation allowance.
Uncertain tax positions. We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world and a number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. We have established reserves to address potential exposures related to tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain tax position and we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different, we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected if actual earnings are different than our estimates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, outcomes resulting from income tax examinations, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles.
Goodwill, acquired intangible assets and long-lived assets
When we acquire a business, we allocate the purchase price to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets, with the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the fair value of the intangible assets acquired involves significant judgments and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, technology obsolescence, and the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital. Our estimate of the fair value of certain assets may differ materially from that determined by others who use different assumptions or utilize different business models.
Impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets. We perform an annual assessment of our goodwill during the fourth quarter of each calendar year or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist, such as an adverse change in business climate or a decline in the overall industry demand, that would indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit would be less than its carrying value. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we measure the amount of impairment as the amount the carrying value of our single reporting entity exceeds the fair value. As of December 31, 2020, we determined that no impairment of the carrying value of goodwill was required.
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, intangible assets subject to amortization and right-of-use assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount to the estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If it is determined that an asset group is not recoverable, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value. We recorded a $12.5 million right-of-use asset impairment in 2020 primarily related to our headquarters campus. We used the following significant
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
assumptions to determine the impairment charge: future sublease rental rates, future sublease market conditions and a discount rate based on the weighted-average cost of capital.
Convertible Senior Notes
We account for our convertible senior notes in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. As our 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes have a net settlement feature and may be settled wholly or partially in cash upon conversion, we are required to separately account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument. The carrying amount of the liability component of the instrument is determined by estimating the fair value of a similar liability without the conversion option using income and market based approaches. For the income-based approach, we use a convertible bond pricing model that includes several assumptions such as volatility and the risk-free rate. For the market-based approach, we evaluate issuances of convertible debt securities by other companies at the time of issuance. The amount of the equity component is then calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the instrument. The difference between the principal amount and the liability component represents a debt discount that is amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes using an effective interest rate method. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. In accounting for the issuance costs related to the 2022 Notes and 2025 Notes, the allocation of issuance costs incurred between the liability and equity components were based on their relative values. Similarly, in accordance with ASC 470-20, transactions involving contemporaneous exchanges of cash between the same debtor and creditor in connection with the issuance of a new debt obligation and satisfaction of an existing debt obligation by the debtor, such as the contemporaneous 2022 Notes partial repurchase and issuance of the 2025 Notes, should be evaluated as a modification or an exchange transaction depending on whether the exchange is determined to have substantially different terms. The 2022 Notes partial repurchase and issuance of the 2025 Notes were deemed to have substantially different terms due to the significant difference between the value of the conversion option immediately prior to and after the exchange, and consequently, we accounted for the 2022 Notes partial repurchase as a debt extinguishment. The total consideration for the 2022 Notes partial repurchase was separated into liability and equity components by estimating the fair value of a similar liability without a conversion option and assigning the residual value to the equity component. The effective interest rate used to estimate the fair value of the liability component of the 2022 Notes partial repurchase is based on the income approach used to determine the effective interest rate of the 2025 Notes, adjusted for the remaining term of the 2022 Notes. The gain or loss on extinguishment of the debt is subsequently determined by comparing repurchase consideration allocated to the liability component to the sum of the carrying value of the liability component, net of the proportionate amounts of unamortized debt discount and remaining unamortized debt issuance costs.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Recent Accounting Pronouncements in Note 1 Summary of business and significant accounting policies, to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report net income (loss) and diluted net income (loss) per share in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and on a non-GAAP basis. Additionally, we report non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA. We use non-GAAP financial measures to help us understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operational plans. Our management uses, and believes that investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our operating results. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as an alternative to, the measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, and are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles. We believe that these non-GAAP measures, when read in conjunction with our GAAP financials, provide useful information to investors by facilitating:
•the comparability of our on-going operating results over the periods presented;
•the ability to identify trends in our underlying business; and
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•the comparison of our operating results against analyst financial models and operating results of other public companies that supplement their GAAP results with non-GAAP financial measures.
These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that reduce cash available to us;
•adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization and, although these are non-cash charges, the property and equipment being depreciated and amortized often will have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements;
•adjusted EBITDA excludes the amortization of point of purchase (POP) display assets because it is a non-cash charge, and is treated similarly to depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of acquired intangible assets;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude the impairment of intangible assets because it is a non-cash charge that is inconsistent in amount and frequency;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude restructuring and other related costs which primarily include severance-related costs, stock-based compensation expenses, facilities consolidation charges recorded in connection with restructuring actions announced in the fourth quarter of 2016, first quarter of 2017, first quarter of 2018 and second quarter of 2020, including right-of-use asset impairment charges, and the related ongoing operating lease cost of those facilities recorded under ASC 842, Leases. These expenses do not reflect expected future operating expenses and do not contribute to a meaningful evaluation of current operating performance or comparisons to the operating performance in other periods;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards granted primarily to our workforce. We exclude stock-based compensation expense because we believe that the non-GAAP financial measures excluding this item provide meaningful supplemental information regarding operational performance. In particular, we note that companies calculate stock-based compensation expense for the variety of award types that they employ using different valuation methodologies and subjective assumptions. These non-cash charges are not factored into our internal evaluation of net income (loss) as we believe their inclusion would hinder our ability to assess core operational performance;
•adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP net income (loss) exclude the loss on extinguishment of debt because it is not reflective of ongoing operating results in the period, and the frequency and amount of such losses are inconsistent;
•non-GAAP net income (loss) excludes acquisition-related costs including the amortization of acquired intangible assets (primarily consisting of acquired technology), the impairment of acquired intangible assets (if applicable), as well as third-party transaction costs incurred for legal and other professional services. These costs are not factored into our evaluation of potential acquisitions, or of our performance after completion of the acquisitions, because these costs are not related to our core operating performance or reflective of ongoing operating results in the period, and the frequency and amount of such costs are inconsistent and vary significantly based on the timing and magnitude of our acquisition transactions and the maturities of the businesses being acquired. Although we exclude the amortization of acquired intangible assets from our non-GAAP net income (loss), management believes that it is important for investors to understand that such intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation;
•non-GAAP net income (loss) excludes non-cash interest expense. In connection with the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes in April 2017 and November 2020, we are required to recognize non-cash interest expense in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance for convertible debt that may be settled in cash;
•non-GAAP net income (loss) excludes a gain on the sale and license of intellectual property. This gain is not related to our core operating performance or reflective of ongoing operating results in the period, and the frequency and amount of such gains are inconsistent;
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•non-GAAP net income (loss) includes income tax adjustments. We utilize a cash-based non-GAAP tax expense approach (based upon expected annual cash payments for income taxes) for evaluating operating performance as well as for planning and forecasting purposes. This non-GAAP tax approach eliminates the effects of period specific items, which can vary in size and frequency and does not necessarily reflect our long-term operations. Historically, we computed a non-GAAP tax rate based on non-GAAP pre-tax income on a quarterly basis, which considered the income tax effects of the adjustments above; and
•other companies may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA:
GoPro, Inc.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income (loss) to non-GAAP net income (loss):
(1) Beginning in the first quarter of 2017, we implemented a cash-based non-GAAP expense approach (based upon expected annual cash payments for income taxes) for evaluating operating performance as well as for planning and forecasting purposes. This non-GAAP approach eliminates the effects of period specific items, which can vary in size and frequency and does not necessarily reflect our long-term operations. Historically, we computed a non-GAAP tax rate based on non-GAAP pre-tax income on a quarterly basis, which considered the income tax effects of the adjustments above.