ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For business overview and developments during the year ended December 31, 2020, refer to Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview and Outlook
Our key financial and operating metrics are home deliveries, home closings revenue, average sales price of homes delivered, and net new home orders, which refers to sales contracts executed reduced by the number of sales contracts canceled during the relevant period. Our results for each key financial and operating metric, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, are provided below:
The United States has been impacted by the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic. While response to the COVID-19 outbreak continues to rapidly evolve, during March and the second quarter of 2020 these steps included stay-at-home orders and social distancing guidelines that have seriously disrupted activities in many other segments of the economy. However, throughout the pandemic, we have continued to build, close and sell homes in our markets. While uncertainty caused by COVID-19 dramatically slowed net new home orders in late March and April 2020, during May and June 2020, our sales rebounded. Our rate of sales accelerated in the third and fourth quarters with an increase in net sales of 88.8.% and 43.7% over the corresponding periods in the prior year, respectively. The initial recovery and expansion of our sales activity since May is attributable to the steady growth and strong performance of our new Trophy brand division, an increase in average selling communities as well as the impact of macroeconomic factors such as low interest rates, an influx of millennial first-time home buyers and demand for suburban homes from apartment dwellers in response to COVID-19.
2020 Developments
From October 2019 to October 2020, homes in the DFW and Atlanta markets appreciated by 6.5% and 6.8%, respectively (Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices & CoreLogic, December 2020). We believe that we operate in two of the most desirable housing markets in the nation and that increasing demand and supply constraints in our target markets create favorable conditions for our future growth.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Residential Units Revenue and New Homes Delivered
The table below represents residential units revenue and new homes delivered for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
The $170.3 million increase in residential units revenue was driven by the 28.4% increase in the number of homes delivered, which was primarily due to an organic increase in the number of active selling communities and an increase in our absorption rate for net new home orders per average active selling community during the year ended December 31, 2020. The
4.4% decline in the average sales price of homes delivered for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to our growth in revenues which was substantially from Trophy Signature Homes and CB JENI Homes-Townhome Division, that both sell homes at average sales prices that are below the average sales price for the Company.
New Home Orders and Backlog
The table below represents new home orders and backlog related to our builder operations segments, excluding mechanic’s liens contracts (dollars in thousands):
Net new home orders increased by 50.0% over the prior year period. The increase reflects the strong performance of our new Trophy brand division, an 11.6% increase in average selling communities as well as the impact of macroeconomic factors such as low interest rates, an influx of millennial first-time buyers and demand for suburban homes from apartment dwellers in response to COVID-19. Our absorption rate per average active selling community increased 33.9% year over year. While uncertainty caused by COVID-19 dramatically slowed net new home orders in late March and April 2020, during May and June 2020, our sales rebounded. Our rate of sales accelerated in both the third and fourth quarters with an increase in net sales of 88.8.% and 43.7% over the corresponding periods in the prior year, respectively.
Backlog refers to homes under sales contracts that have not yet closed at the end of the relevant period, and absorption rate refers to the rate at which net new home orders are contracted per average active selling community during the relevant period. Upon a cancellation, the escrow deposit may be returned to the prospective purchaser. Accordingly, backlog may not be indicative of our future revenue.
Our cancellation rate, which refers to sales contracts canceled divided by sales contracts executed during the relevant period, was 13.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 12.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Sales contracts relating to homes in backlog may be canceled by the prospective purchaser for a number of reasons, such as the prospective purchaser’s inability to obtain suitable mortgage financing. Upon a cancellation, the escrow deposit may be returned to the prospective purchaser. Management believes a cancellation rate in the range of 15% to 20% is representative of an industry average cancellation rate. Our cancellation rate is on the lower end of the industry average, which we believe is due to favorable market conditions through December 31, 2020.
The $340.0 million increase in value of backlog was due to the 86.1% increase in the number of homes in backlog and the 6.4% increase in the average sales price of backlog. The 86.1% increase in the number of homes in backlog was due to a 33.9% increase in the absorption rate per average active selling community and a 11.6% increase in the number of average active selling communities. The increase of the average sales price of homes in backlog was the result of lower incentives offered and price increases.
Residential Units Gross Margin
The table below represents the components of residential units gross margin (dollars in thousands):
Cost of residential units for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $108.0 million, or 18.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the 28.4% increase in the number of new homes delivered and a change in mix of homes delivered.
Residential units gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to 24.1%, compared to 21.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily because of a decrease in sales incentives offered to customers, price increases to homes sold in certain communities, and an increase in building homes on lots developed by the Company where our lower land cost increases our profitability.
Land and Lots Revenue
The table below represents lots closed and land and lots revenue (dollars in thousands):
The 42.9% increase in lots revenue was driven by the 77.7% increase in the number of lots closed, partially offset by the 19.6% decrease in the average lot price. The average lot price decreased by 19.6% due to a higher number of entry level lots sold.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The table below represents the components of selling, general and administrative expense (dollars in thousands):
The 0.9% decrease of total selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of revenue was driven driven by headcount reductions and higher revenues partially offset by an increase in commission expenses.
Builder Operations
Selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of revenue for builder operations decreased by 0.7%. due to a higher degree of operating leverage driven by increased sales volume. Builder operations expenditures include salary expenses, sales commissions, and community costs such as advertising and marketing expenses, rent, professional fees, and non-capitalized property taxes.
Land Development
The 2.3% decrease in selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of revenue for land development was primarily attributable to an increase in land development segment revenues.
Corporate, Other and Unallocated
Selling, general and administrative expense for the corporate, other and unallocated non-operating segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.3 million, compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Equity in Income of Unconsolidated Entities
Equity in income of unconsolidated entities increased to $16.7 million, or 69.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in earnings from GB Challenger, LLC and Green Brick Mortgage, LLC.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, decreased to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to $1.5 million of allowances for option deposits and pre-acquisition costs caused by COVID-19 pandemic considerations, and the impact of customer earnest money deposit of $5.0 million on the sale of finished lots forfeited during the year ended December 31, 2019, which were partially offset by an increase in title closing and settlement services of $2.6 million arising from higher volume of closings during the period.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased to $25.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to a higher taxable income substantially offset by a lower effective tax rate due to estimated savings from federal energy efficient homes tax credits for the 2020 tax year and for ameding prior year tax returns for federal energy efficient homes tax credits.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
For discussion and analysis of the Company’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as well as for comparison to the Company’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Item 7 of Part II of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Lots Owned and Controlled
The following table presents the lots we owned or controlled, including lot option contracts, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Owned lots are those for which we hold title, while controlled lots are lots past feasibility studies for which we do not hold title but have the contractual right to acquire title.
(1)Total lots excludes lots with homes under construction.
The following table presents additional information on the lots we controlled as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The following table presents additional information on the lots we owned as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Overview
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had $19.5 million and $33.3 million of unrestricted cash, respectively. Our historical cash management strategy includes redeploying net cash from the sale of home inventory to acquire and develop land and lots that represent opportunities to generate desired margins and using cash to make additional investments in business acquisitions, joint ventures, or other strategic activities. In response to the extraordinary circumstances created by the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, during the latter part of the first quarter of 2020 management took measures to significantly curtail land and lot acquisitions. However, as we began to see increased market activity commencing in May and accelerating into June, we re-initiated much of the previously planned capital expenditures. Specifically, we restarted construction of unsold units, recommenced purchases of lots and land and resumed development of land to reflect the market activity. We have continued moderate product price increases to offset some cost input increases like lumber and expect to maintain our industry leading high margins. We continue to monitor our fixed costs to position us to be responsive to the changing market conditions and have delivered this growth without returning to prior overhead levels.
Our principal uses of capital for the year ended December 31, 2020 were home construction, land purchases, land development, operating expenses, and payment of routine liabilities. We used funds generated by operations and available borrowings to meet our short-term working capital requirements. We remain focused on generating positive margins in our builder operations segments and acquiring desirable land positions in order to maintain a strong balance sheet and remain poised for continued growth.
Cash flows for each of our communities depend on the community’s stage in the development cycle and can differ substantially from reported earnings. Early stages of development or expansion require significant cash outlays for land acquisitions, entitlements and other approvals, roads, utilities, general landscaping and other amenities. These costs are a component of our inventory and are not recognized in our statement of income until a home closes. In the later stages of community development, cash inflows may significantly exceed earnings reported for financial statement purposes, as the cash outflows associated with home construction and land development previously occurred.
Our debt to total capitalization ratio, which is calculated as the sum of borrowings on lines of credit, the senior unsecured notes and notes payable, net of debt issuance costs, divided by the total Green Brick Partners, Inc. stockholders’ equity, was approximately 25.6% as of December 31, 2020. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, our net debt to total capitalization ratio, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, remained low at 23.8%. It is our intent to prudently employ leverage to continue to invest in our land acquisition, development and homebuilding businesses. We target a debt to total capitalization ratio of approximately 30% to 35%, which we expect will provide us with significant additional growth capital.
Reconciliation of a Non-GAAP Financial Measure
In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we utilize a financial measure of net debt to total capitalization ratio that is a non-GAAP financial measure as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Net debt to total capitalization is calculated as the total debt less cash and cash equivalents, divided by the sum of total Green Brick Partners, Inc. stockholders’ equity and total debt less cash and cash equivalents. We present this measure because we believe it is useful to management and investors in evaluating the Company’s financing structure. We also believe this measure facilitates the comparison of our financing structure with other companies in our industry. Because this measure is not calculated in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), it may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The closest GAAP financial measure to the net debt to total capitalization ratio is the debt to total capitalization ratio. The following table represents a reconciliation of the net debt to total capitalization ratio to the closest GAAP financial measure as of December 31, 2020.
Key Sources of Liquidity
The Company’s key sources of liquidity were funds generated by operations and provided by lines of credit and issuance of senior unsecured notes during the year ended December 31, 2020. Borrowings on lines of credit outstanding, net of debt issuance costs, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 consisted of the following (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had $7.0 million outstanding under our Secured Revolving Credit Facility, down from $38.0 million as of December 31, 2019. Borrowings under the Secured Revolving Credit Facility have a maturity date of May 1, 2022 and bear interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the rate announced by Bank of America, N.A. as its “Prime Rate” less 0.25%. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the interest may not, at any time, be less than 4% per annum or more than the lesser amount of 18% and the highest maximum rate allowed by applicable law. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on outstanding borrowings under the secured revolving credit facility was 4.00% per annum.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $101.0 million outstanding under our Unsecured Revolving Credit facility, down from $128 million as of December 31, 2019. Based on the unprecedented disruptions to the credit and economic markets arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew the unutilized portion of our Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility during the three months ended March 31, 2020. However, these amounts were repaid in June 2020 once it was apparent that our access to liquidity in the financial markets was not compromised. Borrowings on the Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility have a maturity date of December 14, 2021 for $11.4 million, December 14, 2022 for $28.6 million, and December 14, 2023 for $61.0 million, respectively, and bear interest at a floating rate equal to either (a) for base rate advances, the highest of (1) the lender’s base rate, (2) the federal funds rate plus 0.5% and (3) the one-month LIBOR plus 1.0%, in each case plus 1.5%; or (b) in the case of Eurodollar rate advances, the reserve adjusted LIBOR plus 2.5%. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rates on outstanding borrowings under the unsecured revolving credit facility ranged from 2.64% to 2.65% per annum.
During the three months ended September 30, 2020, we issued $37.5 million in senior unsecured notes pursuant to a Note Purchase Agreement with The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Prudential Universal Reinsurance Company. The Company received net proceeds of $37.4 million and incurred debt issuance costs of approximately $0.1 million that were deferred and reduced the amount of debt on our consolidated balance sheet. The Company used the net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes to repay borrowings under the Company’s existing revolving credit facilities and for general corporate purposes.
We had an aggregate $111.1 million and $73.4 million in senior unsecured notes as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Principal of $75.0 million of the senior unsecured notes is required to be paid in increments of $12.5 million on August 8, 2024 and $12.5 million on August 8, 2025. The final principal payment of $50.0 million is due on August 8, 2026. Optional prepayment is allowed with payment of a “make-whole” premium which fluctuates depending on market interest rates. Interest, which accrues at a fixed rate of 4.00% per annum, is payable quarterly in arrears commencing November 8, 2019. Principal of $37.5 million of the senior unsecured notes is due on August 26, 2027. Interest, which accrues at a fixed rate of 3.35% per annum is payable quarterly in arrears commencing on November 26, 2020.
Our debt instruments require us to maintain specific financial covenants, each of which we were in compliance with as of December 31, 2020. Specifically, under the most restrictive covenants, we are required to maintain (1) a minimum interest coverage (consolidated EBITDA to interest incurred) of no less than 2.0 to 1.0 and, as of December 31, 2020, our interest coverage on a last 12 months’ basis was 15.60 to 1.0, (2) a Consolidated Tangible Net Worth of no less than approximately $412.5 million and, as of December 31, 2020, we had $638.3 million and (3) maximum debt to total capitalization rolling average ratio of no more than 40.0% and, as of December 31, 2020, we had a rolling average ratio of 26.8%.
As of December 31, 2020, we believe that our cash on hand, capacity available under our lines of credit and cash flows from operations for the next twelve months will be sufficient to service our outstanding debt during the next twelve months. For more detailed information on the Company’s lines of credit, refer to Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements located in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Registration Statements
In December 2020, we filed with the SEC a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 registering up to $500 million of securities, including shares of our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities either separately or represented by warrants, or depositary shares as well as units that include any of these securities. Under the rules governing shelf registration statements, we will file a prospectus supplement and advise the SEC of the amount and type of securities each time we issue securities under this registration statement. No securities were issued under this registration statement through the date of this filing.
Cash Flows
The following summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
•Operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.1 million, compared to $22.1 million cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. The net cash inflows for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily driven by $119.6 million of cash generated from business operations, the deferral of expense payments through the increase in accrued expenses of $15.8 million, and an increase in customer builder deposits of $14.2 million, partially offset by an increase in inventory of $90.3 million, a $9.1 million decrease in earnest money deposits, expense payments of $5.5 million through a decrease in accounts payable and a $5.3 million payment of contingent consideration related to the acquisition of GRBK GHO in excess of acquisition date fair value
•Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $13.3 million compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash outflows was primarily driven by a $9.0 million investment in joint venture GBTM Sendera, a $0.5 million investment into a newly formed equity investee BHome Mortgage LLC and acquisitions of property and equipment of $2.9 million.
•Financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $25.9 million, compared to $25.9 million source of cash during the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash outflows for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily due to net payments on lines of credit of $58.0 million, and $6.8 million of distributions to noncontrolling interests partners, partially offset by borrowings from senior unsecured notes of $37.5 million.
For discussion and analysis of the Company’s cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 as well as for comparison to the Company’s cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Item 7 of Part II of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Land and Lot Option Contracts
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into land purchase contracts with third-party developers in order to procure lots for the construction of our homes in the future. We are subject to customary obligations associated with such contracts. These purchase contracts typically require an earnest money deposit, and the purchase of properties under these contracts is generally contingent upon satisfaction of certain requirements, including obtaining applicable property and development entitlements.
We also utilize option contracts with lot sellers as a method of acquiring lots in staged takedowns, which are the schedules that dictate when lots must be purchased to help manage the financial and market risk associated with land holdings, and to reduce the use of funds from our corporate financing sources. Lot option contracts generally require us to pay a non-refundable deposit for the right to acquire lots over a specified period of time at pre-determined prices which typically include escalations in lot prices over time.
Our utilization of lot option contracts is dependent on, among other things, the availability of land sellers willing to enter into these arrangements, the availability of capital to finance the development of optioned lots, general housing market conditions and local market dynamics. Options may be more difficult to procure from land sellers in strong housing markets and are more prevalent in certain geographic regions.
We generally have the right, at our discretion, to terminate our obligations under both purchase contracts and option contracts by forfeiting the earnest money deposit with no further financial responsibility to the land seller. During the three months ended March 31, 2020, management determined to increase the allowance for certain option contracts due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the homebuilding industry and projected future demand for homes in certain markets and/or locations. However, management subsequently reassessed the market situation based on new information available. As a result, reversal of allowances for earnest money deposits and pre-acquisition costs related to option contracts reflected a net loss of $1.5 million and $0.9 million for the years ended ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had earnest money deposits of $29.0 million at risk associated with contracts to purchase 4,722 lots past feasibility studies with an aggregate purchase price of approximately $324.9 million.
Letters of Credit and Performance Bonds
Refer to Note 17 in the accompanying Notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details of letters of credit and performance bonds outstanding.
Guarantee
Refer to Note 5 in the accompanying Notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for details of our guarantee in relation to our joint venture with EJB River Holdings, LLC (“EJB River Holdings”).
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to use judgment and make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues, costs and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes that the following accounting area is most critical to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and requires the most subjective or complex judgments.
Impairment of Inventory
The Company values inventory at cost unless the carrying value is determined to be not recoverable in which case the affected inventory is written down to fair value. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), we evaluate our inventory for indicators of impairment by individual community and development during each reporting period.
For our builder operations segments, during each reporting period, community gross margins on closed homes, average margins of homes within backlog, and community outlook factors are reviewed by management. In the event that this review suggests higher potential for losses at a specific community, the Company monitors such communities by adding them to its “watchlist” communities, and, when an impairment indicator is present, further analysis is performed.
For our land development segment, we perform a quarterly review for indicators of impairment for each project which involves comparing anticipated lot sale revenues to projected costs (i.e. lot gross margins). For lots designated for our builders, we review land for indicators of impairment on a consolidated level, looking at overall projected home gross margins. In determining the allocation of costs to a particular land parcel, we rely on project budgets which are based on a variety of assumptions, including assumptions about development schedules and future costs to be incurred. It is common that actual results differ from budgeted amounts for various reasons, including delays, changes in costs that have not been committed, unforeseen issues encountered during project development that fall outside the scope of existing contracts, or items that ultimately cost more or less than the budgeted amount. We apply procedures to maintain best estimates in our budgets, including assessing and revising project budgets on a periodic basis, obtaining commitments from subcontractors and vendors for future costs to be incurred and utilizing the most recent information available to estimate costs.
For each real estate asset that has an indicator of impairment, we analyze whether the estimated remaining undiscounted future cash flows are more or less than the asset’s carrying value. The estimated cash flows are determined by projecting the remaining revenue from closings based on the contractual lot takedowns remaining or historical and projected home sales or delivery absorptions for homebuilding operations and then comparing such projections to the remaining projected expenditures for development or home construction. Remaining projected expenditures are based on the most current pricing/bids received
from subcontractors for current phases or homes under development. For future phases of land development, management uses its judgment to project potential cost increases. When projecting revenue, management does not assume improvement in market conditions.
If the estimated undiscounted cash flows are less than the asset’s carrying value, the asset is deemed impaired and will be written down to fair value less associated costs to sell. These impairment evaluations require us to make estimates and assumptions regarding future conditions, including the timing and amounts of development costs and sales prices of real estate assets, to determine if expected future cash flows will be sufficient to recover the asset’s carrying value.
Fair value is determined based on estimated future cash flows discounted for inherent risks associated with real estate assets. These discounted cash flows are impacted by expected risk based on estimated land development activities, construction and delivery timelines, market risk of price erosion, uncertainty of development or construction cost increases, and other risks specific to the asset or market conditions where the asset is located when the assessment is made. These factors are specific to each community and may vary among communities.
When estimating cash flows of a community, management makes various assumptions, including: (i) expected sales prices and sales incentives to be offered, including the number of homes available, pricing and incentives being offered by us or other builders, and future sales price adjustments based on market and economic trends; (ii) expected sales pace and cancellation rates based on local housing market conditions, competition and historical trends; (iii) costs expended to date and expected to be incurred including, but not limited to, land and land development costs, home construction costs, interest costs, indirect construction and overhead costs, and selling and marketing costs; (iv) alternative product offerings that may be offered that could have an impact on sales pace, sales price and/or building costs; and (v) alternative uses for the property.
Many assumptions are interdependent and a change in one may require a corresponding change to other assumptions. For example, increasing or decreasing sales absorption rates has a direct impact on the estimated per unit sales price of a home, the level of time-sensitive costs (such as indirect construction, overhead and carrying costs), and selling and marketing costs (such as model home maintenance costs and advertising costs). Due to uncertainties in the estimation process, the volatility in demand for new housing and the long life cycle of many communities, actual results could differ significantly from such estimates.
Refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further description of the Company’s significant accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recent accounting pronouncements.