Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section titled “Selected Financial Data” and our audited financial statements and the related notes to those included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company developing targeted immunotherapies for cancer and infectious disease. Our approach seeks to generate a prophylactic or therapeutic immune response by leveraging insights into the immune system’s ability to recognize and destroy diseased cells by targeting select antigens. We initially focused on harnessing the natural power of a patient’s own immune system to recognize short tumor-specific peptide sequences presented on cancer cells, referred to as tumor-specific neoantigens, or TSNA, in order to destroy tumor cells. More recently, we extended our programs to include viral antigens displayed on the surface of virus-infected cells. Our programs are built on two key pillars - first, our proprietary Gritstone EDGE artificial intelligence platform, which enables us to identify antigens that can be recognized by the immune system with high accuracy; and, second, a potent immunotherapy platform, which we have engineered to deliver the selected antigens and drive the patient’s immune system to attack and destroy tumors or virally-infected cells.
We initiated the Phase 2 portion of our Phase 1/2 first-in-human clinical trial of our personalized immunotherapy product candidate, GRANITE, and the Phase 2 portion of our Phase 1/2 clinical trial of our “off-the-shelf” immunotherapy product candidate, SLATE (also targeting TSNA), in the fourth quarter of 2020, both for the treatment of several common solid tumors and being evaluated in combination with immune checkpoint blockade. In these studies, patients have received our immunotherapy product candidates, which have shown acceptable tolerability at doses tested as of December 31, 2020, and, importantly, we have observed substantial cytotoxic T cell responses to multiple administered TSNA and early signs of clinical benefit. We expect to present preliminary clinical data from select cohorts in the first half of 2021. Patient selection for the two programs is distinct. SLATE patients must carry both a particular tissue type human leukocyte antigen, or HLA, which is similar to the ABO blood type, but with more variants, and at least one of twenty specific gene mutations, with a particular focus upon common KRAS gene mutations, to be eligible for this “off-the-shelf” product candidate. In contrast, GRANITE patients receive an immunotherapy product candidate made specifically for them, based upon their tumor DNA/RNA sequence. Separately, we have also identified a lead product candidate against CT83, a cancer testis antigen target in a separate product class of bispecific antibodies, or BiSAb, which are designed to offer an alternative form of off-the-shelf therapy against our EDGE-identified novel tumor-specific antigens. We expect to file an IND for this program in 2022.
We have funded our operations to date primarily from private placements of our convertible preferred stock, the net proceeds from our initial public offering (“IPO”), which we completed in October 2018, from our follow-on public offering, which we completed in April 2019, from our “at the marketing offering” program (the “ATM Offering Program”), and from our private placement of common stock and pre-funded warrants in December 2020, as well as cash proceeds from bluebird bio, Inc. (“bluebird”), under the Research Collaboration and License Agreement we entered into with bluebird in August 2018 (the “bluebird Collaboration Agreement”). We do not expect to generate revenue from any product candidates that we develop until we obtain regulatory approval for one or more of such product candidates and commercialize our products or enter into collaboration agreements with third parties. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. The GRANITE, SLATE, BiSAb and CORAL programs will require substantial additional development time and resources before we would be able to apply for or receive regulatory approvals and begin generating revenue from product sales. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We also do not yet have a sales organization or commercial infrastructure and, accordingly, we will incur significant expenses to develop a sales organization or commercial infrastructure in advance of generating any commercial product sales. As a result, we will need substantial additional capital to support our operating activities.
We currently anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through equity or debt financings or other sources, such as potential collaboration agreements with third parties. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all, particularly in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic uncertainty and potential local and/or global economic recession. If sufficient funds on acceptable terms are not available when needed, we will be required to significantly reduce our operating expenses and delay, reduce the scope of, or eliminate one or more of our development programs. See “Liquidity and
Capital Resources” below and Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere for additional information.
Manufacturing is a vital component of personalized immunotherapy, and we have invested significantly in our manufacturing facility, which opened in November 2017. Until December 2019, we used a hybrid approach to manufacture our personalized immunotherapy, wherein certain elements of our product candidates were manufactured on an outsourced basis at qualified third-party contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and other elements of our product candidates were manufactured internally. As of March 2020, we have internalized the majority of the manufacturing steps in an effort to drive down both cost and production time, as well as establish full control over intellectual property and product quality. Our internal manufacturing process will require ongoing process improvements and scale up, which will require significant investments in our manufacturing facility and processes. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not materially affected our supply chain or production schedule, but further escalation of the health
crisis has the potential to cause delays in our supply chain and manufacturing operations, which could materially adversely impact our business.
Since we commenced operations in August 2015, we have invested a significant portion of our efforts and financial resources in research and development activities and establishing our manufacturing facility. We have incurred net losses each year since inception. Our net losses were $105.3 million, $94.4 million and $64.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $326.3 million, and we do not expect positive cash flows from operations in the foreseeable future. We do not have any products approved for sale. We expect to continue to incur net operating losses for at least the next several years as we advance our product candidates through clinical development, seek regulatory approval, prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization, continue our research and development efforts and invest in our manufacturing facility.
In October 2018, we completed our IPO and sold and issued an aggregate of 6,854,202 shares of our common stock, including 187,535 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ partial exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, at a price to the public of $15.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds from the offering of $92.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
In April 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering and sold and issued an aggregate of 6,500,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $11.50 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds from the offering of approximately $69.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
In October 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, or the Shelf Registration Statement, with the SEC covering the offering of up to $250.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units, including the sale and issuance of up to $75.0 million in shares of our common stock to be issued from time to time in our ATM Offering Program pursuant to the Sales Agreement that we have entered into with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen. The Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on November 8, 2019. Through December 31, 2020, we have received aggregate proceeds from our ATM Offering Program of $13.4 million, net of commissions and offering costs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold approximately 1,160,963 shares of our common stock through our ATM Offering Program and received net proceeds of approximately $9.8 million. We have $60.7 million available under the Shelf Registration Statement for the ATM Offering Program as of December 31, 2020.
In December 2020, we entered into private placement transactions with certain existing and new investors, pursuant to which we sold (i) an aggregate of 5,543,351 shares of common stock at a per share purchase price of $3.34, (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 27,480,719 shares of common stock, each with an exercise price of $3.34 per share of common stock (of which $3.33 per share was pre-paid by each purchaser), and (iii) an aggregate of 4,043,127 shares of common stock at a per share purchase price of $3.71. The aggregate gross cash proceeds to Gritstone for the securities sold in these private placements was $125.0 million, and related costs were $5.2 million. In January 2021, in connection with these private placements, we filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement to our automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 in order to register for resale the shares of common stock sold in these transactions. In addition, the automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 that we filed with the SEC covers the offering of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has placed strains on the providers of healthcare services, including the healthcare institutions where we conduct our clinical trials. These strains have resulted in institutions prohibiting the initiation of new clinical trials, slowing or halting enrollment in existing trials and restricting the on-site monitoring of clinical trials. The Company’s operations have not been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we have experienced slowing of patient recruitment and sample collection
in our ongoing clinical trials. Additionally, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, competition for potential patients in our trials may be further exaggerated as a result of multiple clinical site closures.
We have not experienced any disruptions in our supply chain necessary to conduct our ongoing clinical trials.
In response to the pandemic, and in alignment with public health guidance designed to slow the spread of COVID-19, we implemented a reduced onsite staffing model and transitioned to a remote work plan for all employees other than those providing essential services, such as our manufacturing and laboratory staff. For our onsite employees, we have implemented heightened health and safety measures designed to comply with applicable federal, state and local guidelines in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are further supporting all of our employees by leveraging virtual meeting technology and encouraging employees to follow local health authority guidance. While reopening plans have progressed in California and Massachusetts, we have continued to restrict our personnel as outlined above. We may need to undertake additional actions that could impact our operations if required by applicable laws or regulations or if we determine such actions to be in the best interests of our employees.
Components of Our Operating Results
Collaboration Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales for the foreseeable future. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized $3.5 million, $4.4 million and $1.2 million, respectively, of revenue from the bluebird Collaboration Agreement and another small collaboration agreement.
In the future, we will continue to recognize revenue from the bluebird Collaboration Agreement and may generate revenue from product sales or other collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We expect that our revenue will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year as a result of the timing and amount of license fees, milestones, reimbursement of costs incurred and other payments and product sales, to the extent that any are successfully commercialized. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused significant resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies, manufacturing development efforts and related development activities for our product candidates.
Research and development activities account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These costs include:
•
External research and development expenses, including:
•
Expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, including clinical research organizations, or CROs, preclinical testing organizations, CMOs, academic and non-profit institutions and consultants;
•
Fees related to our license agreements;
•
Internal research and development expenses, including:
•
Headcount related expenses, including salaries, payroll taxes, benefits, non-cash stock-based compensation and travel, for employees contributing to research and development activities, including the costs associated with the development of our EDGE platform; and
•
Other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratories, facilities and other costs.
In October 2017, we entered into a license agreement with Arbutus Biopharma Corporation, or Arbutus. Certain terms of the agreement were modified by amendment in July 2018. Under the agreement, Arbutus grants us a worldwide, exclusive license to certain technology of Arbutus, including Arbutus’ portfolio of proprietary and clinically-validated LNP products and associated intellectual property, as well as technology transfer of Arbutus’ manufacturing know-how. Under this agreement, we made an upfront payment of $5.0 million, which was included in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2017. Following the acceptance of our investigational new drug application for GRANITE by the FDA, we made a $2.5 million development milestone payment to Arbutus in September 2018 that was recorded as research and development expense. During the
year ended December 31, 2020, we did not reimburse Arbutus for any materials or personnel costs. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we reimbursed Arbutus for materials and personnel costs totaling $0.4 million and $0.4 million, respectively. In August 2019, a milestone was met following the initial patient treatment of SLATE in our GO-005 clinical trial. We recorded $3.0 million as research and development expense in connection with the milestone. The milestone payment was made in October 2019. See “Collaboration and License Agreements - Arbutus Biopharma Corporation” for additional information.
In October 2020, we entered into an Option and License and Development Agreement with Genevant Sciences GmbH, or Genevant, pursuant to which Genevant granted us exclusive license rights under certain intellectual property related to Genevant’s LNP technology for a single indication, and we agreed to pay Genevant an initial payment of $2.0 million, up to an aggregate of $71.0 million in specified development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, and low to mid-single digit royalties on net sales of licensed products. The upfront payment of $2.0 million was included in research and development expenses during 2020.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially in the future as we continue to advance our product candidates into and through clinical studies and pursue regulatory approval. Conducting the necessary clinical studies to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming and such clinical studies generally become larger and more costly to conduct as they advance into later stages. The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of risks and uncertainties associated with drug development, including those set forth in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Section 1A and elsewhere in this report.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program and category (in thousands):
(1) Personnel-related expenses include stock-based compensation expense of $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We have not tracked internal related expenses on a program-by-program basis because our research and development employees and infrastructure resources are utilized across our development programs. Due to the early-stage nature of our cancer immunotherapy programs, we did not track costs on a project-by-project basis prior to 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including payroll taxes, benefits, non-cash stock-based compensation and travel. Other general and administrative expenses include legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, and professional service fees for auditing, tax and general legal services. We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in the future as we expand our operating activities and prepare for potential commercialization of our current and future product candidates, increase our headcount and support our operations as a public company, including increased expenses related to legal, accounting, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with requirements of the Nasdaq Global Select Market and the SEC, directors and officers liability insurance premiums and investor relations activities. Allocated expenses consist of rent expenses related to our office and research and development facilities, depreciation and other allocated costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net, consists primarily of interest income and investment income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, and for 2018, interest expense on our lease financing obligation, which was derecognized on January 1, 2019 in connection with our adoption of Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842).
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations (in thousands):
Revenues
Collaboration revenue was $3.5 million and $4.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $0.9 million decrease was due to less required FTEs to complete the required research work under the bluebird agreement during 2020. In January 2021, bluebird announced plans to spin off its cancer unit into a separate business. We expect our collaboration agreement will be migrated to the new company by the end of 2021. Contribution revenue is related to $0.6 million cash proceeds received from a philanthropic institution, which was restricted and was to be spent in accordance with the contribution agreement. All of the contribution grant was spent in accordance with the contribution agreement and therefore recognized as revenue as of December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $88.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $82.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to increases in personnel-related expenses and expenses related to in-house laboratory supplies and consumables and facilities expenses. Personnel-related costs increased by $5.4 million, as a direct result of our increased research and development headcount. Outside services and consultants decreased by $4.3 million for clinical trials, preclinical testing and contract manufacturing expansion. In-house expenses for laboratory supplies and consumables increased by $0.8 million and reflect our increased research and development personnel and manufacturing expansion. Facility-related expenses increased by $4.8 million to accommodate our manufacturing expansion and increased research and development personnel. Milestone and license payments decreased by $1.0 million, reflecting a $3.0 million payment made in 2019 under the Arbutus license agreement upon the achievement of certain milestones and a $2.0 million in-licensing payment made in 2020 under our new agreement with Genevant Sciences GmbH.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2.0 million was primarily attributable to a $1.4 million increase in personnel-related costs as we expanded our headcount, and a $0.3 million increase in outside services for legal, finance, recruiting and other professional services to support our ongoing operations and operate as a public company. Facility-related expenses increased by $0.2 million to accommodate our increased general and administrative personnel.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The income for both years represents interest and investment income from cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. The decrease of $2.8 million was due to a lower average cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance in 2020 than in 2019.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations (in thousands):
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue was $4.4 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The $3.2 million increase was due to an entire year of revenue recognized in 2019 pursuant to the bluebird Collaboration Agreement, which we entered into in August 2018.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $82.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $55.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to increases in personnel-related expenses, expenses related to outside services and consultants, in-house laboratory supplies and consumables and facilities expenses. Personnel-related costs increased by $7.9 million, as a direct result of our increased research and development headcount. Outside services and consultants increased by $7.5 million for clinical trials, preclinical testing and contract manufacturing expansion. In-house expenses for laboratory supplies and consumables increased by $6.0 million and reflect our increased research and development personnel. Facility-related expenses increased by $6.0 million to accommodate our manufacturing expansion and increased research and development personnel. Milestone and license payments increased by $0.5 million reflecting a $2.5 million payment made in 2018 and a $3.0 million payment made in 2019 under a certain agreement upon the achievement of certain milestones.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $7.6 million was primarily attributable to a $2.6 million increase in personnel-related costs as we expanded our headcount, and a $4.2 million increase in outside services for legal, finance, recruiting and other professional services to support our ongoing operations and operate as a public company. Facility-related expenses increased by $0.8 million to accommodate our increased general and administrative personnel.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net was $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The income for both years represents interest and investment income from cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. The increase of $2.7 million was due to a higher average cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance in 2019 than in 2018 and decreased interest expense incurred on our lease financing obligation due to our adoption of Topic 842, and the change in accounting treatment related to the Pleasanton lease, which was derecognized on January 1, 2019 in connection with our adoption of Topic 842.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have funded our operations primarily through private placements of our common and convertible preferred stock, the bluebird Collaboration Agreement, and the proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our IPO, follow on public offering, and “at the market offering.” We have raised net cash proceeds of $177.9 million from the issuance of our convertible preferred stock and a non-refundable upfront payment of $20.0 million from bluebird.
In October 2018, we completed our initial public offering by issuing 6,854,202 shares of our common stock, including 187,535 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ partial exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, at an offering price of $15.00 per share, for net proceeds of approximately $92.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
In April 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering and sold and issued an aggregate of 6,500,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $11.50 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds from the offering of approximately $69.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
In October 2019, we filed the Shelf Registration Statement, covering the offering of up to $250.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units, including the sale and issuance of up to $75.0 million in shares of our common stock to be issued from time to time in our ATM Offering Program pursuant to the Sales Agreement with Cowen. The Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on November 8, 2019. Through December 31, 2020, we have received aggregate proceeds from our ATM Offering Program of $13.4 million, net of commissions and offering costs, and have $60.7 million remaining to raise.
In December 2020, we entered into private placement transactions with certain existing and new investors, pursuant to which we sold (i) an aggregate of 5,543,351 shares of common stock at a per share purchase price of $3.34, (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 27,480,719 shares of common stock, each with an exercise price of $3.34 per share of common stock (of which $3.33 per share was pre-paid by each purchaser), and (iii) an aggregate of 4,043,127 shares of common stock at a per share purchase price of $3.71. The aggregate gross cash proceeds to Gritstone for the securities sold in these private placements was $125.0 million, and related costs were $5.2 million. In January 2021, in connection with these private placements, we filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement to our automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 in order to register for resale the shares of common stock sold in these transactions. In addition, the automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3 that we filed with the SEC covers the offering of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $171.1 million and an accumulated deficit of $326.3 million, compared to cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $127.8 million and an accumulated deficit of $221.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
Additionally, we do not expect positive cash flows from operations in the foreseeable future. Historically, we have incurred operating losses as a result of ongoing efforts to develop our cancer immunotherapy candidates, including conducting ongoing research and development, clinical and preclinical studies and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We expect to continue to incur net operating losses for at least the next several years as we advance the SLATE, GRANITE, BiSAb and CORAL programs and any future product candidates through clinical development, seek regulatory approval, prepare for and, if approved, proceed to commercialization, continue our research and development efforts and invest in our manufacturing facility.
Future Funding Requirements
We do not have any products approved for sale, and we do not expect to generate any meaningful revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our current and future product candidates and/or enter into additional significant collaboration agreements with third parties, and we do not know when, or if, either will occur. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our current and future product candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved products. We are subject to all the risks typically related to the development of new product candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. Moreover, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of revenue from the commercialization of our tumor-specific immunotherapy product candidates or from additional significant collaboration or license agreements with third parties, if ever, we expect to finance our future cash needs through public or private equity offerings or debt financings. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have
to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or convertible debt securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders and increased fixed payment obligations. In addition, as a condition to providing additional funds to us, future investors may demand, and may be granted, rights superior to those of existing stockholders. If we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations and potentially impair our competitiveness, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Additionally, any future collaborations we enter into with third parties may provide capital in the near term, but we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. Any of the foregoing could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations. We have an accumulated deficit of $326.3 million through December 31, 2020. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we conduct and expand our research and development activities. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to enable us to fund our projected operations through at least the next twelve (12) months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future capital requirements depend on many factors, including:
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of developing our tumor-specific immunotherapy product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, including our Phase 1/2 clinical trial of GRANITE, which we initiated in the fourth quarter of 2018;
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of conducting studies and clinical trials for our SLATE product candidate series, including the Phase 1/2 clinical trial for SLATE, which we initiated in the third quarter of 2019;
•
the scope, progress, results, and costs of conducting drug discovery, preclinical studies and clinical trials for our BiSAb program, for which we expect to select a product candidate by the end of the fiscal year 2020;
•
potential delays in our ongoing clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our tumor-specific immunotherapy product candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of any additional product candidates we develop or acquire;
•
the timing and amount of any milestone, royalty or other payments we are required to make pursuant to any current or future collaboration or license agreements;
•
the cost of manufacturing our tumor-specific immunotherapy product candidates we successfully commercialize, including the cost of scaling up our internal manufacturing operations;
•
the cost of building a sales force in anticipation of product commercialization;
•
the cost of commercialization activities, including building a commercial infrastructure, marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•
our ability to maintain existing, and establish new, strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements, including the timing and amount of any future milestone, royalty or other payments due under any such agreement;
•
any product liability or other lawsuits related to our products;
•
the costs to attract, hire and retain skilled personnel;
•
the costs associated with being a public company;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio; and
•
the timing, receipt and amount of sales of any future approved products, if any.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our current and future product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we will need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash (in thousands):
Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $89.1 million, which consisted of a net loss of $105.3 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $21.1 million and cash used due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.9 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of depreciation and amortization expense of $6.6 million, stock-based compensation of $7.1 million, and non-cash operating lease expense of $7.5 million. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to decreases of $3.8 million in lease liability, $2.8 million in deferred revenue, $0.7 million in accrued research and development expenses, and $0.9 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, offset by increases of $0.8 million in accounts payable, $1.7 million in accrued compensation and $0.7 million in accrued and other current liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $85.0 million, which consisted of a net loss of $94.4 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $15.1 million and cash used due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.7 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of depreciation and amortization expense of $4.7 million, stock-based compensation of $5.3 million, and non-cash operating lease expense of $6.4 million. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease of $4.3 million as a result of the deferred revenue recorded in connection with the bluebird Collaboration Agreement, a decrease of $3.3 million due to pre-payments made per our lease agreements, and a decrease of $0.3 million in deposits and other long-term assets, offset by increases of $1.5 million in accrued research and development expenses and $0.7 million in accrued compensation.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in operating activities was $38.2 million, which consisted of a net loss of $64.8 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $6.4 million and cash used due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $20.2 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of depreciation and amortization expense of $4.0 million and stock-based compensation of $3.0 million. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $18.8 million as a result of the deferred revenue recorded in connection with our Collaboration Agreement with bluebird, an increase of $3.3 million in accounts payable, and $1.7 million in accrued compensation, offset by a decrease of $1.8 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, and an increase of $1.0 million in accrued and other liabilities and deferred rent, and $0.8 million in deposits and other long-term assets.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $65.9 million, which consisted of $72.9 million in proceeds from the maturity of marketable securities and $5.4 million in proceeds from the sale of marketable securities, offset by $8.8 million of purchases of marketable securities and $3.5 million of capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by investing activities was $15.8 million, which consisted of $113.0 million in proceeds from the maturity of marketable securities, offset by $81.0 million of purchases of marketable securities and $16.2 million of capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash used in investing activities was $59.1 million, which consisted of $102.1 million of purchases of marketable securities, $5.7 million of capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment, offset by $48.7 million in proceeds from the maturity of marketable securities.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $135.8 million, which primarily consisted of $125.0 million in proceeds from sale of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in a series of private placement transactions (the “PIPE”), $9.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our “at the market offering,” $0.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock from the purchase of shares under our employee stock purchase plan, and $0.2 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, offset by $0.1 million of payments of deferred financing costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $74.4 million, which primarily consisted of $70.3 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock in a public offering, $4.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our “at the market offering,” $0.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock from the purchase of shares under our employee stock purchase plan, and $0.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, offset by $0.8 million of payments of deferred financing costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, cash provided by financing activities was $110.4 million, which primarily consisted of $20.9 million in net proceeds from the issuances of shares of our Series C convertible preferred stock and $92.5 million in net proceeds from our IPO, offset by $3.1 million paid for deferred offering costs associated with preparation for our initial public offering.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
See Note 6 to our financial statements.
We are party to license agreements pursuant to which we have in-licensed various intellectual property rights. The license agreements obligate us to make certain milestone payments related to achievement of specified events, as well as royalties in the low-single digits based on sales of licensed products. In September 2018, we made a milestone payment of $2.5 million pursuant to a license agreement with Arbutus. In August 2019, following the initial patient treatment of SLATE, we recorded $3.0 million as research and development expense in connection with the milestone. In October 2020, we made a milestone payment of $2.0 million pursuant to an option and license development agreement with Genevant Science GmbH. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, no royalties were due from the sales of licensed products. The table above does not include any milestone or royalty payments to the counterparties to these agreements as the amounts, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known. See Note 7 to our financial statements.
In September 2017, we entered into a contract research and development agreement with a third-party contract research organization (“CRO”) to provide research, analysis and antibody samples to further the development of our personalized immunotherapy candidate in the treatment of cancer. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had no research and development expense under the agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an insignificant amount of research and development expense under the agreement. We are also obligated to pay the CRO certain milestone payments of up to $36.4 million on achievement of specified events. None of these events had occurred as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. However, we are unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones and, therefore, any related payments are not included in the table above.
In May 2019, we entered into a contract research and testing agreement with a third party CRO to provide antibody discovery related services. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an insignificant amount of research and development expense under the agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a total of $1.0 million of research and development expense under the agreement. We are also obligated to pay the CRO certain milestone payments of up to $34.8 million on achievement of specified events. None of these events had occurred as of December 31, 2020. However, we are unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones and, therefore, any related payments are not included in the table above.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and CMOs for clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes, which generally provide for termination within 30 days of notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts and not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
This discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operation is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to preclinical and clinical study trial accruals, fair value of assets and liabilities, the fair value of right-of-use assets (“ROU Assets”) and lease liabilities, revenue recognition, and the fair value of stock-based compensation. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other market-specific and relevant assumptions that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We analyze our collaboration agreements to assess whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes in the responsibilities of all parties in the arrangement. For collaboration arrangements that are considered to be in the scope of the collaboration guidance and that contain multiple elements, we first determine which elements of the collaboration are deemed to be within the scope of the collaboration guidance and those that are more reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and, therefore, within the scope of the revenue with contracts with customer guidance. For elements of collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to the revenue from contracts with customer guidance, an appropriate recognition method is determined and applied consistently, generally by analogy to the revenue from contracts with customers guidance.
The terms of the collaboration and license agreements entered into typically include payment of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front fees; development, regulatory, and commercial milestone payments; payments for manufacturing supply services; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Each of these payments results in license, collaboration, and other revenues, except for revenues from royalties on net sales of licensed products, which are classified as royalty revenues. The core principle of the accounting for revenue from contracts with customers guidance is to recognize revenues when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected to be received in exchange for those goods or services.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets. If the related performance obligation is expected to be satisfied within the next twelve (12) months this will be classified in current liabilities. Amounts recognized as revenue prior to receipt are recorded as contract assets in our consolidated
balance sheets. If we expect to have an unconditional right to receive consideration in the next twelve (12) months, this will be classified in current assets. A net contract asset or liability is presented for each contract with a customer.
At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised in a contract with a customer and identify those distinct goods and services that represent a performance obligation. A promised good or service may not be identified as a performance obligation if it is immaterial in the context of the contract with the customer, if it is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (either because it is not capable of being separated or because it is not separable in the context of the contract), or if the performance obligation does not provide the customer with a material right.
We consider the terms of the contract and our customary business practices to determine the transaction price. The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer. The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable amounts, or both. Variable consideration will only be included in the transaction price when it is not considered constrained, which is when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
If it is determined that multiple performance obligations exist, the transaction price is allocated at the inception of the agreement to all identified performance obligations based on the relative standalone selling prices. The relative selling price for each deliverable is estimated using objective evidence if it is available. If objective evidence is not available, we use our best estimate of the selling price for the deliverable.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to a customer. An asset is transferred when, or as, the customer obtains control of that asset, which for a service, is considered to be as the services are received and used. We recognize revenue over time by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the relevant performance obligation using an appropriate input or output method based on the nature of the good or service promised to the customer.
After contract inception, the transaction price is reassessed at every period end and updated for changes such as resolution of uncertain events. Any change in the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations on the same basis as at contract inception.
Management may be required to exercise considerable judgment in estimating revenue to be recognized. Judgment is required in identifying performance obligations, estimating the transaction price, estimating the stand-alone selling prices of identified performance obligations, which may include forecasted revenue, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success, and estimating the progress towards satisfaction of performance obligations.
Research and Development Expenses
We record research and development expenses to operations as incurred. Research and development expenses represent costs incurred by us for the discovery and development of our product candidates and the development of our technology and include: internal research and development expense, including employee-related expenses (such as salaries, benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expense); external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as CROs, preclinical testing organizations, contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”), academic and non-profit institutions and consultants; license fees; other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs; and costs incurred related to our collaboration agreements. Costs to develop our technologies are recorded as research and development expense unless the criteria to be capitalized as internal-use software costs is met.
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate and accrue expenses. We record the estimated expenses of research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers based upon the estimated amount of services provided within research and development expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. These services include the conduct of clinical and preclinical studies, contract manufacturing activities and consulting services. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are deferred and recognized as expense in the period in which the related goods are received or services are realized or consumed. If the costs have been prepaid, this expense reduces the prepaid expenses in the consolidated balance sheets, and if not yet invoiced, the costs are included in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We record amortization of prepaid expenses or accrued expenses for these costs based on the estimated amount of work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these third parties. Such payments are evaluated for current or long-term classification based on when they will be realized.
Costs for certain research and development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed may vary from our estimates and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from external CROs, CMOs, and other third-party service providers. To date, we have not experienced material differences between our accrued expenses and actual expenses.
We have and may continue to enter into license agreements to access and utilize certain technology. We evaluate if the license agreement is an acquisition of an asset or a business. To date, none of our license agreements have been considered to be an acquisition of a business. For asset acquisitions, the upfront payments to acquire such licenses, as well as any future milestone payments made before product approval, are immediately recognized as research and development expense when due, provided there is no alternative future use of the rights in other research and development projects. These license agreements may also include contingent consideration in the form of cash. We assess whether such contingent consideration meets the definition of a derivative.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation expense for stock options granted to our employees, directors, and non-employees on the date of grant and recognize the corresponding compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We account for stock-based compensation arrangements with non-employee consultants using a fair value approach. Forfeitures of awards are estimated based on historical forfeiture experience and the experience of other companies in the same industry. The estimate of forfeitures will be adjusted over the service period to the extent that actual forfeitures differ, or are expected to differ, from prior estimates.
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of our shares of common stock underlying the stock options was the responsibility of and determined by our Board. Because there was no public market for our common stock, the Board determined the fair value of common stock at the time of grant of the option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including, among others: the prices at which we sold shares of our convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions; the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; our results of operations, financial position and capital resources; current business conditions and projections; the lack of marketability of our common stock; the hiring of key personnel and the experience of management; progress of our research and development activities; our stage of development and material risks related to its business; the fact that the option grants involve illiquid securities in a private company; and the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale, in light of prevailing market conditions.
Following the IPO, the market traded price of the shares of common stock underlying the stock options is the fair value of our stock as reported on The Nasdaq Global Select Market on the grant date.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to our employees, directors, and non-employees on the grant date and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Expected Term. Our expected term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term), as we do not have sufficient historical data to use any other method to estimate expected term.
Expected Volatility. Due to our limited trading history for our common stock, expected volatility is estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biopharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies are chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the stock option grants.
Expected Dividend Yield. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially in the future from that recorded in the current period. We expect to continue to grant stock options and
awards in the future, and to the extent that we do, our actual stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
We have not recognized, and we do not expect to recognize in the near future, any tax benefit related to employee stock-based compensation expense as a result of the full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets including deferred tax assets related to our net operating loss carryforwards.
Leases
Prior to January 1, 2019, we assessed agreements to determine whether the arrangement was or contained a lease at the inception of the arrangement and if such a lease is classified as a financing or operating lease. For all of our leases accounted for as operating leases, the lease expense was expensed on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Our lease agreements contained rent holidays, scheduled rent increases and renewal options. Rent holidays and scheduled rent increases were included in the determination of rent expense and recorded ratably over the lease term. We did not assume renewals in its determination of the lease term unless they were deemed to be reasonably assured at the inception of the lease. We begin recognizing rent expense on the date that we obtain the legal right to use and control the leased space. Deferred rent consisted of the difference between cash payments and the recognition of rent expense on a straight-line basis for the buildings we occupied.
Funding of leasehold improvements by our landlord was accounted for as a tenant improvement allowance and recorded as current and non-current deferred rent liabilities and amortized on a straight-line basis as a reduction of rent expense over the term of the lease.
In certain arrangements, we were involved in the construction of improvements to buildings we are leasing. To the extent we were involved with the structural improvements of the construction project or took construction risk, we were considered to be the owner of the building and related improvements for accounting purposes during the construction period. Therefore, we recorded the fair value of the building subject to the lease within property and equipment on the consolidated balance sheets, plus the amount of building improvements incurred and funded by us and/or the landlord as of the balance sheet date. We also recorded a corresponding lease financing obligation on our consolidated balance sheets representing the amounts financed by the lessor for the building and lessor financed improvements. Lessor financed improvement incentives due but not yet received were recorded as prepaid expense and other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
Once construction was completed, we considered the requirements for sale-leaseback accounting treatment, including evaluating whether all risks of ownership had been transferred back to the landlord, as evidenced by a lack of our continuing involvement in the leased property. If we concluded the arrangement did not qualify for sale-leaseback accounting treatment, the building and improvements remained on our consolidated balance sheets and were subject to depreciation and assessment of impairment. We bifurcated our lease payments into a portion allocated to the lease financing obligation and a portion allocated to the parcel of land on which the building had been built. The portion of the lease payments allocated to the land was treated for accounting purposes as operating lease payments, and therefore was recorded as rent expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The portion of the lease payments allocated to the lease financing obligation was further bifurcated into a portion allocated to interest expense and a portion allocated to reduce the lease financing obligation.
The interest rate used for the lease financing obligation represented our estimated incremental borrowing rate at the inception of the lease, adjusted to reduce any built-in loss. The initial recording of these assets and liabilities was classified as non-cash investing and financing items, respectively, for purpose of the consolidated statements of cash flows.
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for the lease financing transaction and the impact of these estimates are as follows:
•
Incremental borrowing rate. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate as the rate we would have incurred to borrow, based on our credit quality at the inception of the lease over a similar term, the funds necessary to purchase the leased building subject to the financing lease transaction. The incremental borrowing rate is used in determining allocating our rental payments between interest expense and a reduction of the outstanding lease financing obligation.
•
Land capitalization rate. The land capitalization rate is the rate of return on the land underlying the lease properly considering expected income that the land would be expected to generate. The land lease capitalization rate is estimated using comparable market data for land capitalization rates for similar properties. The land capitalization rate is used in determining allocating our rental payments between interest expense and a reduction of the outstanding lease financing obligation.
•
Fair value of leased building and underlying land. The fair value of a leased building and underlying land subject to the lease financing transaction is based on comparable market data for similar properties as of the lease inception date. The fair value of the underlying land is used in determining allocating our rental payments between interest expense and a reduction of the outstanding lease financing obligation.
In March 2017, we entered into a non-cancelable lease for 42,620 square feet of office, cleanroom, and laboratory support manufacturing space in Pleasanton, California. Subsequently, in April 2017, we took possession of the space. The scope of the tenant improvements did not qualify under the lease accounting guidance as “normal tenant improvements” and we were the deemed owner of the leased building during the construction period for accounting purposes. In November 2017, construction on the facility was substantially completed and the leased property was placed into service. We determined that the completed construction project did not qualify for sale-leaseback accounting due to the collateral held by the landlord in the form of a letter of credit and will instead be accounted for as a financing transaction. The leased building for the Pleasanton facility and related improvements remained on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2018 and rental payments associated with the lease were allocated to operating lease expense for the ground underlying the leased building and principal and interest payments on the lease financing obligation.
Subsequent to adoption of Topic 842 on January 1, 2019, we determine whether the arrangement is or contains a lease at the inception of the arrangement and if such a lease is classified as a financing lease or operating lease. Leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the consolidated balance sheets as right-of-use assets, lease liabilities and, if applicable, long-term lease liabilities. We have elected not to recognize on the consolidated balance sheets leases with terms of one year or less. Lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As such, we utilize the appropriate incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received and impairment charges if we determine the right-of-use asset is impaired.
We consider a lease term to be the noncancelable period that it has the right to use the underlying asset, including any periods where it is reasonably assured we will exercise the option to extend the contract. Periods covered by an option to extend are included in the lease term if the lessor controls the exercise of that option.
We recognize lease expense on a straight-line basis over the expected lease term.
Our facilities operating leases have lease and non-lease components which we have elected to account for as one single lease component. The lease components resulting in a right-of-use asset have been recorded on the consolidated balance sheet and amortized as lease expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
JOBS Act
We are an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we may delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have nonetheless irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (1) December 31, 2023, (2) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (3) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year or (4) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.