ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-looking Statements
When used in this Annual Report and in other documents filed or furnished by Great Southern Bancorp, Inc. (the “Company”) with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC"), in the Company's press releases or other public or stockholder communications, and in oral statements made with the approval of an authorized executive officer, the words or phrases “may,” “might,” “could,” “should,” "will likely result," "are expected to," "will continue," "is anticipated," “believe,” "estimate," "project," "intends" or similar expressions are intended to identify "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements also include, but are not limited to, statements regarding plans, objectives, expectations or consequences of announced transactions, known trends and statements about future performance, operations, products and services of the Company. The Company’s ability to predict results or the actual effects of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain, and the Company’s actual results could differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. The novel coronavirus disease, or COVID-19, pandemic is adversely affecting the Company, its customers, counterparties, employees, and third-party service providers, and the ultimate extent of the impacts on the Company’s business, financial position, results of operations, liquidity, and prospects is uncertain. Continued deterioration in general business and economic conditions, including further increases in unemployment rates, or turbulence in domestic or global financial markets could adversely affect the Company’s revenues and the values of its assets and liabilities, reduce the availability of funding, lead to a tightening of credit, and further increase stock price volatility. In addition, changes to statutes, regulations, or regulatory policies or practices as a result of, or in response to, COVID-19, could affect the Company in substantial and unpredictable ways.
Other factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to: (i) expected revenues, cost savings, earnings accretion, synergies and other benefits from the Company's merger and acquisition activities might not be realized within the anticipated time frames or at all, and costs or difficulties relating to integration matters, including but not limited to customer and employee retention, might be greater than expected; (ii) changes in economic conditions, either nationally or in the Company's market areas; (iii) fluctuations in interest rates; (iv) the risks of lending and investing activities, including changes in the level and direction of loan delinquencies and write-offs and changes in estimates of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses; (v) the possibility of other-than-temporary impairments of securities held in the Company's securities portfolio; (vi) the Company's ability to access cost-effective funding; (vii) fluctuations in real estate values and both residential and commercial real estate market conditions; (viii) the ability to adapt successfully to technological changes to meet customers' needs and developments in the marketplace; (ix) the possibility that security measures implemented might not be sufficient to mitigate the risk of a cyber-attack or cyber theft, and that such security measures might not protect against systems failures or interruptions; (x) legislative or regulatory changes that adversely affect the Company's business, including, without limitation, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 and its implementing regulations, the overdraft protection regulations and customers' responses thereto and the Tax Cut and Jobs Act; (xi) changes in accounting policies and practices or accounting standards, including Accounting Standards Update 2016-13, Credit Losses (Topic 326), “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” commonly referenced as the Current Expected Credit Loss model, which, upon adoption, resulted in an increase in the Company’s allowance for credit losses; (xii) monetary and fiscal policies of the Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Government and other governmental initiatives affecting the financial services industry; (xiii) results of examinations of the Company and Great Southern Bank by their regulators, including the possibility that the regulators may, among other things, require the Company to limit its business activities, change its business mix, increase its allowance for loan losses, write-down assets or increase its capital levels, or affect its ability to borrow funds or maintain or increase deposits, which could adversely affect its liquidity and earnings; (xiv) costs and effects of litigation, including settlements and judgments; (xv) competition; (xvi) uncertainty regarding the future of LIBOR; and (xvii) natural disasters, war, terrorist activities or civil unrest and their effects on economic and business environments in which the Company operates. The Company wishes to advise readers that the factors listed above and other risks described from time to time in documents filed or furnished by the Company with the SEC could affect the Company's financial performance and could cause the Company's actual results for future periods to differ materially from any opinions or statements expressed with respect to future periods in any current statements.
The Company does not undertake-and specifically declines any obligation- to publicly release the result of any revisions which may be made to any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
The accounting and reporting policies of the Company conform with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and general practices within the financial services industry. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and the accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Allowance for Loan Losses and Valuation of Foreclosed Assets
The Company believes that the determination of the allowance for loan losses involves a higher degree of judgment and complexity than its other significant accounting policies. The allowance for loan losses is calculated with the objective of maintaining an allowance level believed by management to be sufficient to absorb estimated loan losses. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the allowance is based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio and other relevant factors. However, this evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires material estimates of, among other things, expected default probabilities, loss once loans default, expected commitment usage, the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows on impaired loans, value of collateral, estimated losses, and general amounts for historical loss experience.
The process also considers economic conditions, uncertainties in estimating losses and inherent risks in the loan portfolio. All of these factors may be susceptible to significant change. To the extent actual outcomes differ from management estimates, additional provisions for loan losses may be required which would adversely impact earnings in future periods. In addition, the Bank’s regulators could require additional provisions for loan losses as part of their examination process.
Additional discussion of the allowance for loan losses is included in "Item 1. Business - Allowances for Losses on Loans and Foreclosed Assets." Inherent in this process is the evaluation of individual significant credit relationships. From time to time certain credit relationships may deteriorate due to payment performance, cash flow of the borrower, value of collateral, or other factors. In these instances, management may revise its loss estimates and assumptions for these specific credits due to changing circumstances. In some cases, additional losses may be realized; in other instances, the factors that led to the deterioration may improve or the credit may be refinanced elsewhere and allocated allowances may be released from the particular credit. No significant changes were made to management's overall methodology for evaluating the allowance for loan losses during the periods presented in the financial statements of this report.
On January 1, 2021, the Company adopted the new accounting standard related to the Allowance for Credit Losses. For assets held at amortized cost basis, this standard eliminates the probable initial recognition threshold in current GAAP and, instead, requires an entity to reflect its current estimate of all expected credit losses. See Note 1 of the accompanying audited financial statements for additional information.
In addition, the Company considers that the determination of the valuations of foreclosed assets held for sale involves a high degree of judgment and complexity. The carrying value of foreclosed assets reflects management’s best estimate of the amount to be realized from the sales of the assets. While the estimate is generally based on a valuation by an independent appraiser or recent sales of similar properties, the amount that the Company realizes from the sales of the assets could differ materially from the carrying value reflected in the financial statements, resulting in losses that could adversely impact earnings in future periods.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets that have indefinite useful lives are subject to an impairment test at least annually and more frequently if circumstances indicate their value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment using a process that estimates the fair value of each of the Company’s reporting units compared with its carrying value. The Company defines reporting units as a level below each of its operating segments for which there is discrete financial information that is regularly reviewed. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has one reporting unit to which goodwill has been allocated - the Bank. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then no impairment is recorded. If the carrying value amount exceeds the fair value of a reporting unit, further testing is completed comparing the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill to its carrying value to measure the amount of impairment. Intangible assets that are not amortized will be tested for impairment at least annually by comparing the fair values of those assets to their carrying values. At December 31, 2020, goodwill consisted of $5.4 million at the Bank reporting unit, which included goodwill of $4.2 million that was recorded during 2016 related to the acquisition of 12 branches from Fifth Third
Bank. Other identifiable intangible assets that are subject to amortization are amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of seven years. At December 31, 2020, the amortizable intangible assets consisted of core deposit intangibles of $1.5 million, including $1.3 million related to the Fifth Third Bank transaction in January 2016, $200,000 related to the Valley Bank transaction in June 2014 and $31,000 related to the Boulevard Bank transaction in March 2014. These amortizable intangible assets are reviewed for impairment if circumstances indicate their value may not be recoverable based on a comparison of fair value. See Note 1 of the accompanying audited financial statements for additional information.
For purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, the Company used a market approach to value its reporting unit. The market approach applies a market multiple, based on observed purchase transactions for each reporting unit, to the metrics appropriate for the valuation of the operating unit. Significant judgment is applied when goodwill is assessed for impairment. This judgment may include developing cash flow projections, selecting appropriate discount rates, identifying relevant market comparables and incorporating general economic and market conditions.
Based on the Company’s goodwill impairment testing, management does not believe any of the Company’s goodwill or other intangible assets were impaired as of December 31, 2020. While management believes no impairment existed at December 31, 2020, different conditions or assumptions used to measure fair value of the reporting unit, or changes in cash flows or profitability, if significantly negative or unfavorable, could have a material adverse effect on the outcome of the Company’s impairment evaluation in the future.
Current Economic Conditions
Changes in economic conditions could cause the values of assets and liabilities recorded in the financial statements to change rapidly, resulting in material future adjustments in asset values, the allowance for credit losses, or capital that could negatively impact the Company’s ability to meet regulatory capital requirements and maintain sufficient liquidity.
Following the housing and mortgage crisis and correction beginning in mid-2007, the United States entered an economic downturn. Unemployment rose from 4.7% in November 2007 to peak at 10.0% in October 2009. Since that time, economic conditions improved considerably, as indicated by higher consumer confidence levels, increased economic activity and low unemployment levels. The economy continued to operate at historically strong levels until the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic began to take its toll in the first quarter of 2020. The economy plunged into a recession in the first quarter of 2020, as efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 forced all but essential business activity, or any work that could not be done from home, to stop, closing factories, restaurants, entertainment and sports venues, retail shops, personal services locations, and more.
The CARES Act, enacted in March 2020, injected approximately $3 trillion into the economy through direct payments to individuals and grants to small businesses designed to keep employees on their payrolls and fuel a bounce-back in economic activity. Also, as the crisis unfolded, the Federal Reserve acted decisively, employing a wide arsenal of tools including slashing its benchmark interest rate to zero and ensuring credit availability to businesses, households, and municipal governments.
To help our customers navigate through the pandemic, we offered Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans and short-term modifications to loan terms. PPP loans and modifications were made in accordance with guidance from banking regulatory authorities. These modifications did not result in the loans being classified as troubled debt restructurings. Severely impacted industries in our loan portfolio include retail, hotel and restaurants.
More than 22 million jobs were lost nationally in March and April 2020, as firms closed their doors or reduced their operations, sending employees home on furlough or layoffs. At home, with uncertain incomes and limited buying opportunities, consumer spending plummeted. As a result, gross domestic product (GDP), the broadest measure of the nation's economic output, plunged. Improvements in consumer spending, the GDP and employment have since occurred. Around 56% of those jobs lost in early 2020 have come back, with a return to full employment anticipated by the end of 2022.
While the U.S. economic recovery began with a robust rebound from the pandemic-induced recession, challenges remain with millions still out of work and many businesses still closed or operating under reduced hours or capacity. Social distancing measures continue to restrict economic activity, and intermittent closures and re-openings have dampened household and business sentiment.
The Federal Reserve continues to maintain a highly accommodative monetary policy by maintaining short-term rates firmly at the zero lower bound and purchasing Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities to keep long-term interest rates low. With consumer interest rates at record lows and with 30-year fixed-rate mortgages below 3%, the housing market has boomed. Home sales have been above their pre-pandemic levels, and construction activity has picked up in response. The Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing is expected to begin tapering in 2022, while the zero-interest-rate policy will likely remain in place until the economy is near full employment and inflation is firmly above the Federal Reserve’s 2% inflation target, which is not expected until early 2023.
Under the Biden administration and new Congress, additional fiscal stimulus packages are expected for 2021. The “American Rescue Plan” is an economic relief measure in the $1.9 trillion range with an emphasis on vaccination and individual and small business relief. Later in 2021, the “Build Back Better” recovery package, with an emphasis on infrastructure, research and development, education and green energy transition, is expected to be pursued. Increases in corporate and individual tax rates may be used to fund these initiatives.
In December 2020, employment declined by approximately 140,000 jobs from the previous month and the unemployment rate was unchanged from November 2020 at 6.7%, but down from 7.9% in September 2020. The decline in payroll employment reflects an increase in COVID cases and efforts to contain the pandemic. In December 2020, job losses in leisure and hospitality as well as private education were partially offset by gains in professional and business services, retail trade, and construction. Employment in leisure and hospitality declined by 498,000, with three-quarters of the decrease in food services and drinking establishments. Since February 2020, employment in leisure and hospitality is down by 3.9 million, or 23.2%. Retail trade added 121,000 jobs in December 2020 with nearly half of the growth occurring in general merchandise stores, while professional and business services added 161,000 jobs. In December 2020, both the national unemployment rate (6.7)% and the number of unemployed persons (10.7 million) were unchanged from November 2020. Although both measures are much lower than their April 2020 highs, they are nearly twice their pre-pandemic levels in February 2020 (3.5% and 5.7 million, respectively). Unemployment rates will likely continue to be volatile and dependent upon the containment of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In December 2020, the U.S. labor force participation rate (the share of working-age Americans employed or actively looking for a job) stood at 61.7%, a decrease from 63.1% at the end of 2019. The participation rate, along with full employment, is projected to return to pre-pandemic levels by the end of 2022.
The unemployment rate for the Midwest, where the Company conducts most of its business, decreased from 7.2% in September 2020 to 5.7% in December 2020. Unemployment rates for December 2020 were: Arkansas at 4.2%, Colorado at 8.4%, Georgia at 5.6%, Illinois at 7.6%, Iowa at 3.1%, Kansas at 3.8%, Minnesota at 4.4%, Missouri at 5.8%, Nebraska at 3.0%, Oklahoma at 5.3%, and Texas at 7.2%. Of the metropolitan areas in which the Company does business, the largest unemployment increases occurred in the Dallas and Chicago areas with an increase in the unemployment rate by 3.4% and 5.2% from December 2019, respectively, and ending with a rate in December 2020 of 6.3% and 8.1% respectively. While all but two of the Company’s metropolitan areas had an increase in unemployment due to the ongoing pandemic, the remaining areas are below the national unemployment rate of 6.7%.
Housing
Sales of newly built single-family homes for December 2020 were at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 842,000 according to U.S. Census Bureau and the Department of Housing and Urban Development estimates. This is 1.6% below the revised November 2020 rate of 829,000 but is 15.2% above the December 2019 estimate of 731,000. The median sales price of new houses sold in December 2020 was $355,900, up slightly from $331,400 in December 2019. The December 2020 average sales price of $394,900 was up slightly from $384,500 a year earlier. The inventory of new homes for sale at the end of December 2020 would support 4.3 months’ supply at the then-current sales rate, down from 5.7 months’ supply in December 2019.
Existing-home sales rose in December 2020, with home sales reaching their highest level since 2006, according to the National Association of Realtors (NAR). Total existing-home sales completed transactions that include single-family homes, townhomes, condominiums and co-ops, increased 0.7% from November 2020 to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 6.76 million units in December 2020. Sales in total rose 22.2% from a year ago (5.53 million units in December 2019). The median existing home price for all housing types in December 2020 was $309,800, up 12.9% from December 2019 at $274,500, as prices increased in every region. December’s national price increase marked the 106th consecutive month of year-over-year gains. Median home prices increased at double-digit rates in each of the four major regions from one year ago. Existing home sales in the Midwest were unchanged compared to the previous month, recording an annual rate of 1.59 million units in December 2020, but up 26.2% from a year earlier. The median
price in the Midwest was $235,700, a 13.7% increase from a year ago. First-time buyers accounted for 31% of sales in December 2020, unchanged from December 2019, but down from 32% in November 2020.
According to Freddie Mac, the average commitment rate for a 30-year, conventional, fixed-rate mortgage was 2.68% in December 2020, down from 2.77% in November 2020. The average commitment rate for all of 2020 was 3.11%, down from 3.94% for 2019.
The COVID-19 pandemic upended the U.S. apartment sector in 2020 with the pandemic resulting in changing attitudes regarding working from home and living in densely populated environments. Renters have sought more space and affordability; i.e. rents for two-bedroom units have held up better, while studios and downtown units have experienced the worst declines. An estimated 50,000 downtown units likely went unfilled in 2020, and vacancies for downtown product in some areas topped 10% by the end of 2020. Leasing of suburban product powered the demand with renters choosing to move to the suburbs, where they could find more space at lower rents. CoStar estimates 2020 demand in line with the past three years even with new deliveries setting a record at more than 420,000 units opened in 2020. Absorption surged in the third quarter of 2020, a sign that the weak second quarter absorption was the result of lockdown restrictions rather than a reduction in underlying demand for housing. Rents ended the year essentially flat year-over-year, but with important differences across markets and product types. Rents for downtown product ended the year down 7% from the pre-COVID peak while rents in the suburbs rose about 1% over the course of the year. Economic stimulus packages and eviction leniency periods continue to bolster the apartment industry, while unemployment levels will continue to determine the long-term outlook for apartment demand.
In December 2020, national apartment vacancy rates had increased slightly to 6.9% from 6.4% as of December 2019. Our market areas reflected the following vacancy levels in December 2020: Springfield at 4.1%, St. Louis at 8.6%, Kansas City at 8.5%, Minneapolis at 6.8%, Tulsa at 7.7%, Dallas-Fort Worth at 8.8%, Chicago at 8.3%, Atlanta at 8.4%, and Denver at 8.0%.
Commercial Real Estate Other Than Housing
Even before the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the trend of slowing growth in the office industry was expected to continue in 2020 and linger through 2021. The office demand declines that characterized much of 2020 have carried into 2021. Office-using employment remained nearly one million jobs lower than the peak level from the first quarter of 2020. While absorption decreases slowed a bit at year-end, the US office sector recorded about 75 million square feet of negative demand in 2020. As the pandemic continues to flare in areas, many companies have extended work-from-home protocols to the middle of 2021 or beyond, reversing much of the limited space utilization momentum. There will likely not be a significant increase in physical occupancy until vaccines become accessible to the general population on a large scale. Baseline forecasts call for office-using employment totals to return to pre-pandemic levels by the end of 2022, and continue to moderately accelerate from there. As of December 2020, national office vacancy rates had increased slightly to 11.5% while our market areas reflected the following vacancy levels: Springfield at 3.4%, St. Louis at 7.7%, Kansas City at 8.7%, Minneapolis at 8.9%, Tulsa at 11.2%, Dallas-Fort Worth at 17.4%, Chicago at 13.5%, Atlanta at 13.3% and Denver at 13.0%.
The gradual reopening of the economy and the relaxation of social distancing restrictions has modestly lifted consumer attitudes, and confidence and sentiment metrics showed hints of stabilization. However, infection rates remain high and vaccine distribution has been challenging, threatening the path to stability and recovery while adding uncertainty to retailers who were already experiencing reduced revenues and limited liquidity. As a result, tenant and landlord sentiment remains on fragile footing, and negative net absorption continues to increase as retailers and restaurants shutter their businesses under unprecedented financial stress. The wave of retail bankruptcies is expected to continue, with bankruptcies and store closures particularly concentrated throughout the apparel and department store subtypes. On the other hand, despite the tumultuous COVID-stricken backdrop and the many headwinds forcing the rapid evolution and adaptation of retailers across the country, the retail sector continues to exhibit areas of resilience and perseverant activity. Not all retailers are in distress, and aggregate leasing trends demonstrate plenty of pockets of strength. Discounters such as Dollar General, Dollar Tree, TJ Maxx, and Ross Dress for Less; general merchandisers such as Target and Walmart; pharmacies such as Walgreens; pet stores; grocery stores; and home improvement/tool retailers have been among the most active businesses since the pandemic hit. Though these essential-oriented tenant types remain a positive source of demand, their strength likely won't be enough to offset weakness in other segments. Vacancy has risen alongside swelling negative net absorption, and occupancy is poised to erode further. Even landlords with fully occupied buildings are struggling, as many tenants have found it difficult to make rent, seeking rent deferral, rent amendments, or rent modifications. The rise in vacancies has not been uniform across subtypes, and malls have been disproportionately impacted by space give-backs and retailer closures. The vacancy rate in malls rose most significantly throughout 2020, expanding by nearly 70 basis points. Overall, aggregate rent growth dipped into negative territory for the first time since 2012,
registering at -0.7% year-over-year in the fourth quarter of 2020. With store closures mounting and negative net absorption expected to persist throughout at least the next year, rent growth is poised to deteriorate further across all forecast scenarios and subtypes. Single-tenant, essential-oriented properties occupied by banks, pharmacies, and grocery stores continue to trade even amidst a broader lull in investment activity, emphasizing the degree to which strip centers and grocery-anchored centers with more essential tenant-mix will likely capture investor attention leading out of the pandemic.
As of December 2020, national retail vacancy rates stayed the same as the previous month at 5.1% while our market areas reflected the following vacancy levels: Springfield at 3.8%, St. Louis at 4.9%, Kansas City at 5.9%, Minneapolis at 3.8%, Tulsa at 4.2%, Dallas-Fort Worth at 6.1%, Chicago at 6.3%, Atlanta at 5.4% and Denver at 5.3%.
The unprecedented rise in online shopping and quick delivery demands brought on by the pandemic have propelled industrial demand to all-time highs. Leasing activity improved throughout the 2020 fourth quarter, led primarily by commitments from Amazon, power-grocers Walmart and Target, but also smaller healthcare and medical-oriented supply.
Despite the improvement in leasing velocity, U.S. economic growth faces headwinds as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including dampened aggregate demand and reduced export growth. Both will adversely impact the warehouse sector. Disrupted and curtailed supply chains also are problematic for port markets and distribution players. Meanwhile, labor shortages arising from mandatory construction suspensions place further pressure on industrial operators, distributors, and manufacturers.
Net absorption accordingly cooled to its lowest level since 2012, which lifted vacancy to 5.5% and caused rent growth to dip below 4% for the first time since 2013. Persistent demand from e-commerce and third-party logistics companies continues to drive demand. Other retailers and manufacturers are expected to remain cautious amid heightened uncertainty brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of the end of December 2020, national industrial vacancy rates decreased slightly to 5.6%, while our market areas reflected the following vacancy levels: Springfield at 2.7%, St. Louis at 5.3%, Kansas City at 4.6%, Minneapolis at 4.0%, Tulsa at 3.7%, Dallas-Fort Worth at 7.1%, Chicago at 6.2%, Atlanta at 5.7% and Denver at 6.2%.
Sales activity, occupancy, absorption and rental income levels of commercial real estate properties located throughout the Company’s market areas will be impacted from the pandemic but to what degree the sector suffers is yet unknown. The extent of the impact will be highly dependent on containment of the virus. In the meantime, continued economic stimulus, relief and recovery, should do much to bring the economy back to pre-pandemic economic and employment levels.
While the severity and extent of the coronavirus on the global, national and regional economies is still uncertain, any long-term impact on the performance of the financial sector remains indeterminable. Our management will continue to monitor regional, national, and global economic indicators such as unemployment, GDP, housing starts and prices, commercial real estate occupancy, absorption and rental rates, as these could significantly affect customers in each of our market areas.
COVID-19 Impact to Our Business and Response
Great Southern is actively monitoring and responding to the effects of the rapidly-changing COVID-19 pandemic. As always, the health, safety and well-being of our customers, associates and communities are the Company’s top priorities. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines, as well as directives from federal, state and local officials, are being closely followed to make informed operational decisions. A summary of the Company’s major COVID-19 responses and actions are highlighted below.
Great Southern Associates: During this unprecedented time, the Company is working diligently with its nearly 1,200 associates to enforce CDC-advised health, hygiene and social distancing practices. A significant number of non-frontline associates continue to work from home. Teams in nearly every operational department have been split, with part of each team working at an off-site disaster recovery facility to promote social distancing and to avoid service disruptions. To date, there have been no service disruptions or reductions in staffing.
Paid time off and other benefits were enhanced and implemented to support Great Southern associates. Part-time associates were awarded paid sick benefits for the first time. Any full-time or part-time associate will receive full pay if placed under a restrictive quarantine due to COVID-19 infection or direct exposure to an infected individual. The Company’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP) was enhanced at no cost to associates and family members seeking counseling services for mental health and emotional support needs.
As a token of appreciation for our employees’ dedication and to help support some of the needs of our associates, in March 2020 and again in August 2020, the Company rewarded all full-time and part-time associates with special pre-tax bonuses of $1,000 and $600, respectively. These two bonus payments and related benefit expenses totaled $2.2 million during 2020.
Great Southern Communities: Throughout 2020, we have continued to support local COVID-19 relief efforts through contributions to food banks, local United Way agencies and other nonprofit organizations to address food insecurity and support critical health and human services. Many of our employees also volunteer their time to serve various agencies and charitable organizations in their communities.
Great Southern Customers: Taking care of customers and providing uninterrupted access to services are essential. As always, customers can conduct their banking business using the banking center network, online and mobile banking services, ATMs, Telephone Banking, and online account opening services. As health conditions in local markets dictate, Great Southern banking center lobbies may be open following strict social distancing guidance from the CDC and local government officials. If our banking center lobbies are closed, drive-thru service and in-person service by appointment will be available.
As a resource to customers, a COVID-19 information center has been made available on the Company’s website, www.GreatSouthernBank.com. General information about the Company’s pandemic response, how to receive assistance, and how to avoid COVID-19 scams and fraud are included.
Impacts to Our Business Going Forward: The magnitude of the impact on the Company of the COVID-19 pandemic is not yet fully known, and will depend on the length and severity of the economic downturn brought on by the pandemic. The Company expects that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business in one or more of the following ways, among others. Each of these factors could, individually or collectively, result in reduced net income in future periods.
● Consistently low market interest rates for a significant period of time may have a negative impact on our variable rate loans
● Certain fees for deposit and loan products may be waived or reduced
● Point-of-sale fee income may decline due to a decrease in spending by our debit card customers as they deal with state and local government requirements and other restrictions and may be adversely affected by reductions in their personal income and job losses
● Non-interest expenses may increase as we continue to deal with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including cleaning costs, supplies, equipment and other items
● Banking center lobbies have been closed at various times, and may close for extended periods until the pandemic situation improves
● Additional loan modifications may occur and borrowers may default on their loans, which may necessitate further increases to the allowance for credit losses
● The contraction in economic activity may reduce demand for our loans and for our other products and services
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
Great Southern is actively participating in the PPP through the Small Business Administration (SBA). The PPP has been met with very high demand throughout the country, resulting in a second round of funding through an amendment to the CARES Act. The first round of the PPP ran from March to August 2020, with Great Southern originating approximately 1,600 PPP loans totaling approximately $121 million. Great Southern has received $4.7 million in fees from the SBA for originating these loans based on the amount of each loan. The fees, net of origination costs, have been deferred in accordance with standard accounting practices and will be accreted to interest income on loans over the contractual life of each loan. These loans generally have a contractual maturity of two years from origination date, but may be repaid or forgiven (by the SBA) sooner. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company began assisting first-round PPP borrowers with the SBA loan forgiveness process, contingent on each borrower’s eligibility. If these
loans are repaid or forgiven prior to their contractual maturity date, the remaining deferred fee for such loan will be accreted to interest income on loans immediately. We expect a high percentage of these remaining net deferred fees will accrete to interest income in the first half of 2021.
On December 27, 2020, the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits and Venues Act authorized the reopening of the PPP for eligible first-draw and second-draw borrowers through March 31, 2021. The window opened on January 19, 2021, to begin taking PPP applications. First draw PPP loans are for those borrowers who did not receive a PPP loan before August 8, 2020. Second draw PPP loans are for eligible small businesses, with 300 employees or less, that previously received a first draw PPP loan and will use or have used the full amount only for authorized uses, and that can demonstrate at least a 25% reduction in gross receipts between comparable quarters in 2019 and 2020. The maximum amount of a second draw PPP loan is $2 million. The Company has originated approximately $45 million of additional PPP loans during this reopening period.
Loan Modifications
At December 31, 2020, we had remaining 65 modified commercial loans with an aggregate principal balance outstanding of $233 million and 581 modified consumer and mortgage loans with an aggregate principal balance outstanding of $18 million. The loan modifications are within the guidance provided by the CARES Act and subsequent legislation, the federal banking regulatory agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB); therefore, they are not considered troubled debt restructurings. A portion of the loans modified at December 31, 2020 may be further modified, and new loans may be modified, within the guidance provided by the CARES Act (and subsequent legislation), the federal banking regulatory agencies, the SEC and the FASB if a more severe or lengthier deterioration in economic conditions occurs in future periods. At December 31, 2020, the modified loans were in the following categories (dollars in millions):
At June 30, 2020, we had modified 431 commercial loans with an aggregate principal balance outstanding of $931 million and 1,702 consumer and mortgage loans with an aggregate principal balance outstanding of $80 million. This represented the largest number and amount of modified loans at any quarter end during 2020. During the remainder of 2020, the majority of these modified loans completed the modification period and returned to their normal payment schedule. In addition, there were principal payments and loan payoffs which reduced the outstanding balance of these loans.
The Company has escalated monitoring activities related to the modified loans and has also increased review and monitoring activities for certain sectors of the loan portfolio which may be currently most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The retail portfolio had an outstanding balance of $355 million at December 31, 2020, which was 10% of the total loan portfolio. It is a very granular
portfolio, with an average loan size of $1.7 million. Most loans are under $5 million, with 26% of the outstanding balance of the retail portfolio represented by loans in excess of $10 million. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average loan-to-value ratio of this portfolio was 62%.
The hotel/motel portfolio had an outstanding balance of $242 million at December 31, 2020, which was 7% of the total loan portfolio. The average loan size is $4.9 million, with the 20 largest loans comprising approximately 91% of the portfolio. These properties are well-diversified geographically, mainly throughout the Midwest, with most being limited-service properties. Approximately 86% of the portfolio operates under the flag of major hotel chains. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average loan-to-value ratio of this portfolio was 59%.
The restaurant portfolio had an outstanding balance of $72 million at December 31, 2020, which was 2% of the total loan portfolio. It is a very granular portfolio, with the majority of the restaurants operating in Missouri, Illinois, Iowa and Minnesota. The majority of these loans are to franchisees of top-tier quick service brands with national scale that have had the ability to stay open with delivery and drive-through service throughout the course of the pandemic. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average loan-to-value ratio of this portfolio was 58%.
Total loans outstanding (excluding FDIC-assisted acquired loans, net of discount) in the following categories at December 31, 2020, were as follows (dollars in millions):
(1) The Commercial Business outstanding loan balance excludes PPP loans of $95.3 million.
General
The profitability of the Company and, more specifically, the profitability of its primary subsidiary, the Bank, depend primarily on its net interest income, as well as provisions for loan losses and the level of non-interest income and non-interest expense. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income the Bank earns on its loans and investment portfolios, and the interest it pays on interest-bearing liabilities, which consists mainly of interest paid on deposits and borrowings. Net interest income is affected by the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the interest rates earned or paid on these balances. When interest-earning assets approximate or exceed interest-bearing liabilities, any positive interest rate spread will generate net interest income.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Great Southern's total assets increased $511.3 million, or 10.2%, from $5.02 billion at December 31, 2019, to $5.53 billion at December 31, 2020. Full details of the current year changes in total assets are provided below, under “Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.”
Loans. In the year ended December 31, 2020, Great Southern's net loans increased $142.8 million, or 3.4%, from $4.15 billion at December 31, 2019, to $4.30 billion at December 31, 2020. Excluding FDIC-assisted acquired loans and mortgage loans held for sale, total gross loans increased $202.0 million, or 4.1%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily in commercial real estate loans, owner occupied one- to four-family residential loans, commercial business loans and other residential (multi-family) loans. These increases were partially offset by decreases in construction loans and consumer auto loans. FDIC-assisted acquired loan portfolios decreased $28.6 million. As loan demand is affected by a variety of factors, including general economic conditions, and because of the competition we face and our focus on pricing discipline and credit quality, we cannot be assured that our loan growth will match or exceed the level of increases achieved in 2020 or prior years. The Company's strategy continues to be focused on maintaining credit risk and interest rate risk at appropriate levels.
Recent loan growth has occurred in several loan types, primarily other residential (multi-family) real estate loans, one- to four-family residential loans, and commercial real estate loans and in most of Great Southern's primary lending locations, including Springfield, St. Louis, Kansas City, Des Moines and Minneapolis, as well as the locations where it has loan production offices, including Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Omaha and Tulsa. Certain minimum underwriting standards and monitoring help assure the Company's portfolio quality. Great Southern's loan committee reviews and approves all new loan originations in excess of lender approval authorities. Generally, the Company considers commercial construction, consumer, and commercial real estate loans to involve a higher degree of risk compared to some other types of loans, such as first mortgage loans on one- to four-family, owner-occupied residential properties. For commercial real estate, commercial business and construction loans, the credits are subject to an analysis of the borrower's and guarantor's financial condition, credit history, verification of liquid assets, collateral, market analysis and repayment ability. It has been, and continues to be, Great Southern's practice to verify information from potential borrowers regarding assets, income or payment ability and credit ratings as applicable and as required by the authority approving the loan. To minimize construction risk, projects are monitored as construction draws are requested by comparison to budget and with progress verified through property inspections. The geographic and product diversity of collateral, equity requirements and limitations on speculative construction projects help to mitigate overall risk in these loans. Underwriting standards for all loans also include loan-to-value ratio limitations which vary depending on collateral type, debt service coverage ratios or debt payment to income ratio guidelines, where applicable, credit histories, use of guaranties and other recommended terms relating to equity requirements, amortization, and maturity. Consumer loans are primarily secured by new and used motor vehicles and these loans are also subject to certain minimum underwriting standards to assure portfolio quality. Great Southern's consumer underwriting and pricing standards were fairly consistent through the first half of 2016. In response to a more challenging consumer credit environment, the Company tightened its underwriting guidelines on automobile lending in the latter part of 2016. Management took this step in an effort to improve credit quality in the portfolio and reduce delinquencies and charge-offs. The underwriting standards employed by Great Southern for consumer loans include a determination of the applicant's payment history on other debts, credit scores, employment history and an assessment of ability to meet existing obligations and payments on the proposed loan. In 2019, the Company made the decision to discontinue indirect auto loan originations.
Of the total loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 2019, 88.2% and 87.2%, respectively, was secured by real estate, as this is the Bank’s primary focus in its lending efforts. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, commercial real estate and commercial construction loans were 47.8% and 47.6% of the Bank’s total loan portfolio (excluding loans acquired through FDIC-assisted transactions), respectively. Commercial real estate and commercial construction loans generally afford the Bank an opportunity to increase the yield on, and the proportion of interest rate sensitive loans in, its portfolio. They do, however, present somewhat greater risk to the Bank because they may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the economy generally. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, loans made in the Springfield, Mo. metropolitan statistical area (Springfield MSA) were 8% and 9% of the Bank’s total loan portfolio (excluding loans acquired through FDIC-assisted transactions), respectively. The Company’s headquarters are located in Springfield and we have operated in this market since 1923. Because of our large presence and experience in the Springfield MSA, many lending opportunities exist. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, loans made in the St. Louis, Mo. metropolitan statistical area (St. Louis MSA) were 19% and 17% of the Bank’s total loan portfolio (excluding loans acquired through FDIC-assisted transactions), respectively. The Company’s expansion into the St. Louis MSA beginning in May 2009 has provided an opportunity to not only expand its markets and provide diversification from the Springfield MSA, but also has provided access to a larger economy with increased lending opportunities despite higher levels of competition. Loans made in the St. Louis MSA are primarily commercial real estate, commercial business and other residential (multi-family) loans which are less likely to be impacted by the higher levels of
unemployment rates, as mentioned above under “Current Economic Conditions,” than if the focus were on one- to four-family residential and consumer loans. For further discussions of the Bank’s loan portfolio, and specifically, commercial real estate and commercial construction loans, see “Item 1. Business - Lending Activities.”
The percentage of fixed-rate loans in our loan portfolio has been as much as 58% in recent years and was 49% as of December 31, 2020. This was due to customer preference for fixed rate loans during this period of relatively low interest rates. The majority of the increase in fixed rate loans over the past few years was in commercial construction and commercial real estate, both of which typically have short durations within our portfolio. Of the total amount of fixed rate loans in our portfolio as of December 31, 2020, approximately 83% mature within the next five years and therefore are not considered to create significant long-term interest rate risk for the Company. Fixed rate loans make up only a portion of our balance sheet and our overall interest rate risk strategy. As of December 31, 2020, our interest rate risk models indicated a one-year interest rate earnings sensitivity position that is moderately positive in an increasing rate environment. For further discussion of our interest rate sensitivity gap and the processes used to manage our exposure to interest rate risk, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk - How We Measure the Risks to Us Associated with Interest Rate Changes.” For discussion of the risk factors associated with interest rate changes, see “Risk Factors - We may be adversely affected by interest rate changes.”
While our policy allows us to lend up to 95% of the appraised value on one-to four-family residential properties, originations of loans with loan-to-value ratios at that level are minimal. Private mortgage insurance is typically required for loan amounts above the 80% level. Few exceptions occur and would be based on analyses which determined minimal transactional risk to be involved. We consider these lending practices to be consistent with or more conservative than what we believe to be the norm for banks our size. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, none of our owner occupied one- to four-family residential loans had loan-to-value ratios above 100% at origination. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, an estimated 0.6% of total non-owner occupied one- to four-family residential loans had loan-to-value ratios above 100% at origination.
At December 31, 2020, troubled debt restructurings totaled $3.3 million, or 0.08% of total loans, up $1.4 million from $1.9 million, or 0.05% of total loans, at December 31, 2019. Concessions granted to borrowers experiencing financial difficulties may include a reduction in the interest rate on the loan, payment extensions, forgiveness of principal, forbearance or other actions intended to maximize collection. For troubled debt restructurings occurring during the year ended December 31, 2020, five loans totaling $107,000 were restructured into multiple new loans. For troubled debt restructurings occurring during the year ended December 31, 2019, five loans totaling $34,000 were restructured into multiple new loans. For further information on troubled debt restructurings, see Note 3 of the accompanying audited financial statements, which are included in Item 8 of this report. In accordance with the CARES Act and guidance from the banking regulatory agencies, we made certain short-term modifications to loan terms to help our customers navigate through the current pandemic situation. Although loan modifications were made, they did not result in these loans being classified as troubled debt restructurings, potential problem loans or non-performing loans. As of December 31, 2020, $232.6 million of commercial loans and $18.2 million of residential and consumer loans were subject to such modifications. If more severe lengthier negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic occur or the effects of the SBA loan programs and other loan and stimulus programs do not enable companies and individuals to completely recover financially, this could result in longer-term modifications, which may be deemed to be troubled debt restructurings, additional potential problem loans and/or additional non-performing loans.
Loans that were acquired through FDIC-assisted transactions, which are accounted for in pools, were included in the analysis and estimation of the allowance for loan losses. If expected cash flows to be received on any given pool of loans decreased from previous estimates, then a determination was made as to whether the loan pool should be charged down or the allowance for loan losses should be increased (through a provision for loan losses). Acquired loans are described in detail in Note 4 of the accompanying audited financial statements, included in Item 8 of this Report. For acquired loan pools, the Company may allocate, and at December 31, 2020, has allocated, a portion of its allowance for loan losses related to these loan pools in a manner similar to how it allocates its allowance for loan losses to those loans which are collectively evaluated for impairment.
The level of non-performing loans and foreclosed assets affects our net interest income and net income. We generally do not accrue interest income on these loans and do not recognize interest income until the loans are repaid or interest payments have been made for a period of time sufficient to provide evidence of performance on the loans. Generally, the higher the level of non-performing assets, the greater the negative impact on interest income and net income.
Available-for-sale Securities. In the year ended December 31, 2020, available-for-sale securities increased $40.7 million, or 10.9%, from $374.2 million at December 31, 2019, to $414.9 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the purchase
of FNMA and GNMA fixed-rate multi-family mortgage-backed securities and FNMA and GNMA fixed rate collateralized mortgage obligation securities, partially offset by calls of municipal securities and normal monthly payments received related to the portfolio of mortgage-backed securities.
Deposits. The Company attracts deposit accounts through its retail branch network, correspondent banking and corporate services areas, and brokered deposits. The Company then utilizes these deposit funds, along with FHLBank advances and other borrowings, to meet loan demand or otherwise fund its activities. In the year ended December 31, 2020, total deposit balances increased $556.8 million, or 14.1%. Transaction account balances increased $887.1 million and retail certificates of deposit decreased $117.4 million compared to December 31, 2019. The increase in transaction accounts were primarily a result of increased customers in the CDARS reciprocal program, money market deposit accounts, and certain NOW account types. Retail certificates of deposit decreased due to a decrease in retail certificates generated through the banking center network, partially offset by increases in time deposits generated through internet channels. Brokered deposits, including CDARS program purchased funds, were $158.7 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $213.0 million from $371.7 million at December 31, 2019. The brokered deposits were allowed to mature without replacement as other deposit categories increased.
Our deposit balances may fluctuate depending on customer preferences and our relative need for funding. We do not consider our retail certificates of deposit to be guaranteed long-term funding because customers can withdraw their funds at any time with minimal interest penalty. When loan demand trends upward, we can increase rates paid on deposits to attract more deposits and utilize brokered deposits to provide additional funding. The level of competition for deposits in our markets is high. It is our goal to gain deposit market share, particularly checking accounts, in our branch footprint. To accomplish this goal, increasing rates to attract deposits may be necessary, which could negatively impact the Company’s net interest margin.
Our ability to fund growth in future periods may also depend on our ability to continue to access brokered deposits and FHLBank advances. In times when our loan demand has outpaced our generation of new deposits, we have utilized brokered deposits and FHLBank advances to fund these loans. These funding sources have been attractive to us because we can create either fixed or variable rate funding, as desired, which more closely matches the interest rate nature of much of our loan portfolio. It also gives us greater flexibility in increasing or decreasing the duration of our funding. While we do not currently anticipate that our ability to access these sources will be reduced or eliminated in future periods, if this should happen, the limitation on our ability to fund additional loans could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Securities sold under reverse repurchase agreements with customers. Securities sold under reverse repurchase agreements with customers increased $80.0 million from $84.2 million at December 31, 2019 to $164.2 million at December 31, 2020. These balances fluctuate over time based on customer demand for this product. A large portion of this increase is related to two customers who placed additional funds in these account types.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances and Short Term Borrowings. The Company’s FHLBank term advances were $-0- at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings from the FHLBank. At December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings from the FHLBank other than overnight advances, which are included in the short term borrowings category.
Short term borrowings and other interest-bearing liabilities decreased $226.7 million from $228.2 million at December 31, 2019 to $1.5 million at December 31, 2020. The short term borrowings included no overnight FHLBank borrowings at December 31, 2020 and $196.0 million at December 31, 2019. The Company utilizes both overnight borrowings and short-term FHLBank advances depending on relative interest rates.
Subordinated notes. Subordinated notes increased $74.1 million from $74.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $148.4 million at December 31, 2020. The Company issued $75.0 million of subordinated notes in June 2020, receiving net proceeds of $73.5 million.
Net Interest Income and Interest Rate Risk Management. Our net interest income may be affected positively or negatively by changes in market interest rates. A large portion of our loan portfolio is tied to one-month LIBOR, three-month LIBOR or the “prime rate” and adjusts immediately or shortly after the index rate adjusts (subject to the effect of contractual interest rate floors on some of the loans, which are discussed below). We monitor our sensitivity to interest rate changes on an ongoing basis (see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk”). In addition, our net interest income has been impacted by changes in the cash flows expected to be received from acquired loan pools. As described in Note 4 of the accompanying audited financial statements, included
in Item 8 of this report, the Company’s evaluation of cash flows expected to be received from acquired loan pools has been on-going and increases in cash flow expectations have been recognized as increases in accretable yield through interest income. Decreases in cash flow expectations have been recognized as impairments through the allowance for loan losses.
The current level and shape of the interest rate yield curve poses challenges for interest rate risk management. Prior to its increase of 0.25% on December 16, 2015, the FRB had last changed interest rates on December 16, 2008. This was the first rate increase since September 29, 2006. The FRB also implemented rate change increases of 0.25% on eight additional occasions beginning December 14, 2016 and through December 31, 2018, with the Federal Funds rate reaching as high as 2.50%. After December 2018, the FRB paused its rate increases and, in July, September and October 2019, implemented rate change decreases of 0.25% on each of those occasions. At December 31, 2019, the Federal Funds rate stood at 1.75%. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the FRB decreased interest rates on two occasions in March 2020, a 0.50% decrease on March 3 and a 1.00% decrease on March 16. At December 31, 2020, the Federal Funds rate stood at 0.25%. A substantial portion of Great Southern’s loan portfolio ($2.00 billion at December 31, 2020) is tied to the one-month or three-month LIBOR index and will be subject to adjustment at least once within 90 days after December 31, 2020. Of these loans, $1.99 billion had interest rate floors. Great Southern also has a portfolio of loans ($261 million at December 31, 2020) tied to a "prime rate" of interest and will adjust immediately with changes to the "prime rate" of interest. A rate cut by the FRB generally would have an anticipated immediate negative impact on the Company's net interest income due to the large total balance of loans tied to the one-month or three-month LIBOR index and will be subject to adjustment at least once within 90 days or loans which generally adjust immediately as the Federal Funds rate adjusts. Interest rate floors may at least partially mitigate the negative impact of interest rate decreases. Loans at their floor rates are, however, subject to the risk that borrowers will seek to refinance elsewhere at the lower market rate. Because the Federal Funds rate is again very low, there may also be a negative impact on the Company's net interest income due to the Company's inability to significantly lower its funding costs in the current competitive rate environment, although interest rates on assets may decline further. Conversely, interest rate increases would normally result in increased interest rates on our LIBOR-based and prime-based loans. As of December 31, 2020, Great Southern's interest rate risk models indicate that, generally, rising interest rates are expected to have a positive impact on the Company's net interest income, while declining interest rates are expected to have a negative impact on net interest income. We model various interest rate scenarios for rising and falling rates, including both parallel and non-parallel shifts in rates. The results of our modeling indicate that net interest income is not likely to be significantly affected either positively or negatively in the first twelve months following a rate change, regardless of any changes in interest rates, because our portfolios are relatively well matched in a twelve-month horizon. In a situation where market interest rates decrease significantly in a short period of time, as they did in March 2020, our net interest margin decrease may be more pronounced in the very near term (first one to three months), due to fairly rapid decreases in LIBOR interest rates. In the subsequent months we expect that the net interest margin would stabilize and begin to improve, as renewal interest rates on maturing time deposits are expected to decrease compared to the current rates paid on those products. During 2020, we did experience some compression of our net interest margin percentage due to 2.25% of Federal Fund rate cuts during the nine month period of July 2019 through March 2020. Margin compression primarily resulted from changes in the asset mix, mainly the addition of lower-yielding assets and the issuance of subordinated notes during 2020. LIBOR interest rates have decreased, putting pressure on loan yields, and strong pricing competition for loans and deposits remains in most of our markets. For further discussion of the processes used to manage our exposure to interest rate risk, see “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk - How We Measure the Risks to Us Associated with Interest Rate Changes.”
Non-Interest Income and Operating Expenses. The Company's profitability is also affected by the level of its non-interest income and operating expenses. Non-interest income consists primarily of service charges and ATM fees, late charges and prepayment fees on loans, gains on sales of loans and available-for-sale investments and other general operating income. Operating expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee benefits, occupancy-related expenses, expenses related to foreclosed assets, postage, FDIC deposit insurance, advertising and public relations, telephone, professional fees, office expenses and other general operating expenses. Details of the current period changes in non-interest income and non-interest expense are provided under “Results of Operations and Comparison for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.”
Business Initiatives
The Company implemented several business and operational initiatives in 2020.
For most of 2020 and continuing in 2021, Great Southern has actively monitored and responded to the effects of the evolving COVID-19 pandemic. As always, the health, safety and well-being of our customers, associates and communities while maintaining uninterrupted service are the Company’s top priorities. Please see the “COVID-19 Business Impact and Response” section of this Item 7 for further information, including the Company’s participation in the SBA’s PPP.
The Company’s 94 banking centers are also consistently reviewed to measure performance and to ensure responsiveness to changing customer needs and preferences. As such, the Company may open banking centers and invest resources where customer demand leads, and from time to time, consolidate banking centers or even exit markets when conditions dictate.
As a complement to its internal evaluation process, in 2020, the Company engaged a third-party vendor to analyze all banking center facilities and the in-branch customer experience to ensure that this physical access channel is efficiently evolving to the changing landscape.
Several banking center changes were initiated in 2020:
● In July 2020, the Great Southern banking centers located inside the Hy-Vee stores at 2900 Devils Glen Rd in Bettendorf, Iowa, and 2351 W. Locust St. in Davenport, Iowa, were closed due to store infrastructure changes by the landlord. The Company currently operates three banking centers in the Quad Cities market area - two in Davenport and one in Bettendorf.
● In August 2020, remodeling of the downtown office at 1900 Main in Parsons, Kansas, was completed, which included the addition of drive-thru banking lanes. With this completion, the nearby drive-thru facility was consolidated into the downtown office, leaving one location serving the Parsons market.
● In the Joplin, Missouri, market, the Company purchased a banking facility in the fourth quarter of 2019 vacated by another financial institution, which included a contractual black-out period ending in April 2021. A third party vendor has been engaged by the Company to redesign this facility as a “bank of the future” prototype to incorporate evolving customer preferences. Variations of this prototype design may be utilized in other select banking centers in the Company’s footprint in the future. The Company expects the new office in Joplin to be completed in the third quarter of 2021, whereupon the nearby leased banking center at 1710 E. 32nd Street will be consolidated into this new office. There are two banking centers currently serving the Joplin market.
Other corporate initiatives occurred in 2020:
● In June 2020, the Company further enhanced its regulatory capital position with the issuance of $75.0 million of 5.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due June 15, 2030, which count as Tier 2 Capital in the calculation of the Total Capital Ratio. The Notes were sold at par, resulting in net proceeds, after underwriting discounts, commissions and related expenses, of approximately $73.5 million. The Company intends to use the net proceeds of the offering for general corporate purposes, which may include repayment or redemption of outstanding indebtedness, the payment of dividends, providing capital to support its organic growth or growth through strategic acquisitions, capital expenditures, financing investments, repurchasing shares of its common stock and for investments in the Bank as regulatory capital.
● On October 21, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized management to repurchase up to one million additional shares of the Company’s common stock under a program of open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions. The program does not have an expiration date, and took effect after the Company completed the repurchase of the shares remaining under the 2018 stock repurchase program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 529,883 shares of its common stock at an average price of $41.71.
● The Company announced the retirement intentions of two executive management team members. Both announced their retirements at least a year in advance to ensure an orderly leadership transition. Successors have been identified for both of these management positions.
Douglas Marrs, Vice President and Chief Operations Officer of the Bank and Assistant Secretary of the Company, intends to retire in June 2021. He is primarily responsible for general bank operations and facilities management. With a career spanning more than 40 years in the banking industry, Mr. Marrs joined Great Southern in 1996.
Linton J. Thomason, Vice President and Chief Information Officer, intends to retire at the end of 2021. He is responsible for information services and technology. With more than 40 years in the banking industry, Mr. Thomason joined Great Southern in 1997.
Messrs. Marrs and Thomason have been integral in the Bank’s growth and success for the last two decades. During that time period, the Bank has grown from approximately $700 million in assets with operations primarily in the southwest Missouri region, to approximately $5.5 billion in assets and offices in 11 states, as of December 31, 2020.
● Great Southern Bank was recognized as part of Forbes’ annual list of the World’s Best Banks 2020. Great Southern was ranked as the sixth best bank in the United States. The World’s Best Banks list is comprised of the financial institutions that differentiate their services and build trustworthy relationships with their customers. 450 banks around the world are featured on the list, which was announced online on May 14, 2020, and can currently be viewed on the Forbes website. The study involved 40,000 bank customers from 23 countries to rate banks they are involved with on general satisfaction and key attributes like trust, fees, digital services and financial advice.
Effect of Federal Laws and Regulations
General. Federal legislation and regulation significantly affect the operations of the Company and the Bank, and have increased competition among commercial banks, savings institutions, mortgage banking enterprises and other financial institutions. In particular, the capital requirements and operations of regulated banking organizations such as the Company and the Bank have been and will be subject to changes in applicable statutes and regulations from time to time, which changes could, under certain circumstances, adversely affect the Company or the Bank.
Dodd-Frank Act. In 2010, sweeping financial regulatory reform legislation entitled the “Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act” (the “Dodd-Frank Act”) was signed into law. The Dodd-Frank Act implemented far-reaching changes across the financial regulatory landscape. Certain aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act have been affected by the more recently enacted Economic Growth Act, as defined and discussed below under “-Economic Growth Act.”
Capital Rules. The federal banking agencies have adopted regulatory capital rules that substantially amend the risk-based capital rules applicable to the Bank and the Company. The rules implement the “Basel III” regulatory capital reforms and changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. “Basel III” refers to various documents released by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. For the Company and the Bank, the general effective date of the rules was January 1, 2015, and, for certain provisions, various phase-in periods and later effective dates apply. The chief features of these rules are summarized below.
The rules refine the definitions of what constitutes regulatory capital and add a new regulatory capital element, common equity Tier 1 capital. The minimum capital ratios are (i) a common equity Tier 1 (“CET1”) risk-based capital ratio of 4.5%; (ii) a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 6%; (iii) a total risk-based capital ratio of 8%; and (iv) a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4%. In addition to the minimum capital ratios, the rules include a capital conservation buffer, under which a banking organization must have CET1 more than 2.5% above each of its minimum risk-based capital ratios in order to avoid restrictions on paying dividends, repurchasing shares, and paying certain discretionary bonuses. The capital conservation buffer requirement began phasing in on January 1, 2016 when a buffer greater than 0.625% of risk-weighted assets was required, which amount increased an equal amount each year until the buffer requirement of greater than 2.5% of risk-weighted assets became fully implemented on January 1, 2019.
Effective January 1, 2015, these rules also revised the prompt corrective action framework, which is designed to place restrictions on insured depository institutions if their capital levels show signs of weakness. Under the revised prompt corrective action requirements, insured depository institutions are required to meet the following in order to qualify as “well capitalized:” (i) a common equity Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 6.5%, (ii) a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 8%, (iii) a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10% and (iv) a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 5%, and must not be subject to an order, agreement or directive mandating a specific capital level.
Economic Growth Act. In May 2018, the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (the “Economic Growth Act”), was enacted to modify or eliminate certain financial reform rules and regulations, including some implemented under the Dodd-Frank Act. While the Economic Growth Act maintains most of the regulatory structure established by the Dodd-Frank Act, it amends certain aspects of the regulatory framework for small depository institutions with assets of less than $10 billion and for large banks with assets of more than $50 billion. Many of these amendments could result in meaningful regulatory changes.
The Economic Growth Act, among other matters, expands the definition of qualified mortgages which may be held by a financial institution and simplifies the regulatory capital rules for financial institutions and their holding companies with total consolidated assets of less than $10 billion by instructing the federal banking regulators to establish a single “Community Bank Leverage Ratio” of between 8 and 10 percent. Any qualifying depository institution or its holding company that exceeds the “Community Bank Leverage Ratio” will be considered to have met generally applicable leverage and risk-based regulatory capital requirements and any qualifying depository institution that exceeds the new ratio will be considered “well-capitalized” under the prompt corrective action rules. Effective January 1, 2020, the Community Bank Leverage Ratio was 9.0%. In April 2020, pursuant to the CARES Act, the federal bank regulatory agencies announced the issuance of two interim final rules, effective immediately, to provide temporary relief to community banking organizations. Under the interim final rules, the Community Bank Leverage Ratio requirement is a minimum of 8% for the remainder of calendar year 2020, 8.5% for calendar year 2021, and 9% thereafter. The Company and the Bank have chosen to not utilize the new Community Bank Leverage Ratio due to the Company's size and complexity, including its commercial real estate and construction lending concentrations and significant off-balance sheet funding commitments.
In addition, the Economic Growth Act includes regulatory relief in the areas of examination cycles, call reports, mortgage disclosures and risk weights for certain high-risk commercial real estate loans.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the accompanying audited financial statements, which are included in Item 8 of this Report, for a description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective dates of adoption and expected effects on the Company’s financial position and results of operations.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total assets increased by $511.3 million to $5.53 billion. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in loans receivable and cash and cash equivalents.
Cash and cash equivalents were $563.7 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $343.5 million, or 156.1%, from $220.2 million at December 31, 2019. During 2020, the increase was primarily related to excess funds held at the Federal Reserve Bank after repayment of FHLBank overnight borrowings. The additional funds were primarily the result of increases in deposits.
The Company’s available for sale securities increased $40.7 million, or 10.9%, compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the purchase of FNMA and GNMA fixed-rate multi-family mortgage-backed securities and agency collateralized mortgage obligation securities, partially offset by calls of municipal securities and normal monthly payments received related to the portfolio of mortgage-backed securities. The available-for-sale securities portfolio was 7.5% of total assets at both December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net loans increased $142.8 million from December 31, 2019, to $4.30 billion at December 31, 2020. Excluding FDIC-assisted acquired loans and mortgage loans held for sale, total gross loans (including the undisbursed portion of loans) increased $202.0 million, or 4.1%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Increases primarily occurred in commercial real estate loans, other residential (multi-family) loans, one- to four-family residential mortgage loans and commercial business loans. Outstanding and undisbursed balances of commercial real estate loans increased $59.5 million, or 4.0%, one- to four-family residential loans increased $77.6 million, or 15.3%, and other residential (multi-family) loans increased $155.1 million, or 17.9%. Partially offsetting the increases in these loans were a reduction of $72.8 million, or 5.2%, in construction loans, a decrease of $65.7 million, or 43.3%, in consumer auto loans and a decrease of $28.6 million, or 22.5%, in the FDIC-assisted acquired loan portfolios.
Other real estate owned and repossessions were $1.9 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $3.6 million, or 66.0%, from $5.5 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to sales of other real estate properties and properties which were not acquired through foreclosure during the period, and is discussed in more detail in the Non-performing Assets section below.
Total liabilities increased $484.7 million from $4.41 billion at December 31, 2019 to $4.90 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in deposits, subordinated notes and securities sold under reverse repurchase agreements, partially offset by decreases in short-term borrowings.
Total deposits increased $556.8 million, or 14.1%, from $3.96 billion at December 31, 2019 to $4.52 billion at December 31, 2020. Transaction account balances increased $887.1 million compared to December 31, 2019. Non-interest-bearing checking account balances increased $297.7 million and interest-bearing transaction accounts increased $589.4 million. The increase in transaction accounts were primarily a result of increased customers in the CDARS reciprocal program, money market deposit accounts, and certain NOW account types. Customer retail certificates initiated through our banking center network decreased by $186.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Brokered deposits, including CDARS program purchased funds, were $158.7 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $213.0 million from $371.7 million at December 31, 2019. In 2020, the brokered deposits were allowed to mature without replacement as other deposit categories increased.
The Company’s Federal Home Loan Bank advances were $-0- at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. At December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings from the FHLBank. At December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings from the FHLBank, other than overnight borrowings, which are included in the short term borrowings category. The Company utilizes both overnight borrowings and short-term FHLBank advances depending on relative interest rates.
Short term borrowings and other interest-bearing liabilities decreased $226.7 million from $228.2 million at December 31, 2019 to $1.5 million at December 31, 2020. The short term borrowings included no overnight FHLBank borrowings at December 31, 2020 and $196.0 million at December 31, 2019.
Securities sold under reverse repurchase agreements with customers increased $80.0 million, or 95.1%, from $84.2 million at December 31, 2019 to $164.2 million at December 31, 2020. These balances fluctuate over time based on customer demand for this product.
Total stockholders' equity increased $26.6 million, from $603.1 million at December 31, 2019 to $629.7 million at December 31, 2020. The Company recorded net income of $59.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Accumulated other comprehensive income increased $20.9 million due to increases in the fair value of available-for-sale investment securities and the fair value of cash flow hedges. In addition, total stockholders’ equity increased $1.8 million due to stock option exercises. Dividends declared on common stock, which decreased total stockholders’ equity, were $33.3 million. Total stockholders’ equity also decreased $22.1 million due to repurchases of the Company’s common stock.
Results of Operations and Comparison for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General
Net income decreased $14.3 million, or 19.4%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income was $59.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due to an increase in provision for loan losses of $9.7 million, or 158.1%, an increase in non-interest expenses of $8.1 million, or 7.0%, and a decrease in net interest income of $3.3 million, or 1.8%, partially offset by an increase in non-interest income of $4.1 million, or 13.2%, and a decrease in provision for income taxes of $2.7 million, or 16.2%. Net income available to common shareholders was $59.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total Interest Income
Total interest income decreased $17.3 million, or 7.4%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to an $18.1 million, or 8.1%, decrease in interest income on loans, offset by a $792,000, or 6.6%, increase in interest income on investment securities and other interest-earning assets. Interest income on loans decreased in
2020 compared to 2019 due to lower average rates of interest, partially offset by higher average balances of loans. Interest income from investment securities and other interest-earning assets increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due to higher average balances of investments and other interest-earning assets, partially offset by lower average rates of interest.
Interest Income - Loans
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, interest income on loans decreased due to lower average interest rates, partially offset by higher average balances. Interest income decreased $30.6 million as the result of lower average interest rates on loans. The average yield on loans decreased from 5.37% during the year ended December 31, 2019 to 4.66% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Offsetting this decrease was an increase of $12.5 million in interest income as a result of higher average loan balances, which increased from $4.16 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $4.40 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decreased yields in most loan categories was primarily a result of decreased LIBOR and Federal Funds interest rates. In 2020, the Company also originated $121 million of PPP loans, which have a much lower yield compared to the overall loan portfolio.
On an on-going basis, the Company has estimated the cash flows expected to be collected from the acquired loan pools. For each of the loan portfolios acquired, the cash flow estimates have increased, based on the payment histories and the collection of certain loans, thereby reducing loss expectations of certain loan pools, resulting in adjustments to be spread on a level-yield basis over the remaining expected lives of the loan pools. The entire amount of the discount adjustment has been and will be accreted to interest income over time. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the adjustments increased interest income and pre-tax income by $5.6 million and $7.4 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the remaining accretable yield adjustment that will affect interest income was $2.0 million. Of the remaining adjustments affecting interest income, we expect to recognize $1.5 million of interest income during 2021. We adopted the new accounting standard related to accounting for credit losses as of January 1, 2021. With the adoption of this standard, there is no reclassification of discounts from non-accretable to accretable subsequent to December 31, 2020. All adjustments made prior to December 31, 2020 will continue to be accreted to interest income. Apart from the yield accretion, the average yield on loans was 4.53% during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 5.19% during the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of lower current market rates on adjustable rate loans and new loans originated during the year.
In October 2018, the Company entered into an interest rate swap transaction as part of its ongoing interest rate management strategies to hedge the risk of its floating rate loans. The notional amount of the swap was $400 million with a termination date of October 6, 2025. Under the terms of the swap, the Company received a fixed rate of interest of 3.018% and paid a floating rate of interest equal to one-month USD-LIBOR. The floating rate reset monthly and net settlements of interest due to/from the counterparty also occurred monthly. To the extent that the fixed rate of interest exceeded one-month USD-LIBOR, the Company received net interest settlements which were recorded as loan interest income. If USD-LIBOR exceeded the fixed rate of interest in future periods, the Company was required to pay net settlements to the counterparty and recorded those net payments as a reduction of interest income on loans.
In March 2020, the Company and its swap counterparty mutually agreed to terminate the $400 million interest rate swap prior to its contractual maturity. The Company received a payment of $45.9 million from its swap counterparty as a result of this termination. This $45.9 million, less the accrued interest portion and net of deferred income taxes, is reflected in the Company’s stockholders’ equity as Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income and a portion of it will be accreted to interest income on loans monthly through the original contractual termination date of October 6, 2025. This will have the effect of reducing Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income and increasing Net Interest Income and Retained Earnings over the period. The Company recorded loan interest income of $7.7 million and $3.1 million during the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to this interest rate swap.
Interest Income - Investments and Other Interest-earning Assets
Interest income on investments increased $2.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income increased $2.9 million as a result of an increase in average balances from $326.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $426.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income decreased $715,000 due to a decrease in average interest rates from 3.08% during the year ended December 31, 2019 to 2.88% during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to lower market rates of interest on investment securities purchased during 2020 compared to securities already in the portfolio. In addition, some securities with higher yields matured or were called prior to their maturity dates.
Interest income on other interest-earning assets decreased $1.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income decreased $2.7 million due to a decrease in average interest rates from 2.14% during the year ended December 31, 2019, to 0.19% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Market interest rates earned on balances held at the Federal Reserve Bank were significantly lower in 2020 due to significant reductions in the federal funds rate of interest. Interest income increased $1.3 million as a result of an increase in average balances from $87.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $246.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Average balances increased due to higher balances held at the Federal Reserve Bank due to increases in customer deposit balances.
Total Interest Expense
Total interest expense decreased $14.0 million, or 25.7%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, due to a decrease in interest expense on deposits of $13.1 million, or 28.8%, a decrease in interest expense on short-term borrowings and repurchase agreements of $3.0 million, or 81.4%, and a decrease in interest expense on subordinated debentures issued to capital trust of $391,000, or 38.4%. Partially offsetting these decreases, interest expense on subordinated notes increased $2.5 million, or 56.0%, due to additional subordinated notes issued in 2020.
Interest Expense - Deposits
Interest on demand deposits decreased $2.5 million due to a decrease in average rates from 0.53% during the year ended December 31, 2019, to 0.38% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting that decrease, interest on demand deposits increased $1.7 million due to an increase in average balances from $1.51 billion in the year ended December 31, 2019, to $1.87 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in average interest rates of interest-bearing demand deposits was primarily a result of decreased market interest rates on these types of accounts. Demand deposit balances increased substantially during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Both business and personal deposit balances increased during the year.
Interest expense on time deposits decreased $10.6 million as a result of a decrease in average rates of interest from 2.19% during the year ended December 31, 2019, to 1.55% during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, interest expense on time deposits decreased $1.7 million due to a decrease in average balances of time deposits from $1.72 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $1.64 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020. A large portion of the Company’s certificate of deposit portfolio matures within six to eighteen months and therefore reprices fairly quickly; this is consistent with the portfolio over the past several years. Older certificates of deposit that renewed or were replaced with new deposits generally resulted in the Company paying a lower rate of interest due to market interest rate decreases during 2020. Time deposit balances decreased due to maturity of retail and brokered time deposits during 2020. Due to the significant increases in non-time deposits, it was not necessary to replace the brokered deposits.
Interest Expense - FHLBank Advances; Short-term Borrowings, Repurchase Agreements and Other Interest-bearing Liabilities; Subordinated Debentures Issued to Capital Trust and Subordinated Notes
FHLBank term advances were not utilized during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company had a higher amount of overnight borrowings from the FHLBank in 2020, as discussed below.
Interest expense on short-term borrowings and repurchase agreements decreased $2.1 million due to average rates that decreased from 1.40% in the year ended December 31, 2019, to 0.37% in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to decreases in market interest rates and a change in the mix of funding during the period, with more overnight borrowings from the FHLBank in 2019 than 2020. In addition to this decrease, interest expense on short-term borrowings and repurchase agreements decreased $845,000 due to a decrease in average balances from $260.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, to $183.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in average balances was due to fewer overnight borrowings from the FHLBank in 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense on subordinated debentures issued to capital trusts decreased $391,000 due to lower average interest rates. The average interest rate was 3.95% in 2019, compared to 2.44% in 2020. The interest rate on subordinated debentures is a floating rate indexed to the three-month LIBOR interest rate. There was no change in the average balance of the subordinated debentures between 2020 and 2019.
In August 2016, the Company issued $75 million of 5.25% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due August 15, 2026. The notes were sold at par, resulting in net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs, of approximately $73.5 million. In June 2020, the Company issued $75.0 million of 5.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due June 15, 2030. The notes were sold at par, resulting in net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs, of approximately $73.5 million. In both cases, the issuance costs are amortized over the expected life of the notes, which is five years from the issuance date, and therefore impact the overall interest expense on the notes. Interest expense on subordinated notes increased $2.4 million due to an increase in average balances from $74.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $115.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense on the subordinated notes increased $9,000 due to average rates that increased from 5.91% in the year ended December 31, 2019, to 5.92% in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $3.3 million, or 1.8%, to $177.1 million, compared to $180.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net interest margin was 3.49% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.95% for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 46 basis points. In both years, the Company’s net interest income and margin were positively impacted by the increases in expected cash flows from the FDIC-assisted acquired loan pools and the resulting increase to accretable yield, which was discussed previously in “Interest Income - Loans” and is discussed in Note 3 of the accompanying audited financial statements, which are included in Item 8 of this Report. The positive impact of these changes on the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were increases in interest income of $5.6 million and $7.4 million, respectively, and increases in net interest margin of 11 basis points and 16 basis points, respectively. Excluding the positive impact of the additional yield accretion, net interest margin decreased 41 basis points during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net interest margin was due to significantly declining market interest rates, a change in asset mix with increases in lower-yielding investments and cash equivalents and the issuance of additional subordinated notes in 2020.
The Company's overall interest rate spread decreased 39 basis points, or 10.7%, from 3.62% during the year ended December 31, 2019, to 3.23% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to an 85 basis point decrease in the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets, partially offset by a 46 basis point decrease in the weighted average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. In comparing the two years, the yield on loans decreased 71 basis points, the yield on investment securities decreased 20 basis points and the yield on other interest-earning assets decreased 195 basis points. The rate paid on deposits decreased 48 basis points, the rate paid on subordinated debentures issued to capital trust decreased 151 basis points, the rate paid on short-term borrowings decreased 103 basis points, and the rate paid on subordinated notes increased one basis point.
For additional information on net interest income components, refer to the "Average Balances, Interest Rates and Yields" table in this Report.
Provision for Loan Losses and Allowance for Loan Losses
In the first quarter of 2020, pursuant to the CARES Act and guidance from the SEC and FASB, we elected to delay adoption of the new accounting standard (CECL) related to accounting for credit losses. Our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, are prepared under the existing incurred loss methodology standard for accounting for loan losses.
Management records a provision for loan losses in an amount it believes is sufficient to result in an allowance for loan losses that will cover current net charge-offs as well as risks believed to be inherent in the loan portfolio of the Bank. The amount of provision charged against current income is based on several factors, including, but not limited to, past loss experience, current portfolio mix, actual and potential losses identified in the loan portfolio, economic conditions, and internal as well as external reviews. The levels of non-performing assets, potential problem loans, loan loss provisions and net charge-offs fluctuate from period to period and are difficult to predict.
Worsening economic conditions from the COVID-19 pandemic, higher inflation or interest rates, or other factors may lead to increased losses in the portfolio and/or requirements for an increase in loan loss provision expense. Management maintains various controls in an attempt to limit future losses, such as a watch list of possible problem loans, documented loan administration policies and loan review staff to review the quality and anticipated collectability of the portfolio. Additional procedures provide for frequent management review of the loan portfolio based on loan size, loan type, delinquencies, financial analysis, on-going correspondence
with borrowers and problem loan work-outs. Management determines which loans are potentially uncollectible, or represent a greater risk of loss, and makes additional provisions to expense, if necessary, to maintain the allowance at a satisfactory level.
The provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $9.7 million, to $15.9 million, compared with $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the allowance for loan losses was $55.7 million and $40.3 million, respectively. Total net charge-offs were $422,000 and $4.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, a substantial portion of net charge-offs were in the consumer category. The Company experienced net recoveries in some of the other loan categories. In response to a more challenging consumer credit environment, the Company tightened its underwriting guidelines on automobile lending beginning in the latter part of 2016. Management took this step in an effort to improve credit quality in the portfolio and lower delinquencies and charge-offs. In February 2019, the Company ceased providing indirect lending services to automobile dealerships. These actions also reduced origination volume and, as such, the outstanding balance of the Company's automobile loans declined approximately $66 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, indirect automobile loans totaled approximately $48 million. We expect this total balance will be largely paid off in the next year. General market conditions and unique circumstances related to individual borrowers and projects contributed to the level of provisions and charge-offs. In 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on the overall economy and unemployment, the Company increased its provisions for loan losses and increased its allowance for loan losses, even though actual realized net charge-offs were very low. Collateral and repayment evaluations of all assets categorized as potential problem loans, non-performing loans or foreclosed assets were completed with corresponding charge-offs or reserve allocations made as appropriate.
All FDIC-acquired loans were grouped into pools based on common characteristics and were recorded at their estimated fair values, which incorporated estimated credit losses at the acquisition date. These loan pools have been systematically reviewed by the Company to determine the risk of losses that may exceed those identified at the time of the acquisition. Techniques used in determining risk of loss are similar to those used to determine the risk of loss for the legacy Great Southern Bank portfolio, with most focus being placed on those loan pools which include larger loan relationships and those loan pools which exhibit higher risk characteristics. Review of the acquired loan portfolio also includes a review of financial information, collateral valuations and customer interaction to determine if additional reserves are warranted.
The Bank’s allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans, excluding FDIC-assisted acquired loans, was 1.32% and 1.00% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Management considers the allowance for loan losses adequate to cover losses inherent in the Bank’s loan portfolio at December 31, 2020, based on recent reviews of the Bank’s loan portfolio and current economic conditions. If current economic conditions were to last longer than anticipated or deteriorate further or management’s assessment of the loan portfolio were to change, additional loan loss provisions could be required, thereby adversely affecting the Company’s future results of operations and financial condition.
Effective January 1, 2021, we adopted the CECL accounting standard. This accounting standard requires FDIC-insured institutions and their holding companies (banking organizations) to recognize credit losses expected over the life of certain financial assets. CECL covers a broader range of assets than the current incurred loss method of recognizing credit losses and generally results in earlier recognition of credit losses.
Non-performing Assets
Non-performing assets acquired through FDIC-assisted transactions, including foreclosed assets and potential problem loans, are not included in the totals or in the discussion of non-performing loans, potential problem loans and foreclosed assets below. These assets were initially recorded at their estimated fair values as of their acquisition dates and are accounted for in pools; therefore, these loan pools were analyzed rather than the individual loans. The overall performance of the loan pools acquired in each of the five FDIC-assisted transactions has been better than original expectations as of the acquisition dates.
As a result of changes in balances and composition of the loan portfolio, changes in economic and market conditions that occur from time to time, and other factors specific to a borrower's circumstances, the level of non-performing assets will fluctuate.
Non-performing assets, excluding all FDIC-assisted acquired assets, at December 31, 2020, were $3.8 million, a decrease of $4.4 million from $8.2 million at December 31, 2019. Non-performing assets, excluding all FDIC-assisted acquired assets, as a percentage of total assets were 0.07% at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.16% at December 31, 2019.
Compared to December 31, 2019, non-performing loans decreased $1.5 million to $3.0 million at December 31, 2020, and foreclosed assets decreased $2.9 million to $777,000 at December 31, 2020. Non-performing one-to four-family residential loans comprised $1.6 million, or 51.6%, of the total non-performing loans at December 31, 2020. Non-performing consumer loans comprised $771,000, or 25.3%, of the total non-performing loans at December 31, 2020. Non-performing commercial real estate loans comprised $587,000, or 19.3%, of total non-performing loans at December 31, 2020. Non-performing commercial business loans comprised $114,000, or 3.8%, of total non-performing loans at December 31, 2020.
Non-performing Loans. Activity in the non-performing loans category during the year ended December 31, 2020, was as follows:
At December 31, 2020, the non-performing one- to four-family residential category included 23 loans, nine of which were added during 2020. The largest relationship in this category was added in 2020 totaling $274,000, or 17.5% of the total category, which is collateralized by a residential home in the Kansas City, Mo. area. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 this loan was paid off. The non-performing consumer category included 65 loans, 24 of which were added during 2020, and the majority of which are indirect and used automobile loans. The non-performing commercial real estate category included two loans. One loan was added and then removed from non-performing during 2020 after completing six consecutive months of timely payments. The largest relationship in this category was added in 2019 totaling $495,000, or 84.4% of the total category, and was collateralized by a multi-tenant building in Arkansas. The non-performing commercial business category included two loans, neither of which was added during 2020. The largest relationship in this category was added in 2018, and totaled $75,000, or 65.6% of the total category. The previous largest relationship in this category of $1.1 million paid off during 2020.
In the table above, loans that were modified under the guidance provided by the CARES Act are not non-performng loans as they are current under their modified terms. For additional information about these loan modifications, see Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations -- “Loan Modifications.”
Other Real Estate Owned and Repossessions. Of the total $1.9 million of other real estate owned and repossessions at December 31, 2020, $446,000 represents the fair value of foreclosed and repossessed assets related to loans acquired in FDIC-assisted transactions and $654,000 represents properties which were not acquired through foreclosure. The foreclosed and other assets acquired in the FDIC-assisted transactions and the properties not acquired through foreclosure are not included in the following table and discussion of other real estate owned and repossessions. Because sales and write-downs of foreclosed and repossessed properties exceeded
additions, total foreclosed assets and repossessions decreased. Activity in foreclosed assets and repossessions during the year ended December 31, 2020, was as follows:
At December 31, 2020, the land development category of foreclosed assets consisted of one property in the Camdenton, Mo. area and had a balance of $250,000 after a valuation write-down and price reduction. During 2020, two of the three properties in the land development category were sold. The subdivision construction category of foreclosed1.1 assets consisted of one property in the Branson, Mo. area that had a balance of $263,000 after a valuation write-down. The one- to four-family category of foreclosed assets consisted of one property in western Missouri, which was added during 2020 with a balance of $111,000. The amount of additions and sales under consumer loans are due to a higher volume of repossessions of automobiles, which generally are subject to a shorter repossession process. The Company experienced increased levels of delinquencies and repossessions in indirect and used automobile loans throughout 2016 and 2017. The level of delinquencies and repossessions in indirect and used automobile loans decreased in 2018 through 2020.
Potential Problem Loans. Potential problem loans decreased $58,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $4.4 million at December 31, 2019 to $4.3 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to $1.7 million in payments on potential problem loans, $124,000 in loan charge offs, and $123,000 in loans removed from potential problems and transferred to the non-performing category. Partially offsetting this decrease was the addition of $2.0 million of loans to potential problem loans. Potential problem loans are loans which management has identified through routine internal review procedures as having possible credit problems that may cause the borrowers difficulty in complying with current repayment terms. These loans are not reflected in non-
performing assets, but are considered in determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Activity in the potential problem loans category during the year ended December 31, 2020, was as follows:
At December 31, 2020, the commercial real estate category of potential problem loans included three loans, two of which were added during 2020. The largest relationship in this category (added during 2018), totaling $1.8 million, or 62.3% of the total category, is collateralized by a mixed use commercial retail building. Payments were current on this relationship at December 31, 2020. One relationship, which totaled $1.2 million and was outstanding at December 31, 2019, paid off in 2020. The one- to four-family residential category of potential problem loans included 18 loans, five of which were added during 2020. The consumer category of potential problem loans included 52 loans, 38 of which were added during 2020, and the majority of which were indirect and used automobile loans.
Loans Classified “Watch”
The Company reviews the credit quality of its loan portfolio using an internal grading system that classifies loans as “Satisfactory,” “Watch,” “Special Mention,” “Substandard” and “Doubtful.” Loans classified as “Watch” are being monitored because of indications of potential weaknesses or deficiencies that may require future classification as special mention or substandard. During 2020, loans classified as “Watch” increased $27.4 million, from $37.4 million at December 31, 2019 to $64.8 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the addition of two unrelated loan relationships involving eight total loans. One relationship totaled $14.3 million and was collateralized by a shopping center project. The other relationship totaled $11.9 million and was collateralized by multiple indoor recreational facilities. See Note 3 for further discussion of the Company’s loan grading system.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.1 million compared with $31.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4.1 million, or 13.2%, was primarily as a result of the following items:
Net gains on loan sales: Net gains on loan sales increased $5.5 million compared to the prior year. The increase was due to an increase in originations of fixed-rate loans during 2020 compared to 2019. Fixed rate single-family mortgage loans originated are generally subsequently sold in the secondary market.
Other income: Other income increased $855,000 compared to the prior year. In 2020, the Company recognized approximately $734,000 of additional fee income related to newly-originated interest rate swaps in the Company’s back-to-back swap program with loan customers and swap counterparties when compared to 2019. The Company also recognized approximately $784,000 in income related to scheduled payments and exit fees of certain tax credit partnerships during 2020, compared to $525,000 during 2019. In 2019, the Company recognized gains totaling $677,000 from the sale of, or recovery of, receivables and assets that were acquired several years prior in FDIC-assisted transactions, with no similar sales or recoveries in the current year.
Service charges, debit card and ATM fees: Service charges, debit card and ATM fees decreased $2.2 million compared to the prior year. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in overdraft and insufficient funds fees on customer accounts. This was due to both a reduction in usage by customers and a decision near the end of the first quarter of 2020 to waive (through August 31, 2020) certain fees for customers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The effects of that decision were felt during the second and third quarters of 2020. In addition, the Company recorded less in debit card and ATM fees due to a reduction in debit card and ATM usage. Also during 2020, $200,000 in additional expenses were netted against ATM fee income due to the conversion to a new debit card processing system.
Non-Interest Expense
Total non-interest expense increased $8.1 million, or 7.0%, from $115.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, to $123.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s efficiency ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 58.07%, an increase from 54.48% for 2019. The higher efficiency ratio in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in non-interest expense, partially offset by an increase in total revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s efficiency ratio was negatively impacted by an increase in salaries and employee benefits expense and positively impacted by an increase in income related to loan sales. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s efficiency ratio was positively impacted by a decrease in expense on other real estate and repossessions and negatively impacted by an increase in salaries and employee benefits expense. The Company’s ratio of non-interest expense to average assets was 2.31% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2.37% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to an increase in average assets. Average assets for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $468.4 million, or 9.6%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increases in loans receivable and cash and cash equivalents.
The following were key items related to the increase in non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
Salaries and employee benefits: Salaries and employee benefits increased $7.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to annual employee compensation merit increases and increased incentives in lending, including mortgage lending activities as noted above, and operations areas. Total salaries and benefits expense in the mortgage lending area increased $2.4 million compared to the previous year. Additionally, in March 2020, the Company approved a special cash bonus to all employees totaling $1.1 million in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In August 2020, the Company paid a second special cash bonus to all employees totaling $1.1 million in response to the pandemic.
Net occupancy expense: Net occupancy expense increased $1.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily related to increased depreciation on new ATM/ITMs and ATM operating software upgrades implemented during the fourth quarter of 2019. Also included in net occupancy expense for 2020 were COVID-19-related expenses for various items such as cleaning services, equipment, costs to set up remote work sites and other items.
Insurance: Insurance expense increased $390,000 in 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to an increase in FDIC deposit insurance premiums. In 2019, the Bank had a credit with the FDIC for a portion of premiums previously paid to the deposit insurance fund. The deposit insurance fund balance was sufficient to cause no premium to be due for the last six months of 2019.
Partnership tax credit: Partnership tax credit expense decreased $285,000 in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The Company periodically invests in certain tax credits and amortizes those investments over the period that the tax credits are used. The tax credit period for certain of these credits ended in 2020 and so the final amortization of the investment in those credits also ended in 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company's effective tax rate was 18.9% and 18.3%, respectively. These effective rates were lower than the statutory federal tax rate of 21%, due primarily to the utilization of certain investment tax credits and to tax-exempt investments and tax-exempt loans, which reduced the Company’s effective tax rate. The Company’s effective tax rate may fluctuate in future periods as it is impacted by the level and timing of the Company’s utilization of tax credits and the level of tax-exempt investments and loans and the overall level of pre-tax income. The Company's effective income tax rate is currently
generally expected to remain below the statutory rate due primarily the factors noted above. The Company currently expects its effective tax rate (combined federal and state) will be approximately 18.5% to 19.5% in future periods.
Average Balances, Interest Rates and Yields
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the total dollar amount of interest income from average interest-earning assets and the resulting yields, as well as the interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, expressed both in dollars and rates, and the net interest margin. Average balances of loans receivable include the average balances of non-accrual loans for each period. Interest income on loans includes interest received on non-accrual loans on a cash basis. Interest income on loans includes the amortization of net loan fees, which were deferred in accordance with accounting standards. Net fees included in interest income were $6.6 million, $4.0 million and $3.5 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Tax-exempt income was not calculated on a tax equivalent basis. The table does not reflect any effect of income taxes.
*Defined as the Company's net interest income divided by total interest-earning assets.
(1)
Of the total average balance of investment securities, average tax-exempt investment securities were $55.9 million, $41.7 million and $53.6 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In addition, average tax-exempt industrial revenue bonds were $20.0 million, $20.8 million and $24.8 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Interest income on tax-exempt assets included in this table was $2.2 million, $2.4 million and $3.1 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Interest income net of disallowed interest expense related to tax-exempt assets was $2.0 million, $2.2 million and $2.9 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2)
The yield/rate on loans at December 31, 2020 does not include the impact of the accretable yield (income) on loans acquired in the FDIC-assisted transactions. See “Net Interest Income” for a discussion of the effect on 2020 results of operations.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the periods shown. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to (i) changes in rate (i.e., changes in rate multiplied by old volume) and (ii) changes in volume (i.e., changes in volume multiplied by old rate). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately to volume and rate. Tax-exempt income was not calculated on a tax equivalent basis.
Results of Operations and Comparison for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
General
Net income increased $6.5 million, or 9.7%, during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Net income was $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $67.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was due to an increase in net interest income of $12.2 million, or 7.3%, a decrease in provision for loan losses of $1.0 million, or 14.0%, and a decrease in non-interest expenses of $172,000, or 0.1%, partially offset by a decrease in non-interest income of $5.3 million, or 14.5%, and an increase in provision for income taxes of $1.6 million, or 10.8%. Net income available to common shareholders was $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $67.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Total Interest Income
Total interest income increased $29.0 million, or 14.1%, during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to a $24.8 million, or 12.5%, increase in interest income on loans and a $4.2 million, or 54.7%, increase in interest income on investment securities and other interest-earning assets. Interest income on loans increased in 2019 compared to 2018 due to higher average rates of interest and higher average balances of loans. Interest income from investment securities and other interest-earning assets increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due to higher average rates of interest and higher average balances.
Interest Income - Loans
During the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, interest income on loans increased due to higher average interest rates and higher average balances. Interest income increased $12.0 million as the result of higher average
interest rates on loans. The average yield on loans increased from 5.07% during the year ended December 31, 2018 to 5.37% during the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income increased $12.8 million as a result of higher average loan balances, which increased from $3.91 billion during the year ended December 31, 2018, to $4.16 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019. The higher average balances were primarily due to organic loan growth in commercial real estate loans, one- to four- family residential loans, and other residential (multi-family) loans, partially offset by decreases in consumer loans.
On an on-going basis, the Company has estimated the cash flows expected to be collected from the acquired loan pools. For each of the loan portfolios acquired, the cash flow estimates have increased, based on the payment histories and the collection of certain loans, thereby reducing loss expectations of certain loan pools, resulting in adjustments to be spread on a level-yield basis over the remaining expected lives of the loan pools. The entire amount of the discount adjustment has been and will be accreted to interest income over time. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the adjustments increased interest income and pre-tax income by $7.4 million and $5.1 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2019, the remaining accretable yield adjustment that will affect interest income was $7.6 million. Of the remaining adjustments affecting interest income, we expect to recognize $5.6 million of interest income during 2020. Apart from the yield accretion, the average yield on loans was 5.19% during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 4.94% during the year ended December 31, 2018, as a result of higher current market rates on adjustable rate loans and new loans originated during the year.
As noted previously, in October 2018, the Company entered into an interest rate swap transaction as part of its ongoing interest rate management strategies to hedge the risk of its floating rate loans. The notional amount of the swap is $400 million with a termination date of October 6, 2025. Under the terms of the swap, the Company received a fixed rate of interest of 3.018% and paid a floating rate of interest equal to one-month USD-LIBOR. The floating rate reset monthly and net settlements of interest due to/from the counterparty also occurred monthly. The floating rate of interest was 1.710% at December 31, 2019. Therefore, at that time, the Company received net interest settlements which were recorded as loan interest income, to the extent that the fixed rate of interest exceeded one-month USD-LIBOR. If USD-LIBOR had exceeded the fixed rate of interest, the Company was required to pay net settlements to the counterparty and record those net payments as a reduction of interest income on loans. The Company recorded loan interest income of $3.1 million and $673,000 during the years ending December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to this interest rate swap.
Interest Income - Investments and Other Interest-earning Assets
Interest income on investments increased $4.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Interest income increased $3.8 million as a result of an increase in average balances from $201.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, to $326.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Average balances of securities increased primarily due to significant purchases of securities in 2019. Interest income increased $395,000 due to an increase in average interest rates from 2.90% during the year ended December 31, 2018 to 3.08% during the year ended December 31, 2019, due to higher market rates of interest on investment securities and a decrease in the volume of prepayments on mortgage-backed securities.
Interest income on other interest-earning assets decreased $7,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Interest income decreased $58,000 as a result of a decrease in average balances from $104.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, to $87.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income increased $51,000 due to an increase in average interest rates from 1.81% during the year ended December 31, 2018, to 2.14% during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher market rates of interest on other interest-bearing deposits in financial institutions.
Total Interest Expense
Total interest expense increased $16.8 million, or 44.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2019, when compared with the year ended December 31, 2018, due to an increase in interest expense on deposits of $17.6 million, or 63.0%, an increase in interest expense on short-term borrowings and repurchase agreements of $2.9 million, or 375.2%, an increase in interest expense on subordinated notes of $281,000, or 6.9%, and an increase in interest expense on subordinated debentures issued to capital trust of $66,000, or 6.9%. Partially offsetting these increases, interest expense decreased $4.0 million, or 100%, due to having no FHLB advances outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense - Deposits
Interest on demand deposits increased $2.1 million due to an increase in average rates from 0.39% during the year ended December 31, 2018, to 0.53% during the year ended December 31, 2019. Partially offsetting that increase, interest on demand deposits decreased $92,000 due to a decrease in average balances from $1.53 billion in the year ended December 31, 2018, to $1.51 billion in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in average interest rates of interest-bearing demand deposits was primarily a result of increased market interest rates on these types of accounts from December 2016 through the first half of 2019.
Interest expense on time deposits increased $9.4 million as a result of an increase in average rates of interest from 1.60% during the year ended December 31, 2018, to 2.19% during the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, interest expense on time deposits increased $6.3 million due to an increase in average balances of time deposits from $1.38 billion during the year ended December 31, 2018, to $1.72 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019. A large portion of the Company’s certificate of deposit portfolio matures within six to eighteen months and therefore reprices fairly quickly; this is consistent with the portfolio over the past several years. Older certificates of deposit that renewed or were replaced with new deposits generally resulted in the Company paying a higher rate of interest due to market interest rate increases in 2018 and the first half of 2019. The increase in average balances of time deposits was primarily a result of increases in brokered deposits, including CDARS program purchased funds, and increases in deposits originated through the Company’s internet deposit acquisition channels.
Interest Expense - FHLBank Advances, Short-term Borrowings and Structured Repurchase Agreements, Subordinated Debentures Issued to Capital Trust and Subordinated Notes
FHLBank advances were not utilized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company had a higher amount of overnight borrowings from the FHLBank in 2019, as discussed below.
Interest expense on short-term borrowings and repurchase agreements increased $1.8 million due to average rates that increased from 0.56% in the year ended December 31, 2018, to 1.40% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to increases in market interest rates and a change in the mix of funding during the year, with more overnight borrowings from the FHLBank in 2019. In addition to this increase, interest expense on short-term borrowings and repurchase agreements increased $1.1 million due to an increase in average balances from $137.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, to $260.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, interest expense on subordinated debentures issued to capital trusts increased $66,000 due to slightly higher average interest rates. The average interest rate was 3.70% in 2018, compared to 3.95% in 2019. There was no change in the average balance of the subordinated debentures between 2019 and 2018.
In August 2016, the Company issued $75 million of 5.25% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due August 15, 2026. The notes were sold at par, resulting in net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions and other issuance costs, of approximately $73.5 million. These issuance costs are amortized over the expected life of the notes, which is five years from the issuance date, and therefore impact the overall interest expense on the notes. Interest expense on the subordinated notes increased $276,000 due to average rates that increased from 5.55% in the year ended December 31, 2018, to 5.91% in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $12.2 million, or 7.3%, to $180.4 million, compared to $168.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Net interest margin was 3.95% for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 3.99% in 2018, a decrease of four basis points. In both years, the Company’s net interest income and margin were positively impacted by the increases in expected cash flows from the FDIC-assisted acquired loan pools and the resulting increase to accretable yield, which was discussed previously in “Interest Income - Loans” and is discussed in Note 4 of the accompanying audited financial statements, which are included in Item 8 of this Report. The positive impact of these changes on the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were increases in interest income of $7.4 million and $5.1 million, respectively, and increases in net interest margin of 16 basis points and 12 basis points, respectively. Excluding the positive impact of the additional yield accretion, net interest margin decreased eight basis points during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net interest margin is primarily due to an increase in the average interest rates on interest-bearing demand and time deposits and an increase in the average interest rate on short term borrowings and repurchase agreements including overnight borrowings from the FHLBank, partially offset by increased yields in most loan categories and higher overall yields on investments and interest-earning deposits at the Federal Reserve Bank.
The Company’s overall interest rate spread decreased 13 basis points, or 3.5%, from 3.75% during the year ended December 31, 2018, to 3.62% during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to a 39 basis point increase in the weighted average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by a 26 basis point increase in the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets. In comparing the two years, the yield on loans increased 30 basis points, the yield on investment securities increased 18 basis points and the yield on other interest-earning assets increased 33 basis points. The rate paid on deposits increased 45 basis points, the rate paid on FHLBank advances decreased 209 basis points, the rate paid on subordinated debentures issued to capital trust increased 25 basis points, the rate paid on short-term borrowings increased 84 basis points, and the rate paid on subordinated notes increased 36 basis points.
For additional information on net interest income components, refer to the “Average Balances, Interest Rates and Yields” table in this Report.
Provision for Loan Losses and Allowance for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $1.0 million, to $6.2 million, compared with $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. At December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, the allowance for loan losses was $40.3 million and $38.4 million, respectively. Total net charge-offs were $4.3 million and $5.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2019, $2.8 million of the $4.3 million of net charge-offs were in the consumer auto category. In response to a more challenging consumer credit environment, the Company tightened its underwriting guidelines on automobile lending beginning in the latter part of 2016. Management took this step in an effort to improve credit quality in the portfolio and lower delinquencies and charge-offs. In February 2019, the Company ceased providing indirect lending services to automobile dealerships. These actions also reduced origination volume and, as such, the outstanding balance of the Company's automobile loans declined approximately $102 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2019, indirect automobile loans totaled approximately $109 million. We expect this total balance will be largely paid off in the next year. General market conditions and unique circumstances related to individual borrowers and projects contributed to the level of provisions and charge-offs. Collateral and repayment evaluations of all assets categorized as potential problem loans, non-performing loans or foreclosed assets were completed with corresponding charge-offs or reserve allocations made as appropriate.
The Bank’s allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans, excluding FDIC-assisted acquired loans, was 1.00% and 0.98% at December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively.
Non-performing Assets
Non-performing assets acquired through FDIC-assisted transactions, including foreclosed assets and potential problem loans, are not included in the totals or in the discussion of non-performing loans, potential problem loans and foreclosed assets below. These assets were initially recorded at their estimated fair values as of their acquisition dates and are accounted for in pools; therefore, these loan pools are analyzed rather than the individual loans. The overall performance of the loan pools acquired in each of the five FDIC-assisted transactions has been better than original expectations as of the acquisition dates.
As a result of changes in balances and composition of the loan portfolio, changes in economic and market conditions that occur from time to time, and other factors specific to a borrower’s circumstances, the level of non-performing assets will fluctuate.
Non-performing assets, excluding all FDIC-assisted acquired assets, at December 31, 2019, were $8.2 million, a decrease of $3.6 million from $11.8 million at December 31, 2018. Non-performing assets, excluding all FDIC-assisted acquired assets, as a percentage of total assets were 0.16% at December 31, 2019, compared to 0.25% at December 31, 2018.
Compared to December 31, 2018, non-performing loans decreased $1.8 million to $4.5 million at December 31, 2019, and foreclosed assets decreased $1.8 million to $3.7 million at December 31, 2019. Non-performing one-to four-family residential loans comprised $1.4 million, or 30.5%, of the total $4.5 million of non-performing loans at December 31, 2019. Non-performing consumer loans comprised $1.3 million, or 28.2%, of the total non-performing loans at December 31, 2019. Non-performing commercial business loans comprised $1.2 million, or 27.3%, of total non-performing loans at December 31, 2019. Non-performing commercial real estate loans comprised $632,000, or 14.0%, of total non-performing loans at December 31, 2019.
Non-performing Loans. Activity in the non-performing loans category during the year ended December 31, 2019, was as follows:
At December 31, 2019, the non-performing one- to four-family residential category included 23 loans, 13 of which were added during 2019. The largest relationship in this category was added in 2019 totaling $158,000, or 11.5% of the total category, which is collateralized by a residential home in the St. Louis, Mo. area. The non-performing consumer category included 111 loans, 64 of which were added during 2019, and the majority of which are indirect used automobile loans. The non-performing commercial business category included four loans, one of which was added during 2019. The largest relationship in this category was added in 2018, and totaled $1.1 million, or 85.7% of the total category. This relationship is collateralized by an assignment of an interest in a real estate project. The non-performing commercial real estate category included two loans, one of which was added during 2019. The largest relationship in this category was added in 2019 totaling $530,000, or 83.9% of the total category, and was collateralized by a multi-tenant building in Arkansas.
The significant increases and decreases in non-performing loans during 2019 primarily related to one borrower. This relationship totaled approximately $6.7 million, with collateral consisting of commercial development ground and a single-family property in central Missouri and agricultural ground in Iowa. The loans in this relationship were all cross-collateralized. This relationship was represented in the non-performing land development, commercial real estate and one- to four-family categories. During 2019, the borrower deeded the properties to the Bank in lieu of foreclosure and this relationship was then moved to the Other Real Estate Owned and Repossessed category. The land development and commercial real estate assets were then sold prior to the end of 2019.
Other Real Estate Owned and Repossessions. Of the total $5.5 million of other real estate owned and repossessions at December 31, 2019, $1.0 million represents the fair value of foreclosed and repossessed assets related to loans acquired in FDIC-assisted transactions and $871,000 represents properties which were not acquired through foreclosure. The foreclosed and other assets acquired in the FDIC-assisted transactions and the properties not acquired through foreclosure are not included in the following table and discussion of other real estate owned and repossessions. Because sales and write-downs of foreclosed and repossessed properties exceeded additions, total foreclosed assets and repossessions decreased. Activity in foreclosed assets and repossessions during the year ended December 31, 2019, was as follows:
Excluding the consumer category, during the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company reduced its foreclosed assets by $9.0 million through asset sales. At December 31, 2019, the land development category of foreclosed assets included three properties, the largest of which was located in the Branson, Mo. area and had a balance of $768,000, or 42.3% of the total category. Of the total dollar amount in the land development category of foreclosed assets, 70.3% was located in the Branson, Mo. area, including the largest property previously mentioned. The subdivision construction category of foreclosed assets included three properties, the largest of which was located in the Branson, Mo. area and had a balance of $350,000, or 50.8% of the total category. Of the total dollar amount in the subdivision construction category of foreclosed assets, 90.0% is located in the Branson, Mo. area, including the largest property previously mentioned. The one- to four-family category of foreclosed assets included two properties, one of which was added during 2019 with a balance of $291,000. The amount of additions and sales under consumer loans are due to a higher volume of repossessions of automobiles, which generally are subject to a shorter repossession process. The level of delinquencies and repossessions in indirect and used automobile loans decreased in 2018 and 2019 compared to 2016 and 2017, though potential problem loans in this category increased in 2019, as indicated below.
The large additions and sales items in the land development and commercial real estate categories are related to the $6.7 million relationship discussed above under Non-Performing Loans.
Potential Problem Loans. Potential problem loans increased $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, from $3.3 million at December 31, 2018 to $4.4 million at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the addition of $2.5 million of loans to potential problem loans. Partially offsetting the added loans was $1.1 million in payments on potential problem loans, $154,000 in loans removed from potential problem loans due to improvements in the credits, and $173,000 in loans transferred to the non-performing category. Potential problem loans are loans which management has identified through routine internal review procedures as having possible credit problems that may cause the borrowers difficulty in complying with current repayment terms. These loans are not reflected in non-performing assets, but are considered in determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Activity in the potential problem loans category during the year ended December 31, 2019, was as follows:
At December 31, 2019, the commercial real estate category of potential problem loans included two loans, one of which was added during 2019. The largest relationship in this category (added during 2018), totaling $1.8 million, or 60.0% of the total category, is collateralized by a mixed use commercial retail building. The other relationship in the category, which totaled $1.2 million, or 40.0% of the total category, is collateralized by a commercial retail building. Payments on both loans were current at December 31, 2019. The one- to four-family residential category of potential problem loans included 16 loans, four of which were added during 2019. The consumer category of potential problem loans included 55 loans, 45 of which were added during 2019.
Non-Interest Income
Non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $31.0 million compared with $36.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease of $5.2 million, or 14.5%, was primarily a result of the following items:
Gain on sale of business units: On July 20, 2018, the Company closed on the sale of four banking centers in the Omaha, Neb., metropolitan market. The Bank sold branch deposits of approximately $56 million and sold substantially all branch-related real estate, fixed assets and ATMs. The Company recorded a pre-tax gain of $7.4 million on the sale during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other income: Other income increased $2.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to gains totaling $677,000 in 2019 from the sale of, or recovery of, receivables and assets that were acquired several years ago in FDIC-assisted transactions. The Company recognized approximately $1.1 million more in income than was recognized in the prior year as a result of the new debit card contracts. These contracts became effective at the beginning of 2019. The Company recognized approximately $787,000 in income related to interest rate swaps in the Company’s back-to-back swap program with loan customers and swap counterparties in 2019 compared to $50,000 in 2018. The Company also recognized approximately $184,000 in income related to the exit of certain tax credit partnerships in 2019.
Net gains on loan sales: Net gains on loan sales increased $819,000 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to an increase in originations of fixed-rate loans during 2019 compared to 2018. Fixed rate single-family mortgage loans originated are generally subsequently sold in the secondary market. In 2019, the Company began originating SBA loans with the intention of selling the guaranteed portion in the secondary market. During 2019, a gain on sale of $230,000 was recorded related to the Company’s SBA loan sales.
Service charges and ATM fees: Service charges and ATM fees decreased $797,000 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in net ATM transaction fees and a decrease in overdraft and insufficient funds fees on customer accounts due to decreased levels of such activity. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in point-of-sale transaction fees due to a higher volume of such transactions in 2019. The decrease in net ATM transaction fees resulted from less volume of transactions that generate such fee income and increased costs per transaction.
Non-Interest Expense
Total non-interest expense decreased $172,000, or 0.1%, from $115.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2018, to $115.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s efficiency ratio for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 54.48%, a decrease from 56.41% for 2018. The improvement in the ratio for 2019 was primarily due to an increase in net interest income, partially offset by a decrease in non-interest income due to the gain on sale of certain branches and deposits in 2018. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s efficiency ratio was positively impacted by a decrease in expense on other real estate and repossessions and negatively impacted by an increase in salaries and employee benefits expense. In the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company’s efficiency ratio was positively impacted by the significant gain recorded related to the sale of the Bank’s branches and deposits in Omaha, Neb. The Company’s ratio of non-interest expense to average assets was 2.37% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2.56% for the year ended December 31, 2018. This improvement was primarily due to an increase in average assets. Average assets for the year ended December 31, 2019, increased $351.7 million, or 7.8%, from the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to increases in loans receivable and investment securities.
The following were key items related to the decrease in non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018:
Expense on other real estate and repossessions: Expense on other real estate and repossessions decreased $2.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to decreased valuation write-downs of certain foreclosed assets of $958,000 during 2019, compared to $3.6 million during 2018. Also, the Company recorded lower levels of expense related to consumer repossessions during the year ending December 31, 2019.
Legal, audit and other professional fees: Legal, audit and other professional fees decreased $799,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in 2019 was primarily due to higher fees during 2018 for professional services related to process improvement initiatives, fees paid to advisors for the negotiation and implementation of derivative transactions, consulting fees related to the ongoing implementation of an accounting system which will be utilized for the new loan loss accounting standard and legal costs related to the sale of the Omaha-area banking centers. During 2019, legal fees decreased as a result of fewer foreclosures and repossessions during the year.
Insurance: Insurance decreased $659,000 from the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in FDIC deposit insurance premiums for the final six months of 2019. The Bank had a credit with the FDIC for a portion of premiums previously paid to the deposit insurance fund. The deposit insurance fund balance was sufficient to result in no premium being due for the second half of 2019.
Acquired deposit intangible asset amortization: Acquired deposit intangible amortization expense decreased $372,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to 2018. The Company generally amortizes its acquired deposit intangibles over a period of seven years. The amortization of the intangible related to the InterBank acquisition was completed during the first quarter of 2019 and the amortization of the intangible related to the Sun Security Bank acquisition was completed during the third quarter of 2018.
Salaries and employee benefits: Salaries and employee benefits increased $3.0 million from the prior year. This increase was primarily related to increased incentives in the lending and operations areas, annual compensation merit increases, along with staffing additions in the lending areas, including the new loan production offices in Atlanta and Denver, which opened in late 2018. Mortgage lending incentives increased due to the much higher volume of loan originations during 2019.
Net occupancy and equipment expense: Net occupancy expense increased $589,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to increased depreciation related to new ATM/ITMs purchased and expenses related to ATM operating software upgrades implemented during 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s effective tax rate was 18.3% and 18.1%, respectively. These effective rates were lower than the statutory federal tax rate of 21%, due primarily to the utilization of certain investment tax credits and to tax-exempt investments and tax-exempt loans, which reduced the Company’s effective tax rate.
Liquidity
Liquidity is a measure of the Company's ability to generate sufficient cash to meet present and future financial obligations in a timely manner through either the sale or maturity of existing assets or the acquisition of additional funds through liability management. These obligations include the credit needs of customers, funding deposit withdrawals and the day-to-day operations of the Company. Liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits with financial institutions and certain investment securities and loans. As a result of the Company's management of the ability to generate liquidity primarily through liability funding, management believes that the Company maintains overall liquidity sufficient to satisfy its depositors' requirements and meet its customers' credit needs. At December 31, 2020, the Company had commitments of approximately $132.5 million to fund loan originations, $1.18 billion of unused lines of credit and unadvanced loans, and $16.1 million of outstanding letters of credit.
The following table summarizes the Company's fixed and determinable contractual obligations by payment date as of December 31, 2020. Additional information regarding these contractual obligations is discussed further in Notes 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 18 of the accompanying audited financial statements, which are included in Item 8 of this Report.
The Company’s primary sources of funds are customer deposits, short term borrowings at the FHLBank, other borrowings, loan repayments, unpledged securities, proceeds from sales of loans and available-for-sale securities, and funds provided from operations. The Company utilizes particular sources of funds based on the comparative costs and availability at the time. The Company has from time to time chosen not to pay rates on deposits as high as the rates paid by certain of its competitors and, when believed to be appropriate, supplements deposits with less expensive alternative sources of funds.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had these available secured lines and on-balance sheet liquidity:
Statements of Cash Flows. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company had positive cash flows from operating activities. The Company experienced negative cash flows from investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The Company experienced positive cash flows from financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Cash flows from operating activities for the periods covered by the Statements of Cash Flows have been primarily related to changes in accrued and deferred assets, credits and other liabilities, the provision for loan losses, realized gains on the sale of investment securities and loans, depreciation and amortization and the amortization of deferred loan origination fees and discounts (premiums) on loans and investments, all of which are non-cash or non-operating adjustments to operating cash flows. Net income adjusted for non-cash and non-operating items and the origination and sale of loans held-for-sale were the primary sources of cash flows from operating activities. Operating activities provided cash flows of $46.0 million, $86.4 million and $94.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, investing activities used cash of $131.3 million, $295.1 million and $381.3 million, respectively, primarily due to the net increases and purchases of loans and investment securities and the cash paid for the sale of deposits and branches (2018), partially offset by cash received for the termination of interest rate derivatives (2020) and the sales of investment securities (2019).
Changes in cash flows from financing activities during the periods covered by the Statements of Cash Flows are primarily due to changes in deposits after interest credited, changes in FHLBank advances, changes in short-term borrowings, proceeds from the issuance of subordinated notes, purchases of the Company’s common stock and dividend payments to stockholders. Financing activities provided cash flows of $428.9 million, $226.1 million and $247.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, primarily due to increases in customer deposit balances, net increases or decreases in various borrowings and proceeds from the issuance of subordinated notes, partially offset by dividend payments to stockholders and purchases of the Company’s common stock.
Capital Resources
Management continuously reviews the capital position of the Company and the Bank to ensure compliance with minimum regulatory requirements, as well as to explore ways to increase capital either by retained earnings or other means.
As of December 31, 2020, total stockholders’ equity and common stockholders’ equity were each $629.7 million, or 11.4% of total assets, equivalent to a book value of $45.79 per common share. As of December 31, 2019, total stockholders’ equity and common stockholders’ equity were each $603.1 million, or 12.0% of total assets, equivalent to a book value of $42.29 per common share. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s tangible common equity to tangible assets ratio was 11.3%, compared to 11.9% at December 31, 2019. Included in stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 and 2019, were unrealized gains (net of taxes) on the Company’s available-for-sale investment securities totaling $23.3 million and $9.0 million, respectively. This increase in unrealized gains primarily resulted from lower market interest rates, which increased the fair value of the investment securities.
Also included in stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020, were realized gains (net of taxes) on the Company’s cash flow hedge (interest rate swap), which was terminated in March 2020, totaling $29.9 million. This amount, plus associated deferred taxes, is expected to be accreted to interest income over the remaining term of the original interest rate swap contract, which was to end in October 2025. At December 31, 2020, the remaining pre-tax amount to be recorded in interest income was $38.7 million. The net effect on total stockholders’ equity over time will be no impact as the reduction of this realized gain will be offset by an increase in retained earnings (as the interest income flows through pre-tax income).
Banks are required to maintain minimum risk-based capital ratios. These ratios compare capital, as defined by the risk-based regulations, to assets adjusted for their relative risk as defined by the regulations. Under current guidelines, which became effective January 1, 2015, banks must have a minimum common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 4.50%, a minimum Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 6.00%, a minimum total risk-based capital ratio of 8.00%, and a minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4.00%. To be considered "well capitalized," banks must have a minimum common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 6.50%, a minimum Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 8.00%, a minimum total risk-based capital ratio of 10.00%, and a minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio of 5.00%. On December 31, 2020, the Bank's common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 13.7%, its Tier 1 capital ratio was 13.7%, its total capital ratio was 14.9% and its Tier 1 leverage ratio was 11.8%. As a result, as of December 31, 2020, the Bank was well capitalized, with capital ratios in excess of those required to qualify as such. On December 31, 2019, the Bank's common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 13.1%, its Tier 1 capital ratio was 13.1%, its total capital ratio was 14.0% and its Tier 1 leverage ratio was 12.3%. As a result, as of December 31, 2019, the Bank was well capitalized, with capital ratios in excess of those required to qualify as such.
The FRB has established capital regulations for bank holding companies that generally parallel the capital regulations for banks. On December 31, 2020, the Company's common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 12.2%, its Tier 1 capital ratio was 12.7%, its total capital ratio was 17.2% and its Tier 1 leverage ratio was 10.9%. To be considered well capitalized, a bank holding company must have a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of at least 6.00% and a total risk-based capital ratio of at least 10.00%. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was considered well capitalized, with capital ratios in excess of those required to qualify as such. On December 31, 2019, the Company's common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 12.0%, its Tier 1 capital ratio was 12.5%, its total capital ratio was 15.0% and its Tier 1 leverage ratio was 11.8%. As of December 31, 2019, the Company was considered well capitalized, with capital ratios in excess of those required to qualify as such.
In addition to the minimum common equity Tier 1 capital ratio, Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio and total risk-based capital ratio, the Company and the Bank have to maintain a capital conservation buffer consisting of additional common equity Tier 1 capital greater than 2.5% of risk-weighted assets above the required minimum levels in order to avoid limitations on paying dividends, repurchasing shares, and paying discretionary bonuses.
Dividends. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company declared common stock cash dividends of $2.36 per share (56.1% of net income per common share) and paid common stock cash dividends of $2.36 per share. This included a special cash dividend of $1.00 per common share declared in January 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company declared common stock cash dividends of $2.07 per share (40.3% of net income per common share) and paid common stock cash dividends of $2.05 per share. This included a special cash dividend of $0.75 per common share declared in January 2019. The Board of Directors meets regularly to consider the level and the timing of dividend payments. The $0.34 per share dividend declared but unpaid as of December 31, 2020, was paid to stockholders in January 2021.
Common Stock Repurchases and Issuances. The Company has been in various buy-back programs since May 1990. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased 529,883 shares of its common stock at an average price of $41.71 per share and 16,040 shares of its common stock at an average price of $52.93 per share, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company issued 21,436 shares of stock at an average price of $30.81 per share and 125,894 shares of stock at an average price of $33.03 per share, respectively, to cover stock option exercises.
Management has historically utilized stock buy-back programs from time to time as long as management believed that repurchasing the stock would contribute to the overall growth of shareholder value. The number of shares of stock that will be repurchased at any particular time and the prices that will be paid are subject to many factors, several of which are outside of the control of the Company. The primary factors, however, are the number of shares available in the market from sellers at any given time, the price of the stock within the market as determined by the market and the projected impact on the Company’s earnings per share and capital.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This document contains certain financial information determined by methods other than in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures include the ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets.
In calculating the ratio of tangible common equity to tangible assets, we subtract period-end intangible assets from common equity and from total assets. Management believes that the presentation of these measures excluding the impact of intangible assets provides useful supplemental information that is helpful in understanding our financial condition and results of operations, as they provide a method to assess management's success in utilizing our tangible capital as well as our capital strength. Management also believes that providing measures that exclude balances of intangible assets, which are subjective components of valuation, facilitates the comparison of our performance with the performance of our peers. In addition, management believes that these are standard financial measures used in the banking industry to evaluate performance.
These non-GAAP financial measures are supplemental and are not a substitute for any analysis based on GAAP financial measures. Because not all companies use the same calculation of non-GAAP measures, this presentation may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures as calculated by other companies.
Non-GAAP Reconciliation: Ratio of Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets