Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements reflect management’s current expectations and are inherently uncertain. Our actual results may differ significantly from management’s expectations.
The Company has yet to generate revenue from its operations during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 and it has not had material or consistent revenue in each of the last two fiscal years. In order for the Company to maintain and expand its operations through the next 12 months, it must: 1. Continue to raise through capital infusions, either by means of equity or debt offerings, a minimum of $1 million and up to $5 million; or 2. Continue to secure license and development agreements that provide up-front fees or guaranteed, royalties, in a minimum amount of $1 million and up to $5 million. . The Company has prepared filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission to become a fully reporting registrant under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Management believes that this action will allow the Company to move its common stock to a more stable market exchange, and provide greater transparency to the Company’s operations, both necessary steps towards attracting institutional investors. During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2020 Company also received purchase orders for multiple solar projects. The Company has secured two new Community Solar Project agreements (the "Agreement") with Cube Smart Self Storage of Hackensack, NJ ("Cube Smart"). The new locations are anticipated to produce an additional $6.6 million in revenues, that’s in addition to the previously announced $3.9 million totaling $9.9 million for the entire project over a period of 25 years. The Company incurred net losses for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 of ($8,956,197) and ($256.348), respectively. Cumulative losses since inception are ($9,325,259). The Company has a working capital deficit at April 30, 2021 of $927,272. Despite the current private stock offerings and new contracts, there is no guarantee whether the Company will be able to support its operations on a long term basis. This raises doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If additional funds cannot be raised or otherwise generated, the Company may be forced to reduce staff, minimize its research and development activities, or in a worst case scenario, shut-down operations. However, management is cautiously optimistic that they can continue to improve operations and raise the appropriate funds to grow their underlying business. As explained above, the Company is currently raising working capital to fund its operations via private placements of common stock, and has ongoing and pending contracts that are expected to generate operating cash to support operations well into 2022. Despite its limited cash resources, the Company is able to retain engineering, consulting, legal and accounting personnel partially through the raising of interim working capital. The Company has substantial Commitments for Capital Expenditures. In 2021 the Company acquired $265,021 of property and equipment. It does not immediately anticipate a further purchase of facilities or significant equipment.
Results of Operations Year Ended April 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended April 30, 2020
For the year ending April 30, 2021, the Company’s gross margin was 0% as a percentage of net sales as it was in 2020. Management does not place great weight on these gross profit results at this time, as sales revenue and cost of goods sold figures are in an early stage of developing and refinement.
Operating Expenses.
Operating Expenses incurred for the year ending April 30, 2021 were $8,369,327 compared to $251,476 for the year ending April 30, 2020, an increase of $8,117,851. The majority of the increase was due to additional general and administrative expenses reflective of the additional legal and accounting to move the Company toward being fully reporting. In 2021 the Company recognized a loss of $159,050 pursuant to converting debt into common stock. Income and Earnings per Share. The net loss for the year ending April 30, 2021 was ($8,369,327), compared to net loss of ($256,348) for the year ending April 30, 2020, a higher loss of $8,117,851. This variance is due to the factors outlined above. Net loss per weighted average share was ($0.06) for 2021 and ($0.0096) for 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
At April 30, 2021, net working capital was ($927,272) as compared with ($577,062) at April 30, 2020 a decrease of ($8,117,851). In 2021, funds used by the net loss of ($8,369,327) included: expenditures for legal and professional fees. Funds were provided by the sale of 95,611,247 shares of common. The Company needs to obtain capital; however, no assurance can be given that it will be able to obtain this capital on acceptable terms, if at all. In such an event, this may have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s business, operating results and financial condition. If the need arises, the Company may attempt to obtain funding or pay expenses through the continued sale or issuance of restricted stock. The Company may also use various types of short term funding, related party advances and expenses payment deferrals and external loans. The Company’s auditors have issued a going concern opinion. Management is cautiously optimistic, however, that it will be able to generate the funding required to continue and expand its operations over the long term, and believes that it currently has cash reserves and cash commitments available to fund operations through the end of the year or longer.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at this time.
Plan of Operations
The Company plans to continue to marketing its renewable energy generation systems, focusing on solar resources, as a replacement of fossil fuel energy generation equipment. The Company intends to do this by serving as the administrator of solar system installations to be provided by the Company’s vendors, and a coordinating agent for leasing arrangements relating to those systems. In the next twelve months we intend to focus on projects in the $50,000 to $5,000,000 range. GSFI will provide financing for those projects through investment of its own funds, management of project-specific investor funds, and leasing of solar energy equipment and components. As of the date of this registration statement, we are currently engaged if four (4) Solar Roof Leases in the New York and New Jersey metropolitan area, each for a term of twenty-five (25) years at $2,000 per month with annual increases of 2%. As of the date of this registration statement, the Company was actively seeking to develop solar systems at all the locations subject to our leases. The leases will not commence until the Company has arranged for the commencement of construction of a solar system at the site. The construction of each solar system will cost the Company approximately $60,000 to $2,000,000 to build depending on the specifications of the system and any applicable tax credits.
Pursuant to the terms of the Solar Leases, the Company agreed to lease space from each of the property owners for the siting, installation, inspection, operation, maintenance, and repair of solar systems on each of the sites. Each lease is for a term of twenty-five (25) years for a monthly rental amount of $2,000 payable upon commencement of net metering of commercial revenue generation. None of the Solar Leases provide a deadline for completion of, or a penalty for failure to build an operational solar system at the locations subject to the Solar Leases. Once a solar system has become operational at a Solar Lease location, the Company will receive payment from the sale of the electricity it generates to the local electric utility, and any corresponding tax credits and other incentives. The Company may then also enter a PPA with the lessor of the location in order to sell electricity generated by the system to the lessor, or make electricity from the system available to the many potential customers of a community solar project. The Company is responsible for developing, installing and designing each solar facility and is the owner of the solar equipment and the property owner shall have the right to purchase the equipment after twenty (20) years. The Company has the right to terminate the Lease at any time without notice to the property owner. Following the expiration or termination of the lease, the Company will be required to decommission, dismantle and remove the solar system and all other installations and to return the property to its condition before the commencement of the lease.
Timetable for Solar System Installations
Project Anticipated Completion Date Anticipated Cost Anticipated Developer
8012 Tonneli Ave, N. Bergen, NJ November, 2021 Pending** Amergy
11 Station Road, Bellport, NY December, 2021 Pending** Amergy
607 Station Road, Bellport, NY January, 2022 Pending** Amergy
747 Main Street, New Rochelle NY January 2022 Pending** Amergy
* Reflects estimates based on future conditions. Actual dates, costs and related may vary.
** Pending: the Company has not yet fully/sufficiently evaluated the project to make an estimate.
If the Company is able to raise sufficient funds, it hopes to enter into larger leases for larger projects to increase its revenue streams. To effectively fund our business plan, we will need to raise additional capital. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise sufficient capital on terms acceptable to the Company to complete any or all of these projects.
During the first calendar quarter of 2021, we will require approximately $7 million of which approximately $2 million will be used to repay the Company’s currently outstanding convertible notes and approximately $5 million will be used for the design, construction and installment of the Company’s first four or five solar facility projects. During the first quarter of 2021 to date, the Company has repaid approximately $580,000 in convertible notes and the payment of then pending settlement amount.
During the second calendar quarter of 2021, providing the Company can complete one or more solar systems at locations under the Solar Leases, the Company expects to commence revenue generating operations. If four or more such solar systems are operational, it is anticipated that revenues from the resale of electricity to the applicable utilities will generate approximately $50,000 to $60,000 per quarter based on the projections we received from Amergy as to the amount of power these systems will generate, and the current amounts the applicable electric utilities will pay for electricity generated using solar power. However, there can be no assurance that these facilities will ever generate revenues or in the amounts we are anticipating.
Thereafter, in the third quarter of 2021, providing the Company has generated revenue generating operations, the Company anticipates it will be profitable within the quarter. The Company will continue to seek additional candidates for leases of the solar systems it markets and intends to sell and anticipates it will be required to raise additional capital through the sale of its securities or debt. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise these funds or that it will be able to do so on terms that are favorable to the Company.
Anticipated Milestones
The Company anticipates completing projects it has already started, and potentially expand with new leases and projects, possibly in new states, as described in the table below.
The amounts that we actually spend for any specific purpose may vary significantly, and will depend on a number of factors including, but not limited to, the pace of the completion of each solar system, conditions in the markets for the services required to complete solar systems, changes in or revisions to our marketing strategies, as well as any applicable legal or regulatory changes which may occur.
If we are unable to raise the net proceeds from our Regulation A Offering or other financing activities that we believe are needed to fund or business plan, we may be required to scale back our development plans by reducing expenditures for employees, consultants, business development and marketing efforts, and other envisioned expenditures. This could reduce our ability to complete existing solar system projects or initiate new ones, or require us to seek further funding earlier, or on less favorable terms, than if we had raised the full amount of the offering.
If management is unable to implement its proposed business plan or employ alternative financing strategies, it does not presently have any alternative proposals.
We cannot assure you that our solar systems will be completed in a timely manner or at all, that we will ever earn revenues sufficient to support our operations or that we will ever be profitable. Furthermore, since we have no committed source of financing, we cannot assure you that we will be able to raise money as and when we need it to continue our operations. If we cannot raise funds as and when we need them, we may be required to severely curtail, or even to cease our operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements that have been prepared under accounting principle generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
A summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Registration Statement. Of these policies, we believe that the following items are the most critical in preparing our financial statements.
Use of Estimates
Preparing financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management’s estimates and assumptions.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for its stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors to be recognized in the financial statements, based on their fair value. The Company measures share-based compensation to consultants in accordance with ASC 505-50, Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees, and recognizes the fair value of the award over the period the services are rendered or goods are provided.
Most Recent accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Impact of Most Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There were no recent accounting pronouncements that have had a material effect on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.