ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion highlights the principal factors that have affected our financial condition and results of operations as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” above for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared on the accrual basis of accounting, whereby revenues are recognized when earned, and expenses are recognized when incurred. You should read this management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our historical financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our future results could differ materially from our historical results due to a variety of factors, many of which are out of our control.
Overview
GulfSlope Energy, Inc. is an independent crude oil and natural gas exploration and production company whose interests are concentrated in the United States Gulf of Mexico federal waters. We are a technically driven company and we use our licensed 2.2 million acres of advanced three-dimensional (“3-D”) seismic data to identify, evaluate, and acquire assets with attractive economic profiles. GulfSlope Energy commenced commercial operations in March 2013. GulfSlope Energy was originally organized as a Utah corporation in 2004 and became a Delaware corporation in 2012.
We have focused our operations in the United States Gulf of Mexico because we believe this area provides us with favorable geologic and economic conditions, including multiple reservoir formations, comprehensive geologic databases, extensive infrastructure, relatively favorable royalty regime, and an attractive acquisition market and because our management and technical teams have significant experience and technical expertise in this geologic province. Additionally, we licensed 2.2 million acres of advanced 3-D seismic data, a significant portion of which has been enhanced by new, state-of-the-art reprocessing and noise attenuation techniques including reverse time migration depth imaging. We have used our broad regional seismic database and our reprocessing efforts to generate and high-grade oil and natural gas prospects. The use of our extensive seismic database, coupled with our ability, knowledge, and expertise to effectively reprocess this seismic data, allows us to further optimize our drilling operations and to effectively evaluate acquisition and joint venture opportunities. We consistently assess our prospect inventory in order to deploy capital as efficiently as possible. We have given preference to areas with water depths of 450 feet or less where production infrastructure already exists, which will allow for any discoveries to be developed rapidly and cost effectively with the goal to reduce economic risk while increasing returns.
Technical Strategy
We believe that a major obstacle to identifying potential hydrocarbon accumulations globally has been the inability of seismic technology to accurately image deeper geologic formations because of overlying massive, extensive, and complex salt bodies. Large and thick laterally extensive subsurface salt layers highly distort the seismic ray paths traveling through them, which often has led to misinterpretation of the underlying geology and the potential major accumulations of oil and gas. We believe the opportunity exists for a technology-driven company to extensively apply advanced seismic acquisition and processing technologies, with the goal of achieving attractive commercial discovery rates for exploratory wells, and their subsequent appraisal and development, potentially having a very positive impact on returns on invested capital. These tools and techniques have been proven to be effective in deep water exploration and production worldwide, and we are using them to identify and drill targets below the salt bodies in an area of the shallower waters of the Gulf of Mexico where industry activity has largely been absent for over 20 years. In fact, GulfSlope management led the early industry teams in their successful efforts to discover and develop five new fields below the extensive salt bodies in our core area during the 1990’s, which have produced over 125 million barrels of oil equivalent.
Our technical approach to exploration and development is to deploy a team of highly experienced geo-scientists who have current and extensive understanding of the geology and geophysics of the petroleum system within our core area, thereby decreasing the traditional timing and execution risks of advancing up a learning curve. For data licensing, re-processing and interpretation, our technical staff has prioritized specific geographic areas within our 2.2 million acres of seismic coverage, with the goal to optimize capital outlays.
Modern 3-D seismic datasets with acquisition parameters that are optimal for improved imaging at multiple depths are readily available in many of these sub-basins across our core area, and they can be licensed on commercially reasonable terms. The application of state-of-the-art seismic imaging technology is necessary to optimize delineation of prospective structures and to detect the presence of hydrocarbon-charged reservoirs below many complex salt bodies. An example of such a seismic technology is reverse time migration, which we believe to be the most accurate, fastest, and yet affordable, seismic imaging technology for critical depth imaging available today.
Lease and Acquisition Strategy
Our prospect identification and analytical strategy is based on a thorough understanding of the geologic trends within our core area. Exploration efforts have been focused in areas where lease acquisition opportunities are readily available. We entered into two master 3-D license agreements, together covering approximately 2.2 million acres and we have completed advanced processing on select areas within this licensed seismic area exceeding one million acres. We can expand this coverage and perform further advanced processing, both with currently licensed seismic data and seismic data to be acquired. We have sought to acquire and reprocess the highest resolution data available in the potential prospect’s direct vicinity. This includes advanced imaging information to further our understanding of a particular reservoir’s characteristics, including both trapping mechanics and fluid migration patterns. Reprocessing is accomplished through a series of model building steps that incorporate the geometry of the geology to optimize the final image. Our integration of existing geologic understanding and enhanced seismic processing and interpretation provides us with unique insights and perspectives on existing producing areas and especially underexplored formations below and adjacent to salt bodies that are highly prospective for hydrocarbon production.
We currently hold two leases and we are evaluating the acquisition of additional leases in our core area. Our two leases have a five-year primary term and expire on June 30, 2022 and October 31, 2025. BOEM’s regulatory framework provides multiple options for leaseholders to apply to receive extensions of lease terms under specified conditions. GulfSlope is exploring all options contained in BOEM’s regulatory framework to extend the terms of the leases. Additional prospective acreage can be obtained through lease sales, farm-in, or purchase. As is consistent with a prudent and successful exploration approach, we believe that additional seismic licensing, acquisition, processing, and/or interpretation may become highly advantageous, in order to more precisely define the most optimal drillable location(s), particularly for development of discoveries.
We continue to evaluate potential producing property acquisitions in the offshore Gulf of Mexico, taking advantage of our highly specialized subsurface and engineering capabilities, knowledge, and expertise to identify attractive opportunities. Any merger or acquisition is likely to be financed through the issuance of debt and/or equity securities.
Drilling and other Exploratory and Development Strategies
Our plan has been to partner with other entities which could include oil and gas companies and/or financial investors. Our goal is to diversify risk and minimize capital exposure to exploration drilling costs. We expect a portion of our exploration costs to be paid by our partners through these transactions, in return for our previous investment in prospect generation and delivery of an identified prospect on acreage we control. Such arrangements are a commonly accepted industry method of proportionately recouping pre-drill cost outlays for seismic, land, and associated interpretation expenses. We cannot assure you, however, that we will be able to enter into any such arrangements on satisfactory terms. In any drilling, we expect that our retained working interest will be adjusted based upon factors such as geologic risk and well cost. Early monetization of a discovered asset or a portion of a discovered asset is an option for the Company as a means to fund development or additional exploration projects as an alternative to potential equity or debt offerings. However, if a reasonable value were not received from the market at the discovery stage, then we may elect to retain (subject to lease terms) the discovery asset undeveloped, until a reasonable offer is received in line with our perceived market value, or we may elect to seek development partners on a promoted basis in order to substantially reduce capital development requirements.
Recent Developments
The Company has been conducting pre-drill operations for the Tau prospect which is anticipated to be re-drilled to a total depth of approximately 21,000 feet. The Exploration Plan has been filed with and approved by BOEM and the Application for Permit to Drill (“APD”) has been filed with BSEE and is pending approval.
The Tau Prospect is located approximately six miles northeast of the Mahogany Field, discovered in 1993. The Mahogany Field is recognized as the first commercial discovery below allochthonous salt in the Gulf of Mexico. The Tau Prospect is defined by mapping of 3D seismic reprocessed by RTM methods. Drilling operations on the Tau subsalt prospect commenced in September 2018. The wellbore was designed to test multiple Miocene horizons trapped against a well-defined salt flank, including equivalent reservoir sands discovered and developed at the nearby Mahogany Field. The surface location for Tau was located in 305 feet of water. In January 2019, the Tau well experienced an underground control of well event and as a result, an insurance claim was filed with the insurance Underwriters for a net amount of approximately $10.8 million for 100% working interest. The insurance claim was subsequently approved. On May 13, 2019, GulfSlope announced the Tau No. 1 well was drilled to a measured depth of 15,254 feet, as compared to the originally permitted 29,857 foot measured depth. Producible hydrocarbon zones were not established to that depth, but hydrocarbon shows were encountered. Complex geomechanical conditions required two by-pass wellbores, one sidetrack wellbore, and eight casing strings to reach the depth of 15,254 feet. Equipment limitations prevented further drilling at that time. In addition, the drilling rig had contractual obligations related to another operator. Due to these factors, the Company elected to plug the well in a manner that would allow for re-entry at a later time.
Outlook
In the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak spread quickly across the globe. Federal, state and local governments mobilized to implement containment mechanisms and minimize impacts to their populations and economies. Various containment measures, such as stay-at-home orders, closures of restaurants and banning of group gatherings resulted in a severe drop in general economic activity, as well as a corresponding decrease in global energy demand. Additionally, the risks associated with COVID-19 impacted our workforce and the way we meet our business objectives. Due to concerns over health and safety, we asked our employees to work remotely. In 2021 we began to plan a process to phase employees to return to the office. Working remotely has not significantly impacted our ability to maintain operations or caused us to incur significant additional expenses; however, we are unable to predict the duration or ultimate impact of these measures. In addition, actions by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other high oil exporting countries like Russia (“OPEC+”) have negatively impacted crude oil prices throughout 2020 and early 2021. These rapid and unprecedented events pushed crude oil storage near capacity and driven prices down significantly. On January 27, 2021, President Biden issued an executive order that commits to substantial action on climate change, calling for, among other things, the elimination of subsidies provided to the fossil fuel industry, increased production of offshore wind energy and increased emphasis on climate-related risks across governmental agencies and economic sectors. The Biden Administration has also taken actions to limit oil and gas development activities on the OCS. Other actions that could be pursued by the Biden Administration include more restrictive requirements for the establishment of pipeline infrastructure or the permitting of liquefied natural gas export facilities, as well as more stringent emissions standards for oil and gas facilities. These events have been the primary cause of the significant supply-and-demand imbalance for oil, first significantly lowering oil pricing and later significantly increasing oil pricing. The uncertainty in the trajectory of oil and gas prices and in future government actions, has greatly affected energy companies plans and budgets and may continue to exist in future periods. The Company has evaluated the effect of these factors on its business and the Company has determined that these factors will most likely cause a delay in the Company’s 2022 drilling program. The Company continues to monitor the economic environment and evaluate its continuing impact on the business.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Future Results
Success in Acquiring Oil and Gas Leases or Prospects. As a result of our 3-D seismic imaging and reprocessing, we currently hold two lease blocks in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, which we believe may potentially contain economically recoverable reserves.
We have No Proved Reserves. We have identified prospects based on available seismic and geological information that indicate the potential presence of oil or gas, and we own the drilling and production rights for these prospects. Some of our current prospects may require additional seismic data reprocessing and interpretation. Even when properly used and interpreted, seismic data and visualization techniques are only tools used to assist geoscientists in identifying structures and hydrocarbon indicators and do not enable the interpreter to have certainty as to whether hydrocarbons are, in fact, present in those structures. We do not know if any prospect will contain oil or gas in sufficient quantities or quality to recover drilling and completion costs or to be economically viable.
Success in the Discovery and Development of Reserves. Because we have no operating history in the production of oil and gas, our future results of operations and financial condition will be directly affected by our ability to discover and develop reserves through our drilling activities.
Oil and Gas Revenue. We have not yet commenced oil and gas production. If and when we do commence production, we expect to generate revenue from such production. No oil and gas revenue is reflected in our historical financial statements.
General and Administrative Expenses. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods when we commence drilling operations.
Demand and Price. The demand for oil and gas is susceptible to volatility related to, among other factors, the level of global economic activity and may also fluctuate depending on the performance of specific industries. We expect that a decrease in economic activity, in the United States and elsewhere, would adversely affect demand for any oil and gas we may produce. Since we have not generated revenues, these key factors will only affect us if and when we produce and sell hydrocarbons.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended September 30, 2021 compared to September 30, 2020
We had no sales during the year ended September 30, 2021 and 2020. Impairment of oil and gas properties and capitalized exploration costs for the year ended September 30, 2021 was approximately $0.4 million compared to approximately $2.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2020. The impairment of approximately $0.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 resulted from the relinquishment of a lease and the write off of related capital costs and the impairment of approximately $2.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2020 resulted from the expiration of leases and the write-off of related capitalized costs. General and administrative expenses were approximately $1.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to approximately $1.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2020. Interest expense was approximately $554,000 for the year ended September 30, 2021, as compared to approximately $39,000 for the year ended September 30, 2020 net of approximately $1.1 million of interest capitalized to unevaluated oil and natural gas properties during 2020. Gain on extinguishment of debt was approximately $406,000 for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to a loss of $1.5 million for the year ended September 30. 2020. Loss on derivative financial instrument was approximately $177,000 for the year ended September 30, 2021 compared to a gain of approximately $2.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2020.
We had a net loss of approximately $2.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of approximately $2.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2020.
The basic loss per share for the year ended September 30, 2021 was $0.00, compared to a net loss per share of $0.00 for the year ended September 30, 2020.
For the year ended September 30, 2021, cash used in operating activities totaled $1.6 million compared to $0.4 million used in operating activities in fiscal 2020.
For the year ended September 30, 2021, cash provided by investing activities was $0.2 million compared to $5.1 million provided by investing activities in fiscal 2020. For the year ended September 30, 2021 insurance proceeds received were approximately $0.2 million and spending for exploration activities was $0.1 million. Insurance proceeds received were approximately $7.5 million and spending for exploration wells in process was approximately $2.6 million in fiscal 2020.
For the year ended September 30, 2021, cash used in financing activities was approximately $0.3 million compared to approximately $2.7 million cash used in financing activities for the year ended September 30, 2020. For fiscal 2021, approximately $0.3 million of promissory notes were paid. For fiscal 2020, approximately $0.5 million of proceeds from promissory notes were received and $3.2 million of promissory notes were paid.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company’s cash balance was approximately $1.5 million compared to approximately $3.2 million cash balance as of September 30, 2020. The Company’s fiscal 2021 cash decrease of approximately $1.7 million was primarily due to its net cash used in operating activities of approximately $1.6 million, cash received in investing activities of approximately $0.2 million and cash used in financing activities of approximately $0.3 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has incurred accumulated losses for the period from inception to September 30, 2021, of approximately $60.2 million, and has negative working capital of approximately $12.1 million. For the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company has generated losses of approximately $2.2 million and negative cash flows from operations of approximately $1.6 million. As of September 30, 2021, we had $1.5 million of cash on hand. The Company estimates that it will need to raise a minimum of $10 million to meet its obligations and planned expenditures through December 2022. The $10 million is comprised primarily of drilling capital expenditures as well as general and administrative expenses. It does not include any amounts due under outstanding debt obligations, which amounted to $12.0 million of current principal and interest as of September 30, 2021. The Company plans to finance its operations through equity and/or debt financings, and strategic transactions to include farm-outs, asset sales or mergers. Our policy has been to periodically raise funds through the sale of equity securities on a limited basis, to avoid undue dilution while at the early stages of execution of our business plan. Short term needs have been historically funded through loans from executive management. There are no assurances that financing will be available with acceptable terms, if at all. If the Company is not successful in obtaining financing, operations would need to be curtailed or ceased. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
For the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company used approximately $1.6 million of net cash in operating activities, compared with approximately $0.4 million of net cash used in operating activities for the year ended September 30, 2020. For the year ended September 30, 2021, cash provided by investing activities was approximately $0.2 million compared to approximately $5.1 million of cash provided by investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2020. For the year ended September 30, 2021, we used approximately $0.3 million of net cash in financing activities, compared with approximately $2.7 million used in financing activities for year ended September 30, 2020.
We will need to raise additional funds to cover expenditures planned for 2022, as well as any additional, unexpected expenditures that we may encounter. Future equity financings may be dilutive to our stockholders. Alternative forms of future financings may include preferences or rights superior to our common stock. Debt financings may involve a pledge of assets and will rank senior to our common stock. We have historically financed our operations through private equity and debt financings. We do not have any credit or equity facilities available with financial institutions, stockholders or third-party investors, and will continue to rely on best efforts financings. The failure to raise sufficient capital could cause us to cease operations, or the Company would need to sell assets or consider alternative plans up to and including restructuring.
We are party to various contractual obligations such as our office lease obligation that is disclosed in the financial statements. We do not have any other material contractual obligations. Other immaterial obligations may be reflected in our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of September 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The critical accounting estimates include impairment considerations of long-lived assets including oil and natural gas properties and assumptions used in valuing our derivative financial instruments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (ASU 2020-06), which simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts in an entity’s own equity. Additionally, ASU 2020-06 requires the application of the if-converted method to calculate the impact of convertible instruments on diluted earnings per share (EPS), which is consistent with the Company’s accounting treatment under the current standard. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. ASU No. 2020-06 can be adopted on either a fully retrospective or modified retrospective basis. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements or disclosures.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options. ASU 2021-04 provides clarification and reduces diversity in an issuer’s accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options (such as warrants) that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. An issuer measures the effect of a modification or exchange as the difference between the fair value of the modified or exchanged warrant and the fair value of that warrant immediately before modification or exchange. ASU 2021-04 introduces a recognition model that comprises four categories of transactions and the corresponding accounting treatment for each category (equity issuance, debt origination, debt modification, and modifications unrelated to equity issuance and debt origination or modification). ASU 2021-04 is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity should apply the guidance provided in ASU 2021-04 prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date. Early adoption is permitted for all entities, including adoption in an interim period. If an entity elects to early adopt ASU 2021-04 in an interim period, the guidance should be applied as of the beginning of the fiscal year that includes that interim period. The adoption of ASU 2021-04 is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements or disclosures.
The Company has evaluated all other recent accounting pronouncements and believes either they are not applicable or that none of them will have a significant effect on the Company’s financial statements.