ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
OVERVIEW
The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company is one of the world’s leading manufacturers of tires, with one of the most recognizable brand names in the world and operations in most regions of the world. We have a broad global footprint with 46 manufacturing facilities in 21 countries, including the United States. We operate our business through three operating segments representing our regional tire businesses: Americas; Europe, Middle East and Africa; and Asia Pacific.
This management's discussion and analysis provides comparisons of material changes in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For a comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
Our results for 2020 were highly influenced by the severe economic disruption caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. However, based on recent favorable recovery trends, particularly in the U.S., Europe and China, the negative impacts of the pandemic on tire industry demand, auto production, miles driven and our tire volume have moderated and are expected to continue to improve. The tire industry has been negatively impacted by this evolving situation, particularly earlier in the year, which was characterized by a sudden and sharp decline in replacement tire demand and original equipment (“OE”) manufacturers suspending or severely limiting automobile production globally. This environment, which persisted throughout much of 2020, aggravated already challenging industry conditions in many of our key markets, including foreign currency headwinds due to a strong U.S. dollar, lower OE industry volume, softening demand in Europe, weak market conditions in China and economic volatility in Latin America, that were present throughout 2019.
We continue to take actions in response to COVID-19 to protect the health and wellbeing of our associates, customers and communities, which remain our top priority, to mitigate the near- and long-term financial impacts on our operating results, and to ensure adequate liquidity and capital resources are available to maintain our operations until the auto industry and replacement tire demand fully recovers.
Actions taken throughout 2020 included:
•
In March 2020, we announced the suspension of production in Europe and the Americas. These temporary measures were implemented in a way that allowed us to safely and promptly resume production as public health and market conditions improved. We completed a phased restart of most of our manufacturing facilities during the second quarter of 2020, without any significant subsequent COVID-19 related disruptions.
•
During parts of the first half of 2020, production was also temporarily suspended or significantly limited in several locations in Asia Pacific, most notably at our Pulandian, China manufacturing facility. Our Pulandian facility began operating with all of its workforce by the end of the first quarter.
•
Throughout the third quarter of 2020, we continued to ramp up tire production across our manufacturing footprint and most of our factories returned to full capacity by the end of the third quarter and remained at full capacity during the fourth quarter. Our decisions to change production levels in the future will be based on an evaluation of market demand signals, inventory and supply levels, as well as our ability to continue to safeguard the health of our associates.
•
As our business is deemed essential in the U.S. and most other parts of the world, in order to maintain customer service, warehouses, commercial truck service centers and retail operations remained largely operational throughout the year on a reduced staffing schedule, when necessary, and with strong social distancing practices in place. We continue to closely monitor local conditions surrounding these operations, as well as inventory and supply levels, to continue delivery of our products.
•
We are following guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and have introduced a number of preventative measures at our facilities that are open, including limiting visitor access and business travel, remote working and social distancing practices, and increased frequency of disinfection.
•
On April 2, 2020, we announced second quarter actions to reduce our payroll costs through a combination of furloughs, temporary salary reductions and salary deferrals covering over 9,000 of our corporate and business unit associates, including substantial salary reductions and deferrals for our CEO, officers and directors. These and other similar
actions reduced our expenses by approximately $65 million during the second quarter of 2020, while taking advantage of governmental income replacement programs to ensure our associates were supported.
•
On April 9, 2020, we amended and restated our $2.0 billion first lien revolving credit facility, extending the maturity date from April 2021 to April 2025. The refinancing includes favorable adjustments to the calculation of the facility’s borrowing base, which improved our availability under the facility by approximately $230 million at December 31, 2020. In May 2020, we further strengthened our liquidity position by issuing $800 million of 9.5% senior notes due 2025, a portion of the proceeds of which were used to repay our $282 million 8.75% senior notes at maturity in August 2020. For further discussion related to these important sources of liquidity, refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
•
On April 16, 2020, we announced that we suspended the quarterly dividend on our common stock. Previously, these dividends totaled approximately $37 million each quarter.
•
We are leveraging governmental relief efforts when available to defer payroll and other tax payments, which benefited full-year cash flows by approximately $60 million in the U.S. alone. In addition, we benefited from a provision in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act that provided for a 50 percent refundable payroll tax credit on wages, including continuing health benefits, paid to U.S. employees retained but not working due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, during 2020, we recorded a benefit of $12 million as an offset to payroll tax expense.
•
We have taken, and will continue to take, as necessary, other actions to reduce costs and preserve cash in order to successfully navigate the current economic environment, including limiting capital expenditures to $647 million for 2020 and reducing discretionary spending, including other selling, administrative and general expenses (“SAG”), which, in total, decreased by $131 million in 2020.
Additionally, on April 17, 2020, we reached a tentative bargaining agreement, which was ratified on May 1, 2020, and subsequently permanently closed our Gadsden, Alabama manufacturing facility (“Gadsden”) as part of our continuing strategy to strengthen the competitiveness of our manufacturing footprint by curtailing production of tires for declining, less profitable segments of the tire market. We estimate the total pre-tax charges associated with this plan to be $280 million to $295 million, of which $170 million to $180 million are expected to be cash charges. We recorded $189 million of these charges and made cash payments of $46 million during 2020. The remaining charges will be recorded and the remaining cash payments will be made primarily in 2021 and 2022. We expect the combined impact of this plan and the previously announced rationalization actions related to Gadsden will result in approximately $130 million in annual savings in 2021 when compared to 2019.
Our results for 2020 reflect an 18.9% decrease in tire unit shipments compared to 2019, as industry demand was significantly affected, particularly in the second quarter of 2020, by the actions governments, businesses and consumers took to slow the spread of COVID-19. More recently, the macroeconomic impacts of the pandemic have moderated and are expected to continue to improve. Our tire unit shipments were down 17.6%, 45.5%, 9.1% and 4.9% in the first, second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively, compared to 2019. Our results for 2020 include a $394 million unfavorable impact due to higher conversion costs, primarily as a result of lower factory utilization and other period costs directly related to the suspension of production and subsequent ramp up at our manufacturing facilities, partially offset by cost savings of $370 million, including raw material cost saving measures of $61 million. Cost savings for 2020 include approximately $140 million of costs eliminated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including through furloughs and government support programs, most of which are expected to return in 2021.
Net sales were $12,321 million in 2020, compared to $14,745 million in 2019. Net sales decreased in 2020 primarily due to lower global tire volume, lower sales in other tire-related businesses, primarily due to lower aviation sales globally and a decrease in third-party sales of chemical products in Americas, and unfavorable foreign currency translation, primarily in Americas and EMEA. These decreases were partially offset by improvements in price and product mix, primarily in EMEA and Americas.
Goodyear net loss in 2020 was $1,254 million, or $5.35 per diluted share, compared to Goodyear net loss of $311 million, or $1.33 per diluted share, in 2019. The increase in Goodyear net loss in 2020 was primarily driven by lower segment operating income and non-cash goodwill and other asset impairment charges, partially offset by lower income tax expense.
Our total segment operating loss for 2020 was $14 million, compared to income of $945 million in 2019. The $959 million decrease was primarily due to lower global tire volume of $571 million, higher conversion costs of $394 million, primarily in Americas and EMEA, and lower income from other tire-related businesses of $158 million, driven by lower aviation sales globally and lower third-party chemical sales in Americas. These decreases were partially offset by lower SAG of $100 million, primarily due to lower wages and benefits and lower advertising expense reflecting actions taken as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, lower raw material costs of $63 million, primarily in EMEA and Asia Pacific, and improvements in price and product mix of $38 million, primarily in EMEA and Americas, partially offset by unfavorable price and product mix in Asia Pacific. Refer to "Results of Operations - Segment Information” for additional information.
Liquidity
At December 31, 2020, we had $1,539 million in cash and cash equivalents as well as $3,881 million of unused availability under our various credit agreements, compared to $908 million and $3,554 million, respectively, at December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents increased by $631 million from December 31, 2019 primarily due to cash flows from operating activities of $1,115 million and net borrowings of $250 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $647 million and first quarter dividends paid of $37 million. Cash flows from operating activities reflect cash provided by working capital of $871 million. Cash flows from operating activities also reflect our net loss for the year of $1,250 million, which includes non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization of $859 million and goodwill and other asset impairments of $330 million, as well as current year changes in Balance Sheet Accounts for Other Assets and Liabilities and Compensation and Benefits totaling $290 million. Refer to "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information.
Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic caused the temporary closure of many businesses throughout the world during 2020, which limited global business activity, particularly earlier in the year. Most of our manufacturing facilities around the world suspended or significantly limited production at times during the first half of 2020 in response to the pandemic. We completed a phased restart of most of our manufacturing facilities during the second quarter of 2020, returned to full capacity by the end of the third quarter, and remained at full capacity during the fourth quarter.
During the second half of 2020, tire demand in our major markets recovered faster than we anticipated. The stronger than planned volume exceeded our production. We expect to reinvest $450 million to $500 million in working capital during 2021 given the decrease in our inventory levels during 2020.
While markets have recovered considerably, we continue to face a high level of uncertainty as several governments around the globe have recently implemented, or are considering implementing, measures to slow the pandemic that have the potential to reduce economic activity and mobility. We expect volume in the first quarter of 2021 to remain below 2019 levels, reflecting lower auto production and continued softness in vehicle miles traveled.
During the first quarter of 2021, we expect our production to be approximately 3 million units higher than in the first quarter of 2020. Beyond the first quarter, our decisions to change production levels will be based on an evaluation of market demand signals, inventory and supply levels, as well as our ability to continue to safeguard the health of our associates.
Our other tire-related businesses have also been significantly affected by the weak economic environment. While our retail and chemical businesses largely stabilized in the second half of 2020, the decline in business and leisure travel is continuing to adversely impact our aviation business, which we expect will continue in 2021.
For the full year of 2021, we expect our raw material costs to increase $125 million to $175 million, including the benefit of raw material cost saving measures, primarily in the second half of the year. Natural and synthetic rubber prices and other commodity prices historically have been volatile, and this estimate could change significantly based on fluctuations in the cost of these and other key raw materials and foreign exchange rates. We are continuing to focus on price and product mix, to substitute lower cost materials where possible, to work to identify additional substitution opportunities, to reduce the amount of material required in each tire, and to pursue alternative raw materials.
In 2021, we expect our capital expenditures will be approximately $850 million, which includes spending for certain items that were deferred in 2020.
Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of the factors that may impact our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity and “Forward-Looking Information - Safe Harbor Statement” for a discussion of our use of forward-looking statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONSOLIDATED
All per share amounts are diluted and refer to Goodyear net income (loss).
Goodyear net loss in 2020 was $1,254 million, or $5.35 per share, compared to Goodyear net loss of $311 million, or $1.33 per share, in 2019. The increase in Goodyear net loss in 2020 was primarily driven by lower segment operating income and non-cash goodwill and other asset impairment charges, partially offset by lower income tax expense.
Net Sales
Net sales in 2020 of $12,321 million decreased $2,424 million, or 16.4%, compared to $14,745 million in 2019, primarily due to lower global tire volume of $2,387 million, lower sales in other tire-related businesses of $244 million, primarily due to lower aviation sales globally and a decrease in third-party sales of chemical products in Americas, and unfavorable foreign currency translation of $233 million, primarily in Americas and EMEA. These decreases were partially offset by improvements in price and product mix of $402 million, primarily in EMEA and Americas. Goodyear worldwide tire unit net sales were $10,339 million and $12,524 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Consumer and commercial net sales were $7,190 million and $2,636 million in 2020, respectively. Consumer and commercial net sales were $8,835 million and $2,953 million in 2019, respectively.
The following table presents our tire unit sales for the periods indicated:
The decrease in worldwide tire unit sales of 29.3 million units, or 18.9%, compared to 2019, included a decrease of 20.0 million replacement tire units, or 17.4%, comprised primarily of a decrease in Americas and EMEA. OE tire units decreased by 9.3 million units, or 23.0%, primarily due to lower vehicle production globally. Consumer and commercial unit sales in 2020 were 113.8 million and 10.6 million, respectively. Consumer and commercial unit sales in 2019 were 141.9 million and 11.7 million, respectively.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold (“CGS”) was $10,337 million in 2020, decreasing $1,265 million, or 10.9%, from $11,602 million in 2019. CGS was 83.9% of sales in 2020 compared to 78.7% of sales in 2019. CGS in 2020 decreased primarily due to lower global tire volume of $1,816 million, foreign currency translation of $208 million, primarily in Americas and EMEA, lower costs in other tire-related businesses of $86 million, driven by lower aviation sales globally and lower third-party chemical sales in Americas, and lower raw material costs of $63 million, primarily in EMEA and Asia Pacific. These decreases were partially offset by higher conversion costs of $394 million, primarily due to lower factory utilization and other period costs, and the write-off of work-in-process inventory of approximately $26 million, both as a direct result of the suspension of production and subsequent ramp up at our manufacturing facilities, primarily in Americas and EMEA, and higher costs related to product mix of $364 million, primarily in Americas and EMEA. CGS in 2020 included pension expense of $16 million compared to $14 million in 2019. CGS in 2020 and 2019 also included incremental savings from rationalization plans of $107 million and $20 million, respectively.
CGS in 2020 included accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs of $105 million ($81 million after-tax and minority), primarily related to the permanent closure of Gadsden. CGS in 2019 included accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs of $15 million ($12 million after-tax and minority) and favorable indirect tax settlements in Brazil of $11 million ($7 million after-tax and minority) and in the U.S. of $6 million ($5 million after-tax and minority).
Selling, Administrative and General Expense
SAG was $2,192 million in 2020, decreasing $131 million, or 5.6%, from $2,323 million in 2019. SAG was 17.8% of sales in 2020 compared to 15.8% of sales in 2019. SAG decreased primarily due to lower wages and benefits of $42 million, lower advertising expense of $31 million and lower travel-related expenses of $30 million, reflecting global actions taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. SAG also decreased due to foreign currency translation of $23 million, primarily in Americas. SAG in 2020 included pension expense of $18 million compared to $15 million in 2019. SAG in 2020 and 2019 also included incremental savings from rationalization plans of $6 million and $17 million, respectively.
Goodwill and Other Asset Impairments
During 2020, we recorded non-cash impairment charges of $182 million ($178 million after-tax and minority) related to goodwill of our EMEA reporting unit and $148 million ($113 million after-tax and minority) related to our investment in TireHub. For further information, refer to Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 11, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, and No. 12, Other Assets and Investments, in this Form 10-K.
Rationalizations
We recorded net rationalization charges of $159 million ($127 million after-tax and minority) in 2020. Net rationalization charges include $94 million in Americas, primarily related to the permanent closure of Gadsden, and $59 million in EMEA, primarily related to additional termination benefits for associates at the closed Amiens, France manufacturing facility.
We recorded net rationalization charges of $205 million ($165 million after-tax and minority) in 2019. Net rationalization charges include $115 million in EMEA, primarily related to a plan to modernize two of our manufacturing facilities in Germany, and $90 million in Americas, primarily related to the offer of voluntary buy-outs and other actions in 2019 related to Gadsden.
Upon completion of the 2020 plans, we estimate that annual segment operating income will improve by approximately $91 million ($73 million CGS and $18 million SAG). The savings realized in 2020 from rationalization plans totaled $113 million ($107 million CGS and $6 million SAG).
For further information, refer to the Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 3, Costs Associated with Rationalization Programs, in this Form 10-K.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $324 million in 2020, decreasing $16 million from $340 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a lower average interest rate of 4.99% in 2020 compared to 5.31% in 2019, partially offset by a higher average debt balance of $6,495 million in 2020 compared to $6,408 million in 2019.
Other (Income) Expense
Other Expense was $119 million and $98 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $21 million increase was primarily due to a decrease in net gains on asset sales of $18 million, a decrease in net foreign currency exchange gains of $13 million, interest income in 2019 on favorable indirect tax settlements in Brazil of $8 million ($5 million after-tax and minority), and a net gain in 2019 on insurance recoveries of $4 million ($3 million after-tax and minority). These increases were partially offset by charges of $25 million ($25 million after-tax and minority) in 2019 related to flooding at our Beaumont, Texas chemical facility.
Non-service related pension and other postretirement benefits expense of $110 million in 2020 includes net pension settlement and curtailment charges of $18 million ($14 million after-tax and minority). Non-service related pension and other postretirement benefits expense of $118 million in 2019 includes pension settlement charges of $5 million ($4 million after-tax and minority).
Net (gains) losses on asset sales were a loss of $2 million ($2 million after-tax and minority) in 2020 as compared to a gain of $16 million ($15 million after-tax and minority) in 2019.
Other (Income) Expense in 2020 included charges of $3 million ($2 million after-tax and minority), compared to charges of $5 million ($4 million after-tax and minority) in 2019, for non-asbestos legal claims related to discontinued products. Other (Income) Expense in 2019 included a net gain of $2 million ($2 million after-tax and minority) related to an acquisition and $2 million ($2 million after-tax and minority) of favorable foreign currency translation on indirect tax items.
For further information, refer to the Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 5, Other (Income) Expense, in this Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense in 2020 was $110 million on a loss before income taxes of $1,140 million. In 2020, income tax expense was unfavorably impacted by net discrete adjustments totaling $305 million ($305 million after minority interest), including the establishment of a $295 million valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets for foreign tax credits during the first quarter of 2020 as discussed below. Discrete adjustments also reflect a net charge of $10 million, including a $15 million charge related to a U.S. valuation allowance for state loss carryforwards, a $13 million benefit to adjust our deferred tax assets in England for a third quarter enacted change in the tax rate, and various other net charges totaling $8 million.
Income tax expense in 2019 was $474 million on income before income taxes of $177 million. In 2019, income tax expense was unfavorably impacted by net discrete adjustments totaling $386 million. Discrete adjustments were due to non-cash charges of $334 million related to an acceleration of royalty income in the U.S. from the sale of certain European royalty payments to Luxembourg and $150 million related to an increase in our valuation allowance on tax losses in Luxembourg, which were partially offset by a non-cash tax benefit of $98 million related to a reduction of our U.S. valuation allowance for foreign tax credits.
At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.2 billion of U.S. federal, state and local deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances totaling $368 million primarily for foreign tax credits with limited lives. Approximately $900 million of these U.S. net deferred tax assets have unlimited lives and approximately $300 million have limited lives and expire between 2025 and 2040. At December 31, 2019, we had approximately $1.2 billion of U.S. federal, state and local deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances totaling $13 million. In the U.S., we have a cumulative loss for the three-year period ending December 31, 2020. However, as the three-year cumulative loss in the U.S. is driven by the business disruption created by the COVID-19 pandemic, in assessing our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, we also considered objectively verifiable information including recent favorable recovery trends in the tire industry and our tire volume as well as the return to profitability of our U.S. business by the end of the fourth quarter and its expected continued improvement. While the COVID-19 related disruptions to our business are ultimately expected to be temporary, there is still considerable uncertainty around the extent and duration of these disruptions, as well as what additional actions federal, state or local governments may take to contain the pandemic. As such, an additional valuation allowance may be required against all, or a portion of, our U.S. net deferred tax assets in a future period.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our U.S. deferred tax assets included $133 million and $403 million of foreign tax credits with limited lives, net of valuation allowances of $328 million and $3 million, respectively, generated primarily from the receipt of foreign dividends. During the first quarter of 2020, we established a valuation allowance of $295 million against all of these foreign tax credits with expiration dates through 2024 and a portion of those expiring in 2025. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we increased our valuation allowance by $30 million with a corresponding increase to our deferred tax assets to reflect the impact of a decrease in foreign tax credits utilized on our 2019 income tax return. Due to the sudden and sharp decline in industry demand and the temporary suspension of production at our U.S. manufacturing facilities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have a significant U.S. tax loss for 2020. As loss carryforwards must be utilized prior to foreign tax credits in offsetting future income for tax purposes, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that we will be able to utilize these foreign tax credits prior to their expiration. Our earnings and forecasts of future profitability, taking into consideration recent trends, along with three significant sources of foreign income provide us sufficient positive evidence that we will be able to utilize our remaining foreign tax credits that expire between 2025 and 2030. Our sources of foreign income are (1) 100% of our domestic profitability can be re-characterized as foreign source income under current U.S. tax law to the extent domestic losses have offset foreign source income in prior years, (2) annual net foreign source income, exclusive of dividends, primarily from royalties, and (3) tax planning strategies, including capitalizing research and development costs, accelerating income on cross border transactions, including sales of inventory or raw materials to our subsidiaries, and reducing U.S. interest expense by, for example, reducing intercompany loans through repatriating current year earnings of foreign subsidiaries, all of which would increase our domestic profitability.
We consider our current forecasts of future profitability in assessing our ability to realize our deferred tax assets, including our foreign tax credits. As noted above, these forecasts include the impact of recent trends, including various macroeconomic factors such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, on our profitability, as well as the impact of tax planning strategies. Macroeconomic factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, possess a high degree of volatility and can significantly impact our profitability. As such, there is a risk that future earnings will not be sufficient to fully utilize our U.S. net deferred tax assets, including our remaining foreign tax credits. However, we believe our forecasts of future profitability along with the three significant sources of foreign income described above provide us sufficient positive, objectively verifiable evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that, at December 31, 2020, our U.S. net deferred tax assets, including our foreign tax credits, net of valuation allowances, will be fully utilized.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had approximately $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion of foreign deferred tax assets, respectively, and valuation allowances of $1.1 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively. Our losses in various foreign taxing jurisdictions in recent periods represented sufficient negative evidence to require us to maintain a full valuation allowance against certain of these net foreign deferred tax assets. Most notably, in Luxembourg, we maintain a valuation allowance of $978 million on all of our net deferred tax assets. Each reporting period, we assess available positive and negative evidence and estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize these existing deferred tax assets. We do not believe that sufficient positive evidence required to release valuation allowances having a significant impact on our financial position or results of operations will exist within the next twelve months.
For further information, refer to "Critical Accounting Policies" and Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 6, Income Taxes, in this Form 10-K.
Minority Shareholders’ Net Income
Minority shareholders’ net income was $4 million in 2020, compared to $14 million in 2019. The decrease primarily relates to a $17 million indirect tax benefit in EMEA during the first quarter of 2019.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - SEGMENT INFORMATION
Segment information reflects our SBUs, which are organized to meet customer requirements and global competition and are segmented on a regional basis.
Results of operations are measured based on net sales to unaffiliated customers and segment operating income. Each segment exports tires to other segments. The financial results of each segment exclude sales of tires exported to other segments, but include operating income derived from such transactions. Segment operating income is computed as follows: Net Sales less CGS (excluding asset write-off and accelerated depreciation charges) and SAG (including certain allocated corporate administrative expenses). Segment operating income also includes certain royalties and equity in earnings of most affiliates. Segment operating income does not include net rationalization charges (credits), asset sales and certain other items.
Total segment operating loss in 2020 was $14 million, compared to total segment operating income of $945 million in 2019. Total segment operating margin (segment operating income (loss) divided by segment sales) in 2020 was (0.1%) compared to 6.4% in 2019.
Management believes that total segment operating income is useful because it represents the aggregate value of income created by our SBUs and excludes items not directly related to the SBUs for performance evaluation purposes. Total segment operating income is the sum of the individual SBUs’ segment operating income. Refer to the Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 8, Business Segments, in this Form 10-K, for further information and for a reconciliation of total segment operating income to Income (Loss) before Income Taxes.
Americas
Americas unit sales in 2020 decreased 13.7 million units, or 19.4%, to 56.7 million units. Replacement tire volume decreased 10.7 million units, or 19.3%, primarily in our consumer business in the United States, Brazil and Canada, due to lower sales resulting from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. OE tire volume decreased 3.0 million units, or 19.8%, primarily in our consumer business in the United States, Brazil and Canada, driven by lower vehicle production as a result of pandemic-related impacts at major OE manufacturers.
Net sales in 2020 were $6,556 million, decreasing $1,366 million, or 17.2%, compared to $7,922 million in 2019. The decrease in net sales was driven by lower volume of $1,231 million, lower sales in other tire-related businesses of $191 million, primarily due to a decrease in third-party sales of chemical products and lower aviation and retail sales, and unfavorable foreign currency translation of $165 million, primarily related to the Brazilian real. These decreases were partially offset by improvements in price and product mix of $185 million, driven by higher proportionate sales of commercial tires, and $34 million ($26 million after-tax and minority) for a one-time legal settlement.
Operating income in 2020 was $9 million, decreasing $541 million, or 98.4%, from $550 million in 2019. The decrease in operating income was due to lower volume of $281 million, higher conversion costs of $215 million, primarily related to lower factory utilization and other period costs, and the write-off of work-in-process inventory of approximately $13 million, both as a direct result of the suspension of production and subsequent ramp up at our manufacturing facilities, and lower earnings in other tire-related businesses of $94 million, primarily due to a decrease in third-party sales of chemical products and lower aviation and retail sales. These decreases were partially offset by lower SAG of $37 million, primarily related to lower wages and benefits and travel-related expenses reflecting actions taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and improvements in price and product mix of $20 million. Operating income was also impacted by the $34 million one-time legal settlement noted above as well as a $13 million ($10 million after-tax and minority) charge for an environmental remediation liability at a closed facility. Conversion costs include savings from rationalization plans of $92 million in 2020, primarily related to Gadsden. Price and product mix includes TireHub equity losses of $36 million and $33 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating income in 2020 excluded the TireHub non-cash impairment charge of $148 million, as well as accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs of $103 million and rationalization charges of $94 million, primarily related to the permanent
closure of Gadsden. Operating income in 2019 excluded rationalization charges of $90 million and accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs of $13 million.
Americas' results are highly dependent upon the United States, which accounted for 82% and 81% of Americas' net sales in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Results of operations in the United States are expected to continue to have a significant impact on Americas' future performance.
Europe, Middle East and Africa
Europe, Middle East and Africa unit sales in 2020 decreased 10.6 million units, or 19.3%, to 44.5 million units. Replacement tire volume decreased 7.5 million units, or 18.2%, primarily in our consumer business, reflecting decreased industry demand due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and expected declines resulting from our initiative to align distribution in Europe. OE tire volume decreased 3.1 million units, or 22.6%, primarily in our consumer business, driven by lower vehicle production as a result of pandemic-related impacts at major OE manufacturers and our continued exit of declining, less profitable market segments.
Net sales in 2020 were $4,020 million, decreasing $688 million, or 14.6%, compared to $4,708 million in 2019. Net sales decreased primarily due to lower volume of $825 million, unfavorable foreign currency translation of $52 million, driven by the weakening of the Turkish lira, South African rand and Russian ruble, partially offset by the strengthening of the euro, and lower sales in other tire-related businesses of $22 million, primarily due to lower aviation sales. These decreases were partially offset by improvements in price and product mix of $210 million, driven by higher proportionate sales of commercial tires and our continued focus on 17-inch and above rim size consumer tires.
Operating loss in 2020 was $72 million, a change of $274 million, from operating income of $202 million in 2019. The change in operating income (loss) was primarily due to lower volume of $204 million, higher conversion costs of $143 million, primarily related to lower factory utilization and other period costs, and the write-off of work-in-process inventory of approximately $12 million, both as a direct result of the suspension of production and subsequent ramp up at our manufacturing facilities, lower earnings in other tire-related businesses of $27 million, primarily due to lower aviation and motorcycle sales, and higher start-up costs of $8 million, primarily related to our plant expansion projects in Europe. These decreases in operating income were partially offset by improvements in price and product mix of $58 million, lower raw material costs of $40 million, and lower SAG of $37 million, primarily related to lower advertising and travel-related expenses reflecting actions taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. SAG and conversion costs included incremental savings from rationalization plans of $4 million and $15 million, respectively.
Operating income (loss) in 2020 excluded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $182 million, net rationalization charges of $59 million, net losses on asset sales of $2 million, and accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs of $2 million. Operating income (loss) in 2019 excluded net rationalization charges of $115 million, net gains on asset sales of $16 million, and accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs of $2 million.
EMEA’s results are highly dependent upon Germany, which accounted for 18% and 21% of EMEA’s net sales in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Results of operations in Germany are expected to continue to have a significant impact on EMEA’s future performance.
Asia Pacific
Asia Pacific unit sales in 2020 decreased 5.0 million units, or 16.9%, to 24.8 million units. OE tire volume decreased 3.2 million units, or 27.8%, primarily in our consumer business in China and India, driven by lower vehicle production at major OE manufacturers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of discontinued fitments in China. Replacement tire volume decreased 1.8 million units, or 10.1%, primarily in our consumer business, reflecting decreased industry demand as a result of the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net sales in 2020 were $1,745 million, decreasing $370 million, or 17.5%, from $2,115 million in 2019. Net sales decreased due to lower volume of $331 million, lower sales in other tire-related businesses of $31 million, primarily due to lower aviation and retail sales, and unfavorable foreign currency translation of $16 million, primarily related to the weakening of the Indian rupee. These decreases were partially offset by improvements in price and product mix of $7 million.
Operating income in 2020 was $49 million, decreasing $144 million, or 74.6%, from $193 million in 2019. Operating income decreased due to lower volume of $86 million, unfavorable price and product mix of $40 million, lower earnings in other tire-related businesses of $37 million, primarily due to lower aviation and retail sales, and higher conversion costs of $36 million, primarily due to the impact of lower factory utilization. These decreases were partially offset by lower raw material costs of $35 million and lower SAG of $26 million, primarily related to lower wages and benefits, advertising and travel-related expenses reflecting actions taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating income in 2020 excluded net rationalization charges of $4 million.
Asia Pacific’s results are highly dependent upon Australia and China. Australia accounted for 27% of Asia Pacific’s net sales in both 2020 and 2019, respectively. China accounted for 25% and 26% of Asia Pacific's net sales in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Results of operations in Australia and China are expected to continue to have a significant impact on Asia Pacific's future performance.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and related notes to the financial statements. On an ongoing basis, management reviews its estimates, based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may alter such estimates and affect our results of operations and financial position in future periods. Our critical accounting policies relate to:
•
general and product liability and other litigation,
•
workers’ compensation,
•
goodwill,
•
deferred tax asset valuation allowances and uncertain income tax positions, and
•
pensions and other postretirement benefits.
General and Product Liability and Other Litigation. We have recorded liabilities totaling $285 million, including related legal fees expected to be incurred, for potential product liability and other tort claims, including asbestos claims, at December 31, 2020. General and product liability and other litigation liabilities are recorded based on management’s assessment that a loss arising from these matters is probable. If the loss can be reasonably estimated, we record the amount of the estimated loss. If the loss is estimated within a range and no point within the range is more probable than another, we record the minimum amount in the range. As additional information becomes available, any potential liability related to these matters is assessed and the estimates are revised, if necessary. Loss ranges are based upon the specific facts of each claim or class of claims and are determined after review by counsel. Court rulings on our cases or similar cases may impact our assessment of the probability and our estimate of the loss, which may have an impact on our reported results of operations, financial position and liquidity. We record receivables for insurance recoveries related to our litigation claims when it is probable that we will receive reimbursement from the insurer. Specifically, we are a defendant in numerous lawsuits alleging various asbestos-related personal injuries purported to result from alleged exposure to asbestos in certain products previously manufactured by us or present in certain of our facilities. Typically, these lawsuits have been brought against multiple defendants in federal and state courts.
We periodically, and at least annually, update, using actuarial analyses, our existing reserves for pending claims, including a reasonable estimate of the liability associated with unasserted asbestos claims, and estimate our receivables from probable insurance recoveries. In determining the estimate of our asbestos liability, we evaluated claims over the next ten-year period. Due to the difficulties in making these estimates, analysis based on new data and/or changed circumstances arising in the future may result in an increase in the recorded obligation, and that increase may be significant. We had recorded gross liabilities for both asserted and unasserted asbestos claims, inclusive of defense costs, totaling $149 million at December 31, 2020.
We maintain certain primary and excess insurance coverage under coverage-in-place agreements, and also have additional excess liability insurance with respect to asbestos liabilities. We record a receivable with respect to such policies when we determine that recovery is probable and we can reasonably estimate the amount of a particular recovery. This determination is based on consultation with our outside legal counsel and takes into consideration agreements with certain of our insurance carriers, the financial viability and legal obligations of our insurance carriers, and other relevant factors.
As of December 31, 2020, we recorded a receivable related to asbestos claims of $90 million, and we expect that approximately 60% of asbestos claim related losses would be recoverable through insurance through the period covered by the estimated liability. Of this amount, $13 million was included in Current Assets as part of Accounts Receivable at December 31, 2020. The recorded receivable consists of an amount we expect to collect under coverage-in-place agreements with certain primary and excess insurance carriers as well as an amount we believe is probable of recovery from certain of our other excess insurance carriers. Although we believe these amounts are collectible under primary and certain excess policies today, future disputes with insurers could result in significant charges to operations.
Workers’ Compensation. We have recorded liabilities, on a discounted basis, of $196 million for anticipated costs related to U.S. workers’ compensation claims at December 31, 2020. The costs include an estimate of expected settlements on pending claims, defense costs and a provision for claims incurred but not reported. These estimates are based on our assessment of potential liability using an analysis of available information with respect to pending claims, historical experience and current cost trends. The amount of our ultimate liability in respect of these matters may differ from these estimates. We periodically, and at least annually, update our loss development factors based on actuarial analyses. The liability is discounted using the risk-free rate of return.
For further information on general and product liability and other litigation, and workers’ compensation, refer to Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 19, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities, in this Form 10-K.
Goodwill. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually as of October 31 or more frequently if an indicator of impairment is present. Goodwill totaled $408 million at December 31, 2020.
We test goodwill for impairment on at least an annual basis, with the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary or to perform a quantitative assessment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. Under the qualitative assessment, an entity is not required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless the entity determines that it is more likely than not (defined as a likelihood of more than 50%) that its fair value is less than its carrying amount. If under the quantitative assessment the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then an impairment charge is recorded for that difference, not to exceed the total goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Our policy is to perform a quantitative assessment at least once every five years.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting decline in the macroeconomic environment, as well as a significant decrease in our market capitalization, we performed an interim impairment analysis as of March 31, 2020 utilizing a discounted cash flow model. Based on the results of this interim analysis, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $182 million related to our EMEA reporting unit in the first quarter of 2020. The most critical assumptions used in the calculation of the estimated fair value of our reporting units were the timing of the recovery in sales from the COVID-19 pandemic, the projected long-term operating margin and the discount rate. Since the date of our 2019 annual goodwill impairment assessment, which was conducted on a quantitative basis, the overall discount rate increased, reflecting an increase in the risk premium components of the rate partially offset by a decrease in the risk-free interest rate component, as a result of the macroeconomic environment. Also, we gave consideration to the expected near-term negative cash flow impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent recovery, based on our forecasts at that time, as well as a decrease in our market capitalization.
Since the first quarter of 2020, our forecasts as well as our market capitalization have both improved and we have concluded that there were no additional triggering events during the remaining nine months of 2020. Likewise, our 2020 annual impairment analysis, which was also conducted on a quantitative basis, indicated no impairment and that the fair values substantially exceeded the carrying amounts for each reporting unit tested. There were no events or circumstances that indicated the quantitative impairment tests should be re-performed for any reporting unit at December 31, 2020.
Our estimates of future cash flows include assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions, including the impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our sales, and may differ from actual future cash flows. Under the discounted cash flow approach, fair value is calculated as the sum of the projected discounted cash flows of the reporting unit over the next five years and the terminal value at the end of those five years and is dependent on estimates for future sales, operating margin, capital expenditures, rationalization activities and working capital changes, as well as expected long-term growth rates for cash flows and an appropriate discount rate. The risk adjusted discount rate used is consistent with the weighted average cost of capital for companies in the tire industry and is intended to represent a rate of return that would be expected by a market participant. The projected long term operating margin utilized in our fair value estimates is consistent with the reporting unit operating plan and is dependent on the successful execution of our business plan, overall industry growth rates and the competitive environment. As a result, the long term operating margin could be adversely impacted by our ability to execute our business plan as well as by volatile macroeconomic factors such as raw material prices, industry conditions, including the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, or competition. Our business plan includes rationalization programs, aligned distribution actions, and recovering past raw material cost increases by improving price and product mix, including through continued focus on higher margin tires. The discount rate could be adversely impacted by changes in the macroeconomic environment and volatility in the equity and debt markets. Although management believes its estimate of fair value is reasonable, if future financial performance falls below our expectations or there are negative revisions to significant assumptions, or if our market capitalization declines further and if such a decline becomes indicative that the fair value of our reporting units has declined below their carrying values, we may need to record a material, non-cash goodwill impairment charge in a future period.
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowances and Uncertain Income Tax Positions. At December 31, 2020, our valuation allowance on certain of our U.S. federal, state and local deferred tax assets was $368 million, primarily related to foreign tax credits with limited lives, and our valuation allowance on our foreign deferred tax assets was $1.1 billion. At December 31, 2019, our valuation allowance on certain U.S. federal, state and local deferred tax assets was $13 million and our valuation allowance on our foreign deferred tax assets was $1.0 billion.
We record a reduction to the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not such assets will not be realized. The valuation of deferred tax assets requires judgment in assessing future profitability, including the impact of tax planning strategies and the expiration date of the asset.
We consider both positive and negative evidence when measuring the need for a valuation allowance. The weight given to the evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it may be objectively verified. Current and cumulative financial reporting results are a source of objectively verifiable evidence. We give operating results during the most recent three-year period a significant weight in our analysis. We typically only consider forecasts of future profitability when positive cumulative operating results exist in the most recent three-year period. We perform scheduling exercises to determine if sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character exists in the periods required in order to realize our deferred tax assets with limited lives (such as tax loss carryforwards and tax credits) prior to their expiration. We consider tax planning strategies available to accelerate taxable amounts if required to utilize expiring deferred tax assets. A valuation allowance is not required to the extent that, in our judgment, positive evidence exists with a magnitude and duration sufficient to result in a conclusion that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized.
At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.2 billion of U.S. federal, state and local deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances totaling $368 million primarily for foreign tax credits with limited lives. Approximately $900 million of these U.S. net deferred tax assets have unlimited lives and approximately $300 million have limited lives and expire between 2025 and 2040. At December 31, 2019, we had approximately $1.2 billion of U.S. federal, state and local deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances totaling $13 million. In the U.S., we have a cumulative loss for the three-year period ending December 31, 2020. However, as the three-year cumulative loss in the U.S. is driven by the business disruption created by the COVID-19 pandemic, in assessing our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, we also considered objectively verifiable information including recent favorable recovery trends in the tire industry and our tire volume as well as the return to profitability of our U.S. business by the end of the fourth quarter and its expected continued improvement. While the COVID-19 related disruptions to our business are ultimately expected to be temporary, there is still considerable uncertainty around the extent and duration of these disruptions, as well as what additional actions federal, state or local governments may take to contain the pandemic. As such, an additional valuation allowance may be required against all, or a portion of, our U.S. net deferred tax assets in a future period.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our U.S. deferred tax assets included $133 million and $403 million of foreign tax credits with limited lives, net of valuation allowances of $328 million and $3 million, respectively, generated primarily from the receipt of foreign dividends. During the first quarter of 2020, we established a valuation allowance of $295 million against all of these foreign tax credits with expiration dates through 2024 and a portion of those expiring in 2025. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we increased our valuation allowance by $30 million with a corresponding increase to our deferred tax assets to reflect the impact of a decrease in foreign tax credits utilized on our 2019 income tax return. Due to the sudden and sharp decline in industry demand and the temporary suspension of production at our U.S. manufacturing facilities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have a significant U.S. tax loss for 2020. As loss carryforwards must be utilized prior to foreign tax credits in offsetting future income for tax purposes, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that we will be able to utilize these foreign tax credits prior to their expiration. Our earnings and forecasts of future profitability, taking into consideration recent trends, along with three significant sources of foreign income provide us sufficient positive evidence that we will be able to utilize our remaining foreign tax credits that expire between 2025 and 2030. Our sources of foreign income are (1) 100% of our domestic profitability can be re-characterized as foreign source income under current U.S. tax law to the extent domestic losses have offset foreign source income in prior years, (2) annual net foreign source income, exclusive of dividends, primarily from royalties, and (3) tax planning strategies, including capitalizing research and development costs, accelerating income on cross border transactions, including sales of inventory or raw materials to our subsidiaries, and reducing U.S. interest expense by, for example, reducing intercompany loans through repatriating current year earnings of foreign subsidiaries, all of which would increase our domestic profitability.
We consider our current forecasts of future profitability in assessing our ability to realize our deferred tax assets, including our foreign tax credits. As noted above, these forecasts include the impact of recent trends, including various macroeconomic factors such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, on our profitability, as well as the impact of tax planning strategies. Macroeconomic factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, possess a high degree of volatility and can significantly impact our profitability. As such, there is a risk that future earnings will not be sufficient to fully utilize our U.S. net deferred tax assets, including our remaining foreign tax credits. However, we believe our forecasts of future profitability along with the three significant sources of foreign income described above provide us sufficient positive, objectively verifiable evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that, at December 31, 2020, our U.S. net deferred tax assets, including our foreign tax credits, net of valuation allowances, will be fully utilized.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had approximately $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion of foreign deferred tax assets, respectively, and valuation allowances of $1.1 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively. Our losses in various foreign taxing jurisdictions in recent periods represented sufficient negative evidence to require us to maintain a full valuation allowance against certain of these net foreign deferred tax assets. Most notably, in Luxembourg, we maintain a valuation allowance of $978 million on all of our net deferred tax assets. Each reporting period, we assess available positive and negative evidence and estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize these existing deferred tax assets. We do not believe that sufficient positive evidence required to release valuation allowances having a significant impact on our financial position or results of operations will exist within the next twelve months.
We recognize the effects of changes in tax rates and laws on deferred tax balances in the period in which legislation is enacted. We remeasure existing deferred tax assets and liabilities considering the tax rates at which they will be realized. We also consider the effects of enacted tax laws in our analysis of the need for valuation allowances.
Effective January 1, 2018, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act subjects a U.S. parent to current tax on its global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI"). To the extent that we incur expense under the GILTI provisions, we will treat it as a component of income tax expense in the period incurred.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations, including those for transfer pricing. We recognize liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. If we ultimately determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary, we reverse the liability and recognize a tax benefit during the period in which we determine that the liability is no longer necessary. We also recognize income tax benefits to the extent that it is more likely than not that our positions will be sustained when challenged by the taxing authorities. We derecognize income tax benefits when, based on new information, we determine that it is no longer more likely than not that our position will be sustained. To the extent we prevail in matters for which liabilities have been established, or determine we need to derecognize tax benefits recorded in prior periods, our results of operations and effective tax rate in a given period could be materially affected. An unfavorable tax settlement would require use of our cash, and lead to recognition of expense to the extent the settlement amount exceeds recorded liabilities, resulting in an increase in our effective tax rate in the period of resolution. To reduce our risk of an unfavorable transfer price settlement, the Company applies consistent transfer pricing policies and practices globally, supports pricing with economic studies and seeks advance pricing agreements and joint audits to the extent possible. A favorable tax settlement would be recognized as a reduction of expense to the extent the settlement amount is lower than recorded liabilities and, in the case of an income tax settlement, would result in a reduction in our effective tax rate in the period of resolution. We report interest and penalties related to uncertain income tax positions as income tax expense.
For additional information regarding uncertain income tax positions and valuation allowances, refer to Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 6, Income Taxes, in this Form 10-K.
Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits. We have recorded liabilities for pension and other postretirement benefits of $606 million and $236 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020. Our recorded liabilities and net periodic costs for pensions and other postretirement benefits are based on a number of assumptions, including:
•
life expectancies,
•
retirement rates,
•
discount rates,
•
long term rates of return on plan assets,
•
inflation rates,
•
future compensation levels,
•
future health care costs, and
•
maximum company-covered benefit costs.
Certain of these assumptions are determined with the assistance of independent actuaries. Assumptions about life expectancies, retirement rates, future compensation levels and future health care costs are based on past experience and anticipated future trends. The discount rate for our U.S. plans is based on a yield curve derived from a portfolio of corporate bonds from issuers rated AA or higher as of December 31 and is reviewed annually. Our expected benefit payment cash flows are discounted based on spot rates developed from the yield curve. The mortality assumption for our U.S. plans is based on actual historical
experience, an assumed long term rate of future improvement based on published actuarial tables, and current government regulations related to lump sum payment factors. The long term rate of return on U.S. plan assets is based on estimates of future long term rates of return similar to the target allocation of substantially all fixed income securities. Actual U.S. pension fund asset allocations are reviewed on a monthly basis and the pension fund is rebalanced to target ranges on an as-needed basis. These assumptions are reviewed regularly and revised when appropriate. Changes in one or more of them may affect the amount of our recorded liabilities and net periodic costs for these benefits. Other assumptions involving demographic factors such as retirement age and turnover are evaluated periodically and are updated to reflect our experience and expectations for the future. If actual experience differs from expectations, our financial position, results of operations and liquidity in future periods may be affected.
The weighted average discount rate used in estimating the total liability for our U.S. pension and other postretirement benefit plans was 2.42% and 2.34%, respectively, at December 31, 2020, compared to 3.22% and 3.14%, respectively, at December 31, 2019. The decrease in the discount rate at December 31, 2020 was due primarily to lower yields on highly rated corporate bonds. Interest cost included in our U.S. net periodic pension cost was $126 million in 2020, compared to $173 million in 2019 and $157 million in 2018. Interest cost included in our worldwide net periodic other postretirement benefits cost was $8 million in 2020, compared to $11 million in 2019 and $12 million in 2018.
The following table presents the sensitivity of our U.S. projected pension benefit obligation and accumulated other postretirement benefits obligation to the indicated increase/decrease in the discount rate:
Changes in general interest rates and corporate (AA or better) credit spreads impact our discount rate and thereby our U.S. pension benefit obligation. Our U.S. pension plans are invested in a portfolio of substantially all fixed income securities designed to offset the impact of future discount rate movements on liabilities for these plans. If corporate (AA or better) interest rates increase or decrease in parallel (i.e., across all maturities), the investment portfolio described above is designed to mitigate a substantial portion of the expected change in our U.S. pension benefit obligation. For example, if corporate (AA or better) interest rates increased or decreased by 0.5%, the investment portfolio described above would be expected to mitigate more than 85% of the expected change in our U.S. pension benefit obligation.
At December 31, 2020, our net actuarial loss included in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss ("AOCL") related to global pension plans was $2,989 million, $2,353 million of which related to our U.S. pension plans. The net actuarial loss included in AOCL related to our U.S. pension plans is primarily due to declines in U.S. discount rates and plan asset losses that occurred prior to 2015, plus the impact of prior increases in estimated life expectancies. For purposes of determining our 2020 U.S. pension total benefits cost, we recognized $109 million of the net actuarial losses in 2020. We will recognize approximately $110 million of net actuarial losses in 2021 U.S. net periodic pension cost. If our future experience is consistent with our assumptions as of December 31, 2020, actuarial loss recognition over the next few years will remain at an amount near that to be recognized in 2021 before it begins to gradually decline. In addition, if annual lump sum payments from a pension plan exceed annual service and interest cost for that plan, accelerated recognition of net actuarial losses will be required through a settlement in total benefits cost.
The actual rate of return on our U.S. pension fund was 13.20%, 15.90% and (1.90)% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, as compared to the expected rate of 4.22%, 5.25% and 4.58% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We use the fair value of our pension assets in the calculation of pension expense for all of our U.S. pension plans.
The weighted average amortization period for our U.S. pension plans is approximately 17 years.
Service cost of pension plans was recorded in CGS, as part of the cost of inventory sold during the period, or SAG in our Consolidated Statements of Operations, based on the specific roles (i.e., manufacturing vs. non-manufacturing) of employee groups covered by each of our pension plans. In 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately 45% and 55% of service cost was included in CGS and SAG, respectively. Non-service related net periodic pension costs were recorded in Other (Income) Expense.
Globally, we expect our 2021 net periodic pension cost to be $80 million to $100 million, including approximately $35 million of service cost, compared to $117 million in 2020, which included $34 million of service cost. The decrease in expected net periodic pension cost is primarily due to lower interest cost for our U.S. pension plans from decreases in interest rates.
We experienced a decrease in our U.S. discount rate at the end of 2020 and a large portion of the $30 million net actuarial loss included in AOCL for our worldwide other postretirement benefit plans as of December 31, 2020 is a result of the overall decline in U.S. discount rates over time. For purposes of determining 2020 worldwide net periodic other postretirement benefits cost, we recognized $4 million of net actuarial losses in 2020. We will recognize approximately $3 million of net actuarial losses in 2021. If our future experience is consistent with our assumptions as of December 31, 2020, actuarial loss recognition over the next few years will remain at an amount near that to be recognized in 2021 before it begins to gradually decline.
For further information on pensions and other postretirement benefits, refer to Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 17, Pension, Other Postretirement Benefits and Savings Plans, in this Form 10-K.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from our operating and financing activities. Our cash flows from operating activities are driven primarily by our operating results and changes in our working capital requirements and our cash flows from financing activities are dependent upon our ability to access credit or other capital.
In April 2020, we amended and restated our $2.0 billion first lien revolving credit facility. Changes to the facility include extending the maturity to April 9, 2025 and increasing the borrowing base for the facility by increasing the amount attributable to the value of our principal trademarks and adding the value of eligible machinery and equipment, which improved our availability under the facility by approximately $230 million at December 31, 2020. The interest rate for loans under the facility increased by 50 basis points to LIBOR plus 175 basis points, based on our current liquidity, and undrawn amounts under the facility will be subject to an annual commitment fee of 25 basis points.
In May 2020, we further enhanced our liquidity position by issuing $800 million of 9.5% senior notes due 2025. We used the net proceeds from the issuance of these notes for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of our $282 million 8.75% notes at their maturity in August 2020.
For further information on the other initiatives we pursued in 2020, refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Overview.”
At December 31, 2020, we had $1,539 million of Cash and Cash Equivalents, compared to $908 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in cash and cash equivalents of $631 million was primarily due to cash flows from operating activities of $1,115 million, driven by cash from working capital of $871 million, and cash flows from financing activities of $203 million, primarily due to net borrowings of $250 million, partially offset by cash used for first quarter dividends of $37 million. These sources of cash were partially offset by cash used by investing activities of $667 million, reflecting capital expenditures of $647 million.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $3,881 million and $3,554 million, respectively, of unused availability under our various credit agreements. The table below provides unused availability by our significant credit facilities as of December 31:
The borrowing base under our first lien revolving credit facility is dependent, in significant part, on our eligible accounts receivable and inventory, which have declined as a result of our lower sales and production levels due to the COVID-19 pandemic. A decline in our borrowing base would reduce our availability under the first lien revolving credit facility. Additionally, the amounts available to us from our pan-European accounts receivable securitization facility and other accounts receivable factoring programs have declined since December 31, 2019 due to the decline in our accounts receivable as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our sales.
We actively monitor our liquidity and took a number of actions aimed at mitigating the negative consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on our cash flows and liquidity, such as suspending production at most of our manufacturing facilities during parts of the first half of 2020, reducing our second quarter payroll costs through a combination of furloughs, temporary salary reductions and salary deferrals, refinancing our first lien revolving credit facility to extend its maturity and increase its borrowing base, issuing $800 million of 9.5% senior notes due 2025, suspending the quarterly dividend on our common stock, reducing capital expenditures and discretionary spending, and using governmental relief efforts to defer payroll and other tax payments globally. We intend to operate the business in a way that allows us to address our cash flow needs with our existing cash and available credit if they cannot be funded by cash generated from operating or other financing activities. We believe that our liquidity position is adequate to fund our operating and investing needs and debt maturities for the next twelve months and to provide us with the ability to respond to further changes in the business environment.
Our ability to service debt and operational requirements is also dependent, in part, on the ability of our subsidiaries to make distributions of cash to various other entities in our consolidated group, whether in the form of dividends, loans or otherwise. In certain countries where we operate, such as China, South Africa and Argentina, transfers of funds into or out of such countries by way of dividends, loans, advances or payments to third-party or affiliated suppliers are generally or periodically subject to certain requirements, such as obtaining approval from the foreign government and/or currency exchange board before net assets can be transferred out of the country. In addition, certain of our credit agreements and other debt instruments limit the ability of foreign subsidiaries to make distributions of cash. Thus, we would have to repay and/or amend these credit agreements and other debt instruments in order to use this cash to service our consolidated debt. Because of the inherent uncertainty of satisfactorily meeting these requirements or limitations, we do not consider the net assets of our subsidiaries, including our Chinese, South African and Argentinian subsidiaries, which are subject to such requirements or limitations, to be integral to our liquidity or our ability to service our debt and operational requirements. At December 31, 2020, approximately $680 million of net assets, including $185 million of cash and cash equivalents, were subject to such requirements. The requirements we must comply with to transfer funds out of China, South Africa and Argentina have not adversely impacted our ability to make transfers out of those countries.
We expect our 2021 cash flow needs to include capital expenditures of approximately $850 million. We also expect interest expense to be $350 million to $375 million, rationalization payments to be approximately $175 million, income tax payments to be $125 million to $150 million, which include payments deferred from 2020, and contributions to our funded non-U.S. pension plans to be $25 million to $50 million. We expect working capital to be a use of cash of $450 million to $500 million in 2021. We intend to operate the business in a way that allows us to address these needs with our existing cash and available credit if they cannot be funded by cash generated from operations.
Cash Position
At December 31, 2020, significant concentrations of cash and cash equivalents held by our international subsidiaries included the following amounts:
•
$387 million or 25% in Asia Pacific, primarily China and Japan ($337 million or 37% at December 31, 2019),
•
$387 million or 25% in EMEA, primarily Belgium ($214 million or 24% at December 31, 2019), and
•
$384 million or 25% in Americas, primarily Brazil, Canada and Chile ($190 million or 21% at December 31, 2019).
We have deposited our cash and cash equivalents and entered into various credit agreements and derivative contracts with financial institutions that we considered to be substantial and creditworthy at the time of such transactions. We seek to control our exposure to these financial institutions by diversifying our deposits, credit agreements and derivative contracts across multiple financial institutions, by setting deposit and counterparty credit limits based on long term credit ratings and other indicators of credit risk such as credit default swap spreads, and by monitoring the financial strength of these financial institutions on a regular basis. We also enter into master netting agreements with counterparties when possible. By controlling and monitoring exposure to financial institutions in this manner, we believe that we effectively manage the risk of loss due to nonperformance by a financial institution. However, we cannot provide assurance that we will not experience losses or delays in accessing our deposits or lines of credit due to the nonperformance of a financial institution. Our inability to access our cash deposits or make draws on our lines of credit, or the inability of a counterparty to fulfill its contractual obligations to us, could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, financial condition or results of operations in the period in which it occurs.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,115 million in 2020, decreasing $92 million compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $1,207 million in 2019.
The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was driven by a decrease in operating income from our SBUs of $959 million and higher cash payments for rationalizations of $127 million, primarily due to cash payments made during 2020 related to Gadsden. These uses of cash were partially offset by an increase in cash provided by working capital of $789 million and a decrease in cash income tax payments of $97 million, primarily due to our lower earnings. In addition, current year cash flows from operating activities were favorably impacted by a net year-over-year change of $109 million in Other Assets and Liabilities, Compensation and Benefits and Other Current Liabilities on the Balance Sheet, driven by governmental relief efforts to defer payroll tax payments as well as insurance proceeds related to hurricane damage suffered in previous years.
The net increase in cash provided by working capital includes increases in cash provided by Inventory of $707 million and Accounts Receivable of $61 million, driven by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which included lower sales volume as
well as mitigating actions taken by us, such as the suspension of production and subsequent ramp up at our manufacturing facilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities was $667 million in 2020, compared to $800 million in 2019. Capital expenditures were $647 million in 2020, compared to $770 million in 2019. Beyond expenditures required to sustain our facilities, capital expenditures in 2020 and 2019 primarily related to investments in additional 17-inch and above capacity around the world.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows provided from financing activities were $203 million in 2020, compared to net cash used by financing activities of $307 million in 2019. The $510 million year-over-year change reflects net borrowings of $250 million in 2020 in order to enhance our liquidity and cash position in light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, versus net debt repayments of $119 million in 2019. In addition, cash paid for dividends decreased $111 million from $148 million in 2019 to $37 million in 2020, as a result of us suspending the quarterly dividend on our common stock on April 16, 2020.
Credit Sources
In aggregate, we had total credit arrangements of $9,707 million available at December 31, 2020, of which $3,881 million were unused, compared to $9,054 million available at December 31, 2019, of which $3,554 million were unused. At December 31, 2020, we had long term credit arrangements totaling $8,632 million, of which $3,242 million were unused, compared to $8,320 million and $3,189 million, respectively, at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, we had short term committed and uncommitted credit arrangements totaling $1,075 million, of which $639 million were unused, compared to $734 million and $365 million, respectively, at December 31, 2019. The continued availability of the short term uncommitted arrangements is at the discretion of the relevant lender and may be terminated at any time.
Outstanding Notes
At December 31, 2020, we had $3,860 million of outstanding notes, compared to $3,311 million at December 31, 2019. In May 2020, we issued $800 million in aggregate principal amount of 9.5% senior notes due 2025, a portion of the proceeds of which were used to pay in full our $282 million 8.75% senior notes at maturity on August 17, 2020.
$2.0 Billion Amended and Restated First Lien Revolving Credit Facility due 2025
On April 9, 2020, we amended and restated our $2.0 billion first lien revolving credit facility. Changes to the facility include extending the maturity to April 9, 2025 and increasing the borrowing base for the facility by increasing the amount attributable to the value of our principal trademarks by $100 million and adding the value of eligible machinery and equipment. The interest rate for loans under the facility increased by 50 basis points to LIBOR plus 175 basis points, based on our current liquidity, and undrawn amounts under the facility will be subject to an annual commitment fee of 25 basis points.
Our amended and restated first lien revolving credit facility is available in the form of loans or letters of credit. Up to $800 million in letters of credit and $50 million of swingline loans are available for issuance under the facility. Availability under the facility is subject to a borrowing base, which is based on (i) eligible accounts receivable and inventory of The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company and certain of its U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries, (ii) the value of our principal trademarks in an amount not to exceed $400 million, (iii) the value of eligible machinery and equipment, and (iv) certain cash in an amount not to exceed $200 million. To the extent that our eligible accounts receivable and inventory and other components of the borrowing base decline in value, our borrowing base will decrease and the availability under the facility may decrease below $2.0 billion. In addition, if the amount of outstanding borrowings and letters of credit under the facility exceeds the borrowing base, we are required to prepay borrowings and/or cash collateralize letters of credit sufficient to eliminate the excess. As of December 31, 2020, our borrowing base, and therefore our availability, under the facility was $454 million below the facility's stated amount of $2.0 billion.
At December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings and $11 million of letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2019, we had no borrowings and $37 million of letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility.
At December 31, 2020, we had $341 million in letters of credit issued under bilateral credit agreements.
Amended and Restated Second Lien Term Loan Facility due 2025
Our amended and restated second lien term loan facility matures on March 7, 2025. The term loan bears interest, at our option, at (i) 200 basis points over LIBOR or (ii) 100 basis points over an alternative base rate (the higher of (a) the prime rate, (b) the federal funds effective rate or the overnight bank funding rate plus 50 basis points or (c) LIBOR plus 100 basis points). In
addition, if the Total Leverage Ratio is equal to or less than 1.25 to 1.00, we have the option to further reduce the spreads described above by 25 basis points. "Total Leverage Ratio" has the meaning given it in the facility.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the amounts outstanding under this facility were $400 million.
€800 Million Amended and Restated Senior Secured European Revolving Credit Facility due 2024
Our amended and restated European revolving credit facility consists of (i) a €180 million German tranche that is available only to Goodyear Dunlop Tires Germany GmbH (“GDTG”) and (ii) a €620 million all-borrower tranche that is available to Goodyear Europe B.V. (“GEBV”), GDTG and Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations S.A. Up to €175 million of swingline loans and €75 million in letters of credit are available for issuance under the all-borrower tranche. Amounts drawn under this facility will bear interest at LIBOR plus 150 basis points for loans denominated in U.S. dollars or pounds sterling and EURIBOR plus 150 basis points for loans denominated in euros, and undrawn amounts under the facility are subject to an annual commitment fee of 25 basis points. Subject to the consent of the lenders whose commitments are to be increased, we may request that the facility be increased by up to €200 million.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no borrowings and no letters of credit outstanding under the European revolving credit facility.
Each of our first lien revolving credit facility and our European revolving credit facility have customary representations and warranties including, as a condition to borrowing, that all such representations and warranties are true and correct, in all material respects, on the date of the borrowing, including representations as to no material adverse change in our business or financial condition since December 31, 2019 under the first lien facility and December 31, 2018 under the European facility.
Accounts Receivable Securitization Facilities (On-Balance Sheet)
GEBV and certain other of our European subsidiaries are parties to a pan-European accounts receivable securitization facility that expires in 2023. The terms of the facility provide the flexibility to designate annually the maximum amount of funding available under the facility in an amount of not less than €30 million and not more than €450 million. For the period from October 18, 2018 through October 15, 2020, the designated maximum amount of the facility was €320 million. For the period from October 16, 2020 through October 18, 2021, the designated maximum amount of the facility was decreased to €280 million.
The facility involves the ongoing daily sale of substantially all of the trade accounts receivable of certain GEBV subsidiaries. These subsidiaries retain servicing responsibilities. Utilization under this facility is based on eligible receivable balances.
The funding commitments under the facility will expire upon the earliest to occur of: (a) September 26, 2023, (b) the non-renewal and expiration (without substitution) of all of the back-up liquidity commitments, (c) the early termination of the facility according to its terms (generally upon an Early Amortisation Event (as defined in the facility), which includes, among other things, events similar to the events of default under our senior secured credit facilities; certain tax law changes; or certain changes to law, regulation or accounting standards), or (d) our request for early termination of the facility. The facility’s current back-up liquidity commitments will expire on October 18, 2021.
At December 31, 2020, the amounts available and utilized under this program totaled $291 million (€237 million). At December 31, 2019, the amounts available and utilized under this program totaled $327 million (€291 million). The program does not qualify for sale accounting, and accordingly, these amounts are included in Long Term Debt and Finance Leases.
Accounts Receivable Factoring Facilities (Off-Balance Sheet)
We have sold certain of our trade receivables under off-balance sheet programs. For these programs, we have concluded that there is generally no risk of loss to us from non-payment of the sold receivables. At December 31, 2020, the gross amount of receivables sold was $451 million, compared to $548 million at December 31, 2019.
Supplier Financing
We have entered into payment processing agreements with several financial institutions. Under these agreements, the financial institution acts as our paying agent with respect to accounts payable due to our suppliers. These agreements also allow our suppliers to sell their receivables to the financial institutions at the sole discretion of both the supplier and the financial institution on terms that are negotiated between them. We are not always notified when our suppliers sell receivables under these programs. Our obligations to our suppliers, including the amounts due and scheduled payment dates, are not impacted by our suppliers' decisions to sell their receivables under the program. Agreements for such supplier financing programs totaled up to $500 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Further Information
On November 30, 2020, the ICE Benchmark Administration, the administrator of LIBOR, with the support of the U.S. Federal Reserve Board and the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority, announced plans to consult on ceasing the publication of USD LIBOR on December 31, 2021 for only the one week and two month USD LIBOR tenors, and on June 30, 2023 for all other USD LIBOR tenors. In the United States, efforts to identify a set of alternative U.S. dollar reference interest rates include proposals by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee that has been convened by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to encourage market participants’ use of the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, known as SOFR. Additionally, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. launched a consultation on technical issues related to new benchmark fallbacks for derivative contracts that reference certain interbank offered rates, including LIBOR. We cannot currently predict the effect of the discontinuation of, or other changes to, LIBOR or any establishment of alternative reference rates in the United States, the European Union or elsewhere on the global capital markets. The uncertainty regarding the future of LIBOR, as well as the transition from LIBOR to any alternative reference rate or rates, could have adverse impacts on floating rate obligations, loans, deposits, derivatives and other financial instruments that currently use LIBOR as a benchmark rate. We have identified and evaluated our financing obligations and other contracts that refer to LIBOR and expect to be able to transition those obligations and contracts to an alternative reference rate in the event of the discontinuation of LIBOR. Our amended and restated first lien revolving credit facility, our second lien term loan facility and our European revolving credit facility, which constitute the most significant of our LIBOR-based debt obligations, contain “fallback” provisions that address the potential discontinuation of LIBOR and facilitate the adoption of an alternate rate of interest. We have not issued any long term floating rate notes. Our amended and restated first lien revolving credit facility and second lien term loan facility also contain express provisions for the use, at our option, of an alternative base rate (the higher of (a) the prime rate, (b) the federal funds effective rate or the overnight bank funding rate plus 50 basis points or (c) LIBOR plus 100 basis points). We do not believe that the discontinuation of LIBOR, or its replacement with an alternative reference rate or rates, will have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
For a further description of the terms of our outstanding notes, first lien revolving credit facility, second lien term loan facility, European revolving credit facility and pan-European accounts receivable securitization facility, refer to Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 15, Financing Arrangements and Derivative Financial Instruments, in this Form 10-K.
Covenant Compliance
Our first and second lien credit facilities and some of the indentures governing our notes contain certain covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur additional debt or issue redeemable preferred stock, pay dividends, repurchase shares or make certain other restricted payments or investments, incur liens, sell assets, incur restrictions on the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or to make other payments to us, enter into affiliate transactions, engage in sale and leaseback transactions, and consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets. These covenants are subject to significant exceptions and qualifications. Our first and second lien credit facilities and the indentures governing our notes also have customary defaults, including cross-defaults to material indebtedness of Goodyear and its subsidiaries.
We have additional financial covenants in our first and second lien credit facilities that are currently not applicable. We only become subject to these financial covenants when certain events occur. These financial covenants and related events are as follows:
•
We become subject to the financial covenant contained in our first lien revolving credit facility when the aggregate amount of our Parent Company (The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company) and guarantor subsidiaries cash and cash equivalents (“Available Cash”) plus our availability under our first lien revolving credit facility is less than $200 million. If this were to occur, our ratio of EBITDA to Consolidated Interest Expense may not be less than 2.0 to 1.0 for the most recent period of four consecutive fiscal quarters. As of December 31, 2020, our unused availability under this facility of $1,535 million plus our Available Cash of $408 million totaled $1,943 million, which is in excess of $200 million.
•
We become subject to a covenant contained in our second lien credit facility upon certain asset sales. The covenant provides that, before we use cash proceeds from certain asset sales to repay any junior lien, senior unsecured or subordinated indebtedness, we must first offer to use such cash proceeds to prepay borrowings under the second lien credit facility unless our ratio of Consolidated Net Secured Indebtedness to EBITDA (Pro Forma Senior Secured Leverage Ratio) for any period of four consecutive fiscal quarters is equal to or less than 3.0 to 1.0.
In addition, our European revolving credit facility contains non-financial covenants similar to the non-financial covenants in our first and second lien credit facilities that are described above and a financial covenant applicable only to GEBV and its
subsidiaries. This financial covenant provides that we are not permitted to allow GEBV’s ratio of Consolidated Net GEBV Indebtedness to Consolidated GEBV EBITDA for a period of four consecutive fiscal quarters to be greater than 3.0 to 1.0 at the end of any fiscal quarter. Consolidated Net GEBV Indebtedness is determined net of the sum of cash and cash equivalents in excess of $100 million held by GEBV and its subsidiaries, cash and cash equivalents in excess of $150 million held by the Parent Company and its U.S. subsidiaries, and availability under our first lien revolving credit facility if the ratio of EBITDA to Consolidated Interest Expense described above is not applicable and the conditions to borrowing under the first lien revolving credit facility are met. Consolidated Net GEBV Indebtedness also excludes loans from other consolidated Goodyear entities. This financial covenant is also included in our pan-European accounts receivable securitization facility. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with this financial covenant.
Our credit facilities also state that we may only incur additional debt or make restricted payments that are not otherwise expressly permitted if, after giving effect to the debt incurrence or the restricted payment, our ratio of EBITDA to Consolidated Interest Expense for the prior four fiscal quarters would exceed 2.0 to 1.0. Certain of our senior note indentures have substantially similar limitations on incurring debt and making restricted payments. Our credit facilities and indentures also permit the incurrence of additional debt through other provisions in those agreements without regard to our ability to satisfy the ratio-based incurrence test described above. We believe that these other provisions provide us with sufficient flexibility to incur additional debt necessary to meet our operating, investing and financing needs without regard to our ability to satisfy the ratio-based incurrence test.
Covenants could change based upon a refinancing or amendment of an existing facility, or additional covenants may be added in connection with the incurrence of new debt.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the currently applicable material covenants imposed by our principal credit facilities and indentures.
The terms “Available Cash,” “EBITDA,” “Consolidated Interest Expense,” “Consolidated Net Secured Indebtedness,” “Pro Forma Senior Secured Leverage Ratio,” “Consolidated Net GEBV Indebtedness” and “Consolidated GEBV EBITDA” have the meanings given them in the respective credit facilities.
Potential Future Financings
In addition to our previous financing activities, we may seek to undertake additional financing actions which could include restructuring bank debt or capital markets transactions, possibly including the issuance of additional debt or equity. Given the inherent uncertainty of market conditions, access to the capital markets cannot be assured.
Our future liquidity requirements may make it necessary for us to incur additional debt. However, a substantial portion of our assets are already subject to liens securing our indebtedness. As a result, we are limited in our ability to pledge our remaining assets as security for additional secured indebtedness. In addition, no assurance can be given as to our ability to raise additional unsecured debt.
Dividends and Common Stock Repurchase Program
Under our primary credit facilities and some of our note indentures, we are permitted to pay dividends on and repurchase our capital stock (which constitute restricted payments) as long as no default will have occurred and be continuing, additional indebtedness can be incurred under the credit facilities or indentures following the payment, and certain financial tests are satisfied.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we paid cash dividends of $37 million, $148 million and $138 million, respectively, on our common stock. This excludes dividends earned on stock-based compensation plans of $1 million, $2 million and $1 million for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. On April 16, 2020, we announced that we have suspended the quarterly dividend on our common stock.
From time to time, we repurchase shares of our common stock under programs approved by the Board of Directors. During 2020 and 2019, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock. During 2018, we repurchased shares totaling approximately $220 million under a program that expired on December 31, 2019.
The restrictions imposed by our credit facilities and indentures did not affect our ability to pay the dividends on or repurchase our capital stock as described above, and are not expected to affect our ability to pay similar dividends or make similar repurchases in the future.
Asset Dispositions
The restrictions on asset sales imposed by our material indebtedness have not affected our ability to divest non-core businesses, and those divestitures have not affected our ability to comply with those restrictions.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
Certain of our subsidiaries, which are listed on Exhibit 22.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K and are generally holding companies or smaller operating companies, have guaranteed our obligations under the $1.0 billion outstanding principal amount of 5.125% senior notes due 2023, the $800 million outstanding principal amount of 9.5% senior notes due 2025, the $900 million outstanding principal amount of 5% senior notes due 2026 and the $700 million outstanding principal amount of 4.875% senior notes due 2027 (collectively, the “Notes”).
The Notes have been issued by The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company (the “Parent Company”) and are its senior unsecured obligations. The Notes rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and future senior unsecured obligations and senior to any of our future subordinated indebtedness. The Notes are effectively subordinated to our existing and future secured indebtedness to the extent of the assets securing that indebtedness. The Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several basis by each of our wholly-owned U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries that also guarantee our obligations under certain of our senior secured credit facilities (such guarantees, the “Guarantees”; and, such guaranteeing subsidiaries, the “Subsidiary Guarantors”). The Guarantees are senior unsecured obligations of the Subsidiary Guarantors and rank equally in right of payment with all existing and future senior unsecured obligations of our Subsidiary Guarantors. The Guarantees are effectively subordinated to existing and future secured indebtedness of the Subsidiary Guarantors to the extent of the assets securing that indebtedness.
The Notes are structurally subordinated to all of the existing and future debt and other liabilities, including trade payables, of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the Notes (the “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”). The Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries will have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay amounts due under the Notes or to make funds available to pay those amounts. Certain Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries are limited in their ability to remit funds to us by means of dividends, advances or loans due to required foreign government and/or currency exchange board approvals or limitations in credit agreements or other debt instruments of those subsidiaries.
The Subsidiary Guarantors, as primary obligors and not merely as sureties, jointly and severally irrevocably and unconditionally guarantee on a senior unsecured basis the performance and full and punctual payment when due of all obligations of the Parent Company under the Notes and the related indentures, whether for payment of principal of or interest on the Notes, expenses, indemnification or otherwise. The Guarantees of the Subsidiary Guarantors are subject to release in limited circumstances only upon the occurrence of certain customary conditions.
Although the Guarantees provide the holders of Notes with a direct unsecured claim against the assets of the Subsidiary Guarantors, under U.S. federal bankruptcy law and comparable provisions of U.S. state fraudulent transfer laws, in certain circumstances a court could cancel a Guarantee and order the return of any payments made thereunder to the Subsidiary Guarantor or to a fund for the benefit of its creditors.
A court might take these actions if it found, among other things, that when the Subsidiary Guarantors incurred the debt evidenced by their Guarantee (i) they received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for the incurrence of the debt and (ii) any one of the following conditions was satisfied:
•
the Subsidiary Guarantor was insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of the incurrence;
•
the Subsidiary Guarantor was engaged in a business or transaction for which its remaining assets constituted unreasonably small capital; or
•
the Subsidiary Guarantor intended to incur, or believed (or reasonably should have believed) that it would incur, debts beyond its ability to pay as those debts matured.
In applying the above factors, a court would likely find that a Subsidiary Guarantor did not receive fair consideration or reasonably equivalent value for its Guarantee, except to the extent that it benefited directly or indirectly from the issuance of the Notes. The determination of whether a guarantor was or was not rendered “insolvent” when it entered into its guarantee will vary depending on the law of the jurisdiction being applied. Generally, an entity would be considered insolvent if the sum of its debts (including contingent or unliquidated debts) is greater than all of its assets at a fair valuation or if the present fair salable value of its assets is less than the amount that will be required to pay its probable liability on its existing debts, including contingent or unliquidated debts, as they mature.
Under Canadian federal bankruptcy and insolvency laws and comparable provincial laws on preferences, fraudulent conveyances or other challengeable or voidable transactions, the Guarantees could be challenged as a preference, fraudulent conveyance, transfer at undervalue or other challengeable or voidable transaction. The test to be applied varies among the different pieces of legislation, but as a general matter these types of challenges may arise in circumstances where:
•
such action was intended to defeat, hinder, delay, defraud or prejudice creditors or others;
•
such action was taken within a specified period of time prior to the commencement of proceedings under Canadian bankruptcy, insolvency or restructuring legislation in respect of a Subsidiary Guarantor, the consideration received by the Subsidiary Guarantor was conspicuously less than the fair market value of the consideration given, and the Subsidiary Guarantor was insolvent or rendered insolvent by such action and (in some circumstances, or) such action was intended to defraud, defeat or delay a creditor;
•
such action was taken within a specified period of time prior to the commencement of proceedings under Canadian bankruptcy, insolvency or restructuring legislation in respect of a Subsidiary Guarantor and such action was taken, or is deemed to have been taken, with a view to giving a creditor a preference over other creditors or, in some circumstances, had the effect of giving a creditor a preference over other creditors; or
•
a Subsidiary Guarantor is found to have acted in a manner that was oppressive, unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly disregarded the interests of any shareholder, creditor, director, officer or other interested party.
In addition, in certain insolvency proceedings a Canadian court may subordinate claims in respect of the Guarantees to other claims against a Subsidiary Guarantor under the principle of equitable subordination if the court determines that (1) the holder of Notes engaged in some type of inequitable or improper conduct, (2) the inequitable or improper conduct resulted in injury to other creditors or conferred an unfair advantage upon the holder of Notes and (3) equitable subordination is not inconsistent with the provisions of the relevant solvency statute.
If a court canceled a Guarantee, the holders of Notes would no longer have a claim against that Subsidiary Guarantor or its assets.
Each Guarantee is limited, by its terms, to an amount not to exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed by the applicable Subsidiary Guarantor without rendering the Guarantee, as it relates to that Subsidiary Guarantor, voidable under applicable law relating to fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors generally.
Each Subsidiary Guarantor is a consolidated subsidiary of the Parent Company at the date of the balance sheet presented. The following tables present summarized financial information for the Parent Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Parent Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in any Non-Guarantor Subsidiary.
(1)
Includes receivables due from Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries of $2,428 million as of December 31, 2020.
(2)
Includes income from intercompany transactions with Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries of $527 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from royalties, dividends, interest and intercompany product sales.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations and commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Debt obligations include Notes Payable and Overdrafts, and excludes the impact of deferred financing fees and unamortized discounts.
(2)
The minimum lease payments for finance lease obligations are $796 million.
(3)
These amounts represent future interest payments related to our existing debt obligations and finance leases based on fixed and variable interest rates specified in the associated debt and lease agreements. The amounts provided relate only to existing debt obligations and do not assume the refinancing or replacement of such debt or future changes in variable interest rates.
(4)
Operating lease obligations have not been reduced by minimum sublease rentals of $10 million, $8 million, $6 million, $4 million, $2 million and $4 million in each of the periods above, respectively, for a total of $34 million. Payments, net of minimum sublease rentals, total $1,117 million. The present value of the net operating lease payments, including sublease rentals, is $853 million. The operating leases relate to, among other things, real estate, vehicles, data processing equipment and miscellaneous other assets. No asset is leased from any related party.
(5)
The obligation related to pension benefits is actuarially determined and is reflective of obligations as of December 31, 2020. Although subject to change, the amounts set forth in the table represent the mid-point of the range of our expected contributions for funded U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans, plus expected cash funding of direct participant payments to our U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans.
We made significant contributions to fully fund our U.S. pension plans in 2013 and 2014. We have no minimum funding requirements for our funded U.S. pension plans under current ERISA law or the provisions of our USW collective bargaining agreement, which requires us to maintain an annual ERISA funded status for the hourly U.S. pension plan of at least 97%.
Future U.S. pension contributions will be affected by our ability to offset changes in future interest rates with asset returns from our fixed income portfolio and any changes to ERISA law. For further information on the U.S. pension investment strategy, refer to Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 17, Pension, Other Postretirement Benefits and Savings Plans, in this Form 10-K.
Future non-U.S. contributions are affected by factors such as:
•
future interest rate levels,
•
the amount and timing of asset returns, and
•
how contributions in excess of the minimum requirements could impact the amount and timing of future contributions.
(6)
The payments presented above are expected payments for the next 10 years. The payments for other postretirement benefits reflect the estimated benefit payments of the plans using the provisions currently in effect. Under the relevant summary plan descriptions or plan documents we have the right to modify or terminate the plans. The obligation related to other postretirement benefits is actuarially determined on an annual basis.
(7)
The payments for workers’ compensation obligations are based upon recent historical payment patterns on claims. The present value of anticipated claims payments for workers’ compensation is $196 million.
(8)
Binding commitments are for raw materials, capital expenditures, utilities, and various other types of contracts. The obligations to purchase raw materials include supply contracts at both fixed and variable prices. Those with variable prices are based on index rates for those commodities at December 31, 2020.
(9)
These amounts primarily represent expected payments with interest for uncertain income tax positions as of December 31, 2020. We have reflected them in the period in which we believe they will be ultimately settled based upon our experience with these matters.
Additional other long term liabilities include items such as general and product liabilities, environmental liabilities and miscellaneous other long term liabilities. These other liabilities are not contractual obligations by nature. We cannot, with any degree of reliability, determine the years in which these liabilities might ultimately be settled. Accordingly, these other long term liabilities are not included in the above table.
In addition, pursuant to certain long term agreements, we will purchase varying amounts of certain raw materials and finished goods at agreed upon base prices that may be subject to periodic adjustments for changes in raw material costs and market price adjustments, or in quantities that may be subject to periodic adjustments for changes in our or our suppliers' production levels. These contingent contractual obligations, the amounts of which cannot be estimated, are not included in the table above.
We do not engage in the trading of commodity contracts or any related derivative contracts. We generally purchase raw materials and energy through short term, intermediate and long term supply contracts at fixed prices or at formula prices related to market prices or negotiated prices. We may, however, from time to time, enter into contracts to hedge our energy costs.
At December 31, 2020, we had an agreement to provide a revolving loan commitment to TireHub of up to $100 million. As of December 31, 2020, $14 million was drawn on this commitment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
An off-balance sheet arrangement is any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement involving an unconsolidated entity under which a company has:
•
made guarantees,
•
retained or held a contingent interest in transferred assets,
•
undertaken an obligation under certain derivative instruments, or
•
undertaken any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the company, or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development arrangements with the company.
We have entered into certain arrangements under which we have provided guarantees that are off-balance sheet arrangements. Those guarantees totaled $73 million at December 31, 2020. For further information about our guarantees, refer to Note to the Consolidated Financial Statements No. 19, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities, in this Form 10-K.
FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION - SAFE HARBOR STATEMENT
Certain information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (other than historical data and information) may constitute forward-looking statements regarding events and trends that may affect our future operating results and financial position. The words “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and “project,” as well as other words or expressions of similar meaning, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Such statements are based on current expectations and assumptions, are inherently uncertain, are subject to risks and should be viewed with caution. Actual results and experience may differ materially from the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including:
•
our future results of operations, financial condition and liquidity are expected to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and that impact may be material;
•
if we do not successfully implement our strategic initiatives, our operating results, financial condition and liquidity may be materially adversely affected;
•
we face significant global competition and our market share could decline;
•
deteriorating economic conditions in any of our major markets, or an inability to access capital markets or third-party financing when necessary, may materially adversely affect our operating results, financial condition and liquidity;
•
raw material and energy costs may materially adversely affect our operating results and financial condition;
•
if we experience a labor strike, work stoppage or other similar event our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity could be materially adversely affected;
•
our international operations have certain risks that may materially adversely affect our operating results, financial condition and liquidity;
•
we have foreign currency translation and transaction risks that may materially adversely affect our operating results, financial condition and liquidity;
•
our long term ability to meet our obligations, to repay maturing indebtedness or to implement strategic initiatives may be dependent on our ability to access capital markets in the future and to improve our operating results;
•
financial difficulties, work stoppages, supply disruptions or economic conditions affecting our major OE customers, dealers or suppliers could harm our business;
•
our capital expenditures may not be adequate to maintain our competitive position and may not be implemented in a timely or cost-effective manner;
•
we have a substantial amount of debt, which could restrict our growth, place us at a competitive disadvantage or otherwise materially adversely affect our financial health;
•
any failure to be in compliance with any material provision or covenant of our debt instruments, or a material reduction in the borrowing base under our revolving credit facility, could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and operations;
•
our variable rate indebtedness subjects us to interest rate risk, which could cause our debt service obligations to increase significantly;
•
we have substantial fixed costs and, as a result, our operating income fluctuates disproportionately with changes in our net sales;
•
we may incur significant costs in connection with our contingent liabilities and tax matters;
•
our reserves for contingent liabilities and our recorded insurance assets are subject to various uncertainties, the outcome of which may result in our actual costs being significantly higher than the amounts recorded;
•
we are subject to extensive government regulations that may materially adversely affect our operating results;
•
we may be adversely affected by any disruption in, or failure of, our information technology systems due to computer viruses, unauthorized access, cyber-attack, natural disasters or other similar disruptions;
•
if we are unable to attract and retain key personnel, our business could be materially adversely affected; and
•
we may be impacted by economic and supply disruptions associated with events beyond our control, such as war, acts of terror, political unrest, public health concerns, labor disputes or natural disasters.
It is not possible to foresee or identify all such factors. We will not revise or update any forward-looking statement or disclose any facts, events or circumstances that occur after the date hereof that may affect the accuracy of any forward-looking statement.