ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel immuno-oncology products based off our proprietary Tri-specific Killer Engager (TriKE™) technology platform. Our TriKE platform generates proprietary therapeutics designed to harness and enhance the cancer killing abilities of a patient’s own natural killer cells, or NK cells. Once bound to an NK cell, our moieties are designed to enhance the NK cell, and precisely direct it to one or more specifically-targeted proteins expressed on a specific type of cancer cell or virus infected cell, ultimately resulting in the targeted cell’s death. TriKE is composed of recombinant fusion proteins and interleukin 15 (IL-15), can be designed to target any number of tumor antigens on hematologic malignancies, sarcomas or solid tumors and do not require patient-specific customization.
As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has incurred an accumulated deficit of $595,628,000 through December 31, 2020. On a consolidated basis, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $5,297,000 at December 31, 2020. Because our lack of funds, we will have to raise additional capital in order to fund our selling, general and administrative, and research and development expenses. There are no assurances that we will be able to raise the funds necessary to maintain our operations or to implement our business plan. The consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event we cannot continue our operations.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared coronavirus COVID-19 a global pandemic. This contagious disease outbreak, which has continued to spread, has adversely affected workforces, customers, economies, and financial markets globally. It has also disrupted the normal operations of many businesses. This outbreak could decrease spending, adversely affect demand for the Company’s products, and harm the Company’s business and results of operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company believes the COVID-19 pandemic did impact its operating results. However, the Company has not observed any impairments of its assets or a significant change in the fair value of its assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic. At this time, it is not possible for the Company to predict the duration or magnitude of the adverse results of the outbreak and its effects on the Company’s business or results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity.
The Company has been following the recommendations of health authorities to minimize exposure risk for its team members, including the temporary closure of its corporate office and having team members work remotely. Most vendors have transitioned to electronic submission of invoices and payments.
Corporate Developments
TriKE Agreements
In March 2017, we entered a new one-year Sponsored Research Agreement with the University of Minnesota. The purpose of this agreement is to determine toxicities and in vivo behavior in our TriKE technology, which we license from the University of Minnesota.
In June 2017, we entered into a co-development partnership agreement with Altor BioScience Corporation in which we will collaborate exclusively in the clinical development of a novel 161533 TriKE fusion protein for cancer therapies using our TriKE technology.
License Agreements
In July 2016, we executed an exclusive worldwide license agreement with the Regents of the University of Minnesota, to further develop and commercialize cancer therapies using TriKE technology developed by researchers at the university to target NK cells to cancer. Under the terms of the agreement, we received exclusive rights to conduct research and to develop, make, use, sell, and import TriKe technology worldwide for the treatment of any disease, state or condition in humans. We shall own all permits, licenses, authorizations, registrations and regulatory approvals required or granted by any governmental authority anywhere in the world that is responsible for the regulation of products such as the TriKe technology, including without limitation the FDA and the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products in the European Union. Under the agreement, the University of Minnesota will receive an upfront license fee, royalty fees, and certain milestone payments.
Clinical Trial Agreement
In September 2019, we executed clinical trial agreement with the Regents of the University of Minnesota, to commence enrollment in its first-in-human GTB-3550 TriKE™ Phase I/II clinical trial for the treatment of certain types of leukemia. The clinical trial is being conducted at the University of Minnesota’s Masonic Cancer Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota under the direction of Dr. Erica Warlick. The open-label, dose-escalation Phase I portion of the trial will evaluate GTB-3550 TriKE™ in patients with CD33-expressing, high risk myelodysplastic syndromes, refractory/relapsed acute myeloid leukemia or advanced systemic mastocytosis, and will determine safety and tolerability as well as the pharmacologically active dose and maximum tolerated dose of GTB-3550 TriKE™.
Collaboration Agreement
On March 10, 2020 we entered into a collaboration agreement with Cytovance® Biologics, a USA-based contract development and manufacturing organization (CDMO) and a subsidiary of the Shenzhen Hepalink Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd. (“Hepalink”), to provide development services for a TriKE™ therapeutic for the treatment of coronavirus infection. Under the terms of the collaboration agreement, the companies will focus on preparing sufficient quantities of our coronavirus TriKE drug product for preclinical evaluation using Cytovance’s E. coli-based Keystone Expression System™ and subsequently, will scale-up production using Cytovance’s GMP microbial manufacturing platform for evaluation of TriKE in humans to treat coronavirus infection.
Financing
A.
Notes Payable Issued for Cash
As part of the Company’s financing activities, the Company issued convertible notes payable in exchange for cash. These notes payable are unsecured, bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum, mature in six months up to one year from the date of issuance, and are convertible to common stock at an average conversion rate of $19.65 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions. As of December 31, 2018, outstanding balance of these notes payable amounted to $10,673,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company issued similar notes payable in the aggregate of $3,827,000 in exchange for cash. These notes payable are unsecured, bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum mature in six months up to one year from the date of issuance, and are convertible to common stock at an average conversion rate of $5.74 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions.
In addition, during 2019, notes payable of $1,502,000 were converted to 205,000 shares of common stock.
As of December 31, 2019, outstanding balance of these notes payable issued for cash amounted to $12,998,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued similar notes payable in the aggregate of $12,531,000 in exchange for cash. These notes payable are unsecured, bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum, mature in six months up to one year from the date of issuance, and are convertible to common stock at a conversion rate of $3.40 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions. In addition, during 2020, notes payable of $1,444,000 plus accrued interest were converted to 478,510 shares of common stock.
As of December 31, 2020, outstanding balance of these notes payable issued for cash amounted to $24,085,000. In addition, total notes payable matured and past due as of December 31, 2020 amounted to $16,111,000.
B. Notes Payable Issued for Settlement Agreements
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company issued notes payable of $300,000 as part of a debt settlement agreement. The notes are unsecured, bear interest at a rate of 10%, mature in six months up to one year from the date of issuance, and are convertible to common stock at a conversion rate of $10.20 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions.
As of December 31, 2019, outstanding balance of notes payable issued for settlement agreements amounted to $300,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company entered into settlement agreements with certain unrelated parties to resolve claims and disputes pertaining to certain debt and equity instruments issued by the Company to these parties in prior years.
As part of the agreement, the Company agreed to the following considerations:
a. Issuance of convertible notes payable in the aggregate of $2,228,000. The notes are unsecured, bear interest at a rate of 10%, mature in six months up to one year from the date of issuance, and are convertible to common stock at a conversion rate of $3.40 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions;
b. Cash payment of $380,000;
c. Issuance of 262,353 shares of common stock with a fair value of $1,225,000; and
d. Issuance of warrants to purchase 323,529 shares of common stock. The warrants are fully vested, exercisable at $3.40 per share and will expire in five years with an estimated fair value of $1,021,000 using a BlackScholes option price model.
As of December 31, 2020, outstanding balance of these notes payable for settlement agreements amounted to $2,528,000. In addition, total notes payable matured and past due as of December 31, 2020 amounted to $518,000.
C. Notes Payable Issued for Forbearance Agreements
On June 23, 2020, the Company entered into Standstill and Forbearance Agreements (collectively, the “Forbearance Agreements”) with the holders of $13.2 million aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes (the “Default Notes”), which were in default. Pursuant to the Forbearance Agreements, the holders of the Default Notes agreed to forbear from exercising their rights and remedies under the Default Notes (including declaring such Default Notes (together with any default amounts and accrued and unpaid interest) immediately due and payable) until the earlier of (i) the date that the Company completes a future financing in the amount of $15 million and, in connection therewith, commences listing on NASDAQ (collectively, the “New Financing”) or (ii) January 31, 2021 (the “Termination Date”).
The obligations of the holders to forbear from exercising their rights and remedies under the Default Notes pursuant to the Forbearance Agreements will terminate on the earliest of (i) the Termination Date, (ii) the date of any bankruptcy filing by the Company or its subsidiaries, (iii) the date on which the Company defaults on any of the terms and conditions of the Forbearance Agreements or (iv) the date the Forbearance Agreements are otherwise terminated or expire.
In exchange for the forbearance agreement, the Company agreed to the following considerations:
a. Amendment of the $13.2 million Default Notes (together with default amounts and accrued and unpaid interest) to include a provision that will convert these notes payable into common stock upon the closing of a New Financing at a conversion price equal to the lesser of (i) the conversion price in effect for the Default Notes on the date of such New Financing or (ii) 75% of the lowest per share price at which common stock is or may be issued in connection with such New Financing, in each case, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 9.99%). Shares of the Company’s preferred stock, which are convertible into the Company’s common stock, will be issued in lieu of common stock to the extent that conversion of the Default Notes is prohibited by such beneficial ownership limitations.
b. Amendment of warrants granted to certain noteholders in prior year to include the following terms: (i) the exercise price of all warrants to purchase common stock held by holders of the Default Notes will be reduced to equal the conversion price of the Default Notes and (ii) the number of shares of common stock underlying such warrants shall be increased so that the total exercise price of all such warrants after the decrease in the exercise price equals the total exercise price of all such warrants prior to the decrease in the exercise price. Further, the expiration date of all such warrants shall be extended for three years following the closing date of any New Financing.
c. Issuance of notes payable in the aggregate of $3,955,000. The notes are unsecured, bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum, mature in six months up to one year from the date of issuance, and are convertible to common stock at a conversion rate of $3.40 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions.
As of December 31, 2020, outstanding balance of the notes payable amounted to $3,849,000. Total notes payable matured and past due as of December 31, 2020 amounted to $135,000.
D. Notes Payable issued for Consulting Agreements
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued notes payable of $360,000 in exchange for consulting services. The notes are unsecured, bears interest at a rate of 10%, matures in one year from the date of issuance and convertible to common stock at a conversion rate of $3.40 per share, subject to certain beneficial ownership limitations (with a maximum ownership limit of 4.99%) and standard anti-dilution provisions.
As of December 31, 2020, outstanding balance of these notes payable amounted to $360,000. In addition, total notes payable matured and past due as of December 31, 2020 amounted to $20,000.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, convertible notes and accured in interest aggregating $38,714,000 were converted into 11,386,435 shares of common stock at conversion prices.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company issued 4,945,000 shares of its common stock to investors for net cash proceeds of $24,882,000 pursuant to our February 2021 Offering Circular.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company issued 660,545 shares of common stock upon exercise of warrants for cash proceeds of $3,200,000.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company issued convertible notes payable in the aggregate of $1,205,000 in exchange for each. The Company also issued notes payable of $545,000 to a related party. The Company is currently in the process of determining the appropriate accounting for these notes payable totaling $2,275,000.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company issued convertible notes payable for cash proceeds of $1,205,000. The Company is currently in the process of determining the appropriate accounting for these notes payable.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and
Research and Development Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred $485 thousand and $1.7 million of research and development expenses, respectively. Research and development costs decreased due primarily to the reduction of employee, consultant and preclinical expenses. We anticipate our direct clinical and preclinical costs to increase significantly in 2021, totaling approximately $12 to $15 million, as we have initiated the Phase 1 clinical trial of our most advanced TriKe product candidate, GTB-3550 and anticipate entering Phase II in late second quarter of 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred $6.3 million and $9.8 million of selling, general and administrative expenses, respectively. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses is primarily attributable the reduction of payroll and stock compensation expenses.
Loss on impairment
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company sold its rights, titles and interests, including associated patents, to the pharmaceutical product designated by the Company as GTB-004 (the “Product”). Under the Agreement, the Product was purchased by DAS Therapeutics, Inc. who the Company believes was well positioned to take over the clinical development of the Product including obtaining timely approval by the FDA.
The Company received $200,000 at closing. The Company will also participate in the future commercial value of the Product by receiving $6,000,000 upon the achievement of certain sales objectives. In addition, the Company will receive a royalty equal to 1.5% of U.S. sales until such time as the last of the patents associated with the Product expires. The Company reflected a loss in the year ended December 31, 2019 totaling $20,463,000.
As a result of the loss reported on the sale of the Product, as well as the response received on inquiries related to the other two projects, the Company determined that the remaining value related to these remaining projects should be fully impaired. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company reported an impairment charge for these projects totaling $4,599,000.
There was no similar transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on disposal of assets
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred $0 and $20.5 million of loss on impairment, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an intangible asset impairment charge of $20.5 million related to the portfolio of CNS IPR&D assets, which represents the excess carrying value compared to the fair value. The impairment charge was the result of the sale of certain assets and prioritization for immuno-oncology development candidates. Company experienced changes in key senior management, led by the appointment of a CEO with extensive experience in oncology drug development. These changes resulted in the prioritization for immuno-oncology development candidates relative to the CNS development candidates acquired from Georgetown Translational Pharmaceuticals. In conjunction with these strategic changes, limited internal resources have delayed the development of the CNS IPR&D assets. The limited resources, changes in senior leadership, and favorable market conditions for immuno-oncology development candidates have resulted in the Company choosing to focus on development of its immuno-oncology portfolio.
There was no similar transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expenses were $3.0 million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. The increase is primarily due to the increase in convertible notes payable as well as accrual of default interest from 10% to 8% of past due convertible notes payables.
Loss on legal settlements
Loss on legal settlements were $5.4 million and $0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. The increase is primarily due to legal settlements the Company entered into during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to none in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss on forbearance agreement
Loss on forbearance settlement were $12.6 million and $0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. The increase is primarily due to loss on extinguishment as a result of the change in fair value of debt and equity instruments modified as a result of the forbearance settlement the Company entered into in during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to none in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Amortization of debt discount
Amortization of debt discount were $0.3 million and $0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. The increase is primarily due to the increase in debt discount recorded on new convertible notes payable the Company entered into in during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to none in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s current operations have focused on business planning, raising capital, establishing an intellectual property portfolio, hiring, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials. The Company does not have any product candidates approved for sale and has not generated any revenue from product sales. The Company has sustained operating losses since inception and expects such losses to continue over the foreseeable future. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company raised $12.5 million through a series of issuances of Convertible Notes as compared to $3.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. We anticipate that cash utilized for selling, general and administrative expenses will range between $1 and $2 million in the coming quarters, while research and development expenses will vary depending on clinical activities. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company raised additional funding of $27.2 million through an equity financing in February 2021.
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared on a going-concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Accordingly, the financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue in existence.
The Company has incurred substantial losses and has cash 5.3 million as of December 30, 2020. The Company anticipates incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that it can generate significant sales or revenue from out-licensing of its products currently in development. Substantial additional financing will be needed by the Company to fund its operations and to commercially develop its product candidates. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Management is currently evaluating different strategies to obtain the required funding for future operations. These strategies may include but are not limited to: public offerings of equity and/or debt securities, payments from potential strategic research and development, licensing and/or marketing arrangements with pharmaceutical companies. Management has also implemented cost saving efforts, including reduction in executive salaries and reduced travel. Management believes that these ongoing and planned financing endeavors, if successful, will provide adequate financial resources to continue as a going concern for at least the next nine months from the date the financial statements are issued; however, there can be no assurance in this regard. If the Company is unable to secure adequate additional funding, its business, operating results, financial condition and cash flows may be materially and adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies
We consider the following accounting policies to be critical given they involve estimates and judgments made by management and are important for our investors’ understanding of our operating results and financial condition.
Basis of Presentation and Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries, Oxis Biotech, Inc. and Georgetown Translational Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation.
Reverse Stock Split
On February 10, 2021, the Company completed a 1:17 reverse stock split of the Company's issued and outstanding shares of common stock and all fractional shares were rounded up. All share and per share amounts in the accompanying financial statements have been adjusted retroactively to reflect the reverse stock split as if it had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented.
Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include accruals for potential liabilities, valuation of notes payable, assumptions used in deriving the fair value of derivative liabilities, share-based compensation and beneficial conversion feature of notes payable, and valuation of deferred tax assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for share-based awards to employees and nonemployees and consultants in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at fair value on the grant date and that fair value is recognized as expense over the requisite service, or vesting, period.
The Company values its equity awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and accounts for forfeitures when they occur. Use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions including expected volatility, expected term, and a risk-free interest rate. The Company estimates volatility using a its own historical stock price volatility. The expected term of the instrument is estimated by using the simplified method to estimate expected term. The risk-free interest rate is estimated using comparable published federal funds rates.
Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material adverse impact on our business or operating results during the periods presented.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.