ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, this discussion includes forward-looking information that involves risks and assumptions, which could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. See “Forward-Looking Statements” included in this report.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward looking statements, including without limitation, statements related to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations, intentions and adequacy of resources. Investors are cautioned that such forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties including without limitation the following: (i) our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations and intentions are subject to change at any time at our discretion; (ii) our plans and results of operations will be affected by our ability to manage growth; and (iii) other risks and uncertainties indicated from time to time in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as ’‘may,’’ ’‘will,’’ ’’should,’’ ’‘could,’’ ’‘expects,’’ ’‘plans,’’ ’‘intends,’’ ’‘anticipates,’’ ’‘believes,’’ ’‘estimates,’’ ’‘predicts,’’ ’‘potential,’’ or ’‘continue’’ or the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Moreover, neither we nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of such statements. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We are under no duty to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Report.
This section of the report should be read together with Footnotes of the Company audited financials. The audited statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are compared in the sections below.
General Overview
GBT Technologies Inc. (f/k/a Gopher Protocol Inc., the “Company”, “we”, “us”, “our”, “GBT”, “Gopher”, “Gopher Protocol”, “GOPH”, “GTCH”, or “GBT”) was incorporated on July 22, 2009 under the laws of the State of Nevada and is headquartered in Santa Monica, California. The Company is creating and patenting innovative mobile microchip (ICs) and software technologies based on the GopherInsight™ technology platform. Effective August 5, 2019, the Company changed its name from Gopher Protocol Inc. to GBT Technologies Inc. The Company has historically derived revenues from (i) the provision of IT services; and (ii) from the licensing of its technology.
The Company is targeting additional growing markets: development of Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled networking and tracking technologies, including wireless mesh network technology platform and fixed solutions, development of an intelligent human body vitals device, asset-tracking IoT and wireless mesh networks.
Recent Developments
GBT Tokenize Joint Venture
On March 6, 2020, the Company through its newly acquired wholly owned subsidiary, Greenwich International Holdings, a Costa Rica corporation (“Greenwich”), entered into a Joint Venture and Territorial License Agreement (the “Tokenize Agreement”) with Tokenize-It, S.A. (“Tokenize”), which is owned by a Costa Rica Trust represented by Pablo Gonzalez (“Gonzalez”). Gonzalez also represents Gonzalez Costa Rica Trust, which holds a note in the principal amount of $10,000,000 and is also a shareholder of the Company. Under the Tokenize Agreement, the parties formed GBT Tokenize Corp., a Nevada corporation (“GBT Tokenize”). The purpose of GBT Tokenize is to develop, maintain and support source codes for its proprietary technologies including advanced mobile chip technologies, tracking, radio technologies, AI core engine, electronic design automation, mesh, games, data storage, networking, IT services, business process outsourcing development services, customer service, technical support and quality assurance for business, customizable and dedicated inbound and outbound calls solutions, as well as digital communications processing for enterprises and startups (“Technology Portfolio”), throughout the State of California. Upon generating any revenue from the Technology Portfolio, the Joint Venture will earn the first right of refusal for other territories.
Tokenize shall contribute the services and resources for the development of the Technology Portfolio to GBT Tokenize. The Company shall contribute 100,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company (“GBT Shares”) to GBT Tokenize. Tokenize and the Company will each own 50% of GBT Tokenize. The Company pledged its 50% ownership in GBT Tokenize and its 100% ownership of Greenwich to Tokenize to secure its Technology Portfolio investment. The Company shall appoint two directors and Tokenize shall appoint one director of GBT Tokenize.
In addition, GBT Tokenize and Gonzalez entered into a Consulting Agreement in which Gonzalez is engaged to provide services in consideration of $33,333.33 per month payable quarterly which may be paid in shares of common stock calculated by the amount owed divided by the Company’s 10-day VWAP. Gonzalez will provide services in connection with the development of the business as well as GBT Tokenize’s capital raising efforts. The term of the Consulting Agreement is two years. The closing of the Tokenize Agreement occurred on March 9, 2020. This investment was fully impaired as of March 31, 2020.
Via this Joint Venture, the parties commenced development of a development of an intelligent human vital signs’ device, suggested named qTerm. The platform is an expansion of the existing license agreement with GBT Tokenize Corp., which provided GBT Tokenize Corp. with an exclusive territory of California to develop certain of the Company’s technology. As the nature of the platform cannot be restricted only to California, the Company’s joint venture GBT Tokenize Corp. will be compensated with additional two hundred million shares of the Company to strengthen its funding, subject to board approval. A provisional patent application for the qTerm Medical Device was filed on March 30, 2020 with the USPTO. The application has been assigned serial number 63001564. The Joint Venture completed successfully the first prototype. There is no guarantee that the Company will be successful in researching, developing or implementing this product into the market. In order to successfully implement this concept, the Company will need to raise adequate capital to support its research and, if successfully researched, developed and granted regulatory approval, the Company would need to enter into a strategic relationship with a third party that has experience in manufacturing, selling and distributing this product. There is no guarantee that the Company will be successful in any or all of these critical steps.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company operates in a high-tech marketplace and relies on professionals and partnerships all over the world, which is impacted by the global pandemic, causing the Company’s resources to be affected. Our business operations have been and may continue to be materially and adversely affected by the coronavirus disease COVID-19.
An outbreak of respiratory illness caused by COVID-19 emerged in Wuhan city, Hubei province, PRC, in late 2019 and has been expanding globally. COVID-19 is considered to be highly contagious and poses a serious public health threat.
On March 19, 2020, California Governor Gavin Newsom issued a stay at home order to protect the health and well-being of all Californians and to establish consistency across the state in order to slow the spread of COVID-19. California was therefore under strict quarantine control and travel has been severely restricted, resulting in disruptions to work, communications, and access to files (due to limited access to facilities). Since then, other measures have been imposed in other countries and major cities in the USA, including Los Angeles, and throughout the world in an effort to contain the COVID-19 outbreak. The World Health Organization (the “WHO”) is closely monitoring and evaluating the situation. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic, expanding its assessment of the threat beyond the global health emergency it had announced in January. Any outbreak of such epidemic illness or other adverse public health developments in the USA or elsewhere in the world may materially and adversely affect the global economy, our markets and our business. The stay at home order was lifted in California only on January 25, 2021.
In the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak has caused disruptions in our development operations, which have resulted in delays on exiting projects. A prolonged disruption or any further unforeseen delay in our operations of the development, delivery and assembly process within any of our activities could continue to result in, increased costs and reduced revenue.
We cannot foresee whether the outbreak of COVID-19 will be effectively contained, nor can we predict the severity and duration of its impact. If the outbreak of COVID-19 is not effectively and timely controlled, our business operations and financial condition may be materially and adversely affected as a result of the deteriorating market outlook for sales, the slowdown in regional and national economic growth, weakened liquidity and financial condition of our customers and vendors or other factors that we cannot foresee. Any of these factors and other factors beyond our control could have an adverse effect on the overall business environment, cause uncertainties, cause our business to suffer in ways that we cannot predict and materially and adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations:
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A comparison of the statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Sales for both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $180,000. Sales are derived from providing IT consulting services to a related party.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7,952,836, compared to $176,637,100 for the same period in 2019. The decrease of $168,684,264 or 95.5% was principally due to the fair value of warrants issued of $120,476,603 as a result of anti-dilution provisions in certain warrants previously issued and a charge took for the impairment of assets of $48,631,534 during the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no such expenses in 2020.
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11,206,839, an increase of $851,886 or 8.2% from $10,354,953 for the same period in 2019. The decrease is principally due to i) a change in the fair value of the derivative liability, ii) a decrease in amortization of discount and interest and financing costs; and iii) a decrease in realized and unrealized loss on a marketable equity security.
The operating results of our discontinued operations for Ugopherservices, ECS Prepaid, Electronic Check Services and the Central State Legal Services businesses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is summarized below:
As a result of the disposition of Ugopherservices, ECS Prepaid, Electronic Check Services and the Central State Legal Services businesses, the Company recognized a gain on the disposition of discontinued operations of $1,001,711 and $1,381,803 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17,994,888 compared to $186,505,119 for the same period in 2019 due to the factors described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash was $113,034 and $59,634 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $994,426, compared to $6,623,463 during the same period in 2019. Significant differences exist between the periods, including warrants issued for services, change in fair value of derivative liability, financing costs, impairment of assets and unrealized gain (loss) on marketable equity securities. Our working capital position worsened going from a working capital deficit of $11,712,886 at December 31, 2019 to a working capital deficit of $27,710,040 at December 31, 2020, principally as a result of an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses; an increase in derivative liability; an increase in convertible notes payable; offset by a decrease in note payable. Cash flows used in investing activities were $231,771 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,152,418 for the same period in 2019. The decrease is due to the amount paid for an investment during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,279,597, compared to $5,972,005 for the same period in 2019. The decrease is due to the issuance of convertible notes and notes payable in 2019.
We sustained net losses of $17,994,888 for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we had a working capital deficit of $27,710,040 and accumulated deficit of $270,651,339 at December 31, 2020.
In September of 2017 we purchased the assets of RWJ Advanced Marketing, LLC, and then after ECS Prepaid LLC, Electronic Check Services, Inc. and Central States Legal Services, Inc. in 2018. RWJ and ECS have historically generated significant revenues which we do not expect to continue in the future, as the Company divested its investment in ECS Prepaid LLC, Electronic Check Services, Inc. and Central States Legal Services, Inc. on or around September 2019, left only with the acquired assets from RWJ Advanced Marketing, LLC which in litigation, as disclosed in this report. In addition, during the last half of 2018 and the first few months of 2019, the Company has raised approximately $9,500,000 of net proceeds through the issuance of convertible debt and notes payable (see discussion below). We intend to continue to make investments to support our business growth and we will require additional funds to respond to business challenges, including the need to develop new features and products or enhance our existing products, improve our operating infrastructure or acquire complementary businesses and technologies. Further, we need additional capital to continue operations. Accordingly, we need to engage in equity or debt financings to secure additional funds. We expect that we have sufficient capital to maintain operations through the end of 2020. In order to fully implement our business plan, we will need to raise $10,000,000. The Company will need to raise additional capital in the future of which there is no guarantee that the Company will be able to successfully raise such capital on acceptable terms. With the current cash on hand, cash in our attorney’s trust account and additional cash anticipated to be raised in the future, we believe we will have sufficient cash to meet our obligations for the next 12 months.
$10,000,000 for GBT Technologies S. A. acquisition
In accordance with the acquisition of GBT-CR the Company issued a convertible note in the principal amount of $10,000,000. The convertible note bears interest of 6% per annum and is payable at maturity on December 31, 2021. At the election of the holder, the convertible note can be converted into a maximum of 20,000 shares of Series H Preferred Stock. Each share of Series H Preferred Stock is convertible, at the option of the holder but subject to the Company increasing its authorized shares of common stock, into such number of shares of common stock of the Company as determined by dividing the Stated Value ($500 per share) by the conversion price ($10.00 per share). The convertible note is convertible into common stock at a fixed price that was higher than the Company’s common stock on the date of grant, therefore, this convertible note does not contain a beneficial conversion feature. Due to stock split (See Note 1) the conversion feature is substantially not in the money. The parties along with Stanley Hills, LLV as potential funder are in negotiations to address the issue per the Note holder demands to mitigate its damages. There is no guarantee that the Company will be successful in resolving this issue.
Glen Eagles Acquisition LP
On July 8, 2019, the Company entered a Consulting Agreement with Glen Eagles Acquisition LP (“Glen”) as consultant to provide services in connection with the Company’s acquisition of 25% of GBT Technologies, S.A., a Costa Rican corporation (“GBT-CR”). Consultant will provide analysis, interaction with related professional and other services as requested by the Company to integrate and expand capabilities between GBT-CR and the Company. The Company shall pay Glen $1,000,000 through the issuance of a 6% Convertible Note. At the election of Glen, the Convertible Note can be converted into a maximum of 2,000 shares of Series H Preferred Stock. Each share of Series H Preferred Stock is convertible, at the option of the holder but subject to the Company increasing its authorized shares of common stock, into such number of shares of common stock of the Company as determined by dividing the Stated Value ($500 per share) by the conversion price ($10.00 per share). The Series H Preferred Stock has no liquidation preference, does not pay dividends and the holder of Series H Preferred Stock shall be entitled to one vote for each share of common stock that the Series H Preferred Stock may be convertible into. In addition, the Company entered into an Amendment of a Common Stock Purchase Warrant held by Glen to acquire nine million shares of common stock that had been assigned to Glen by Guardian Patch LLC. Pursuant to the amendment, the Company agreed to provide that the Common Stock Purchase Warrant may be exercised on a cashless basis and provided a beneficial ownership limitation of 4.99%. On or about June 23, 2020, the Company and AltCorp entered into agreements with SURG and Glen Eagles Acquisition LP (“Glen”) into series of agreements regarding the $4,000,000 SURG Note. Glen converted in full its $1,000,000 convertible note that was issued by the Company on July 8, 2019 plus $50,000 of accrued interest, into $1,050,000 of a SURG Note via an assignment of a portion ($1,050,000 of a $4,000,000 face value) of the $4,000,000 SURG Note. In addition, the Company entered into a consulting agreement with Glen for which the Company shall pay to Glen $200,000 via an assignment of a portion ($200,000 of a $4,000,000 face value) of the $4,000,000 SURG Note. Glen in turn converted all its $1,250,000 considerations received into 2,500,000 SURG shares. The open aged credit balance derived from the above with Glen as off the date of this report is $45,000.
RWJ Acquisition Note
In connection with the acquisition of RWJ in September 2017, the Company issued a note payable. The note accrues interest at 3.5% per annum, was due on December 31, 2019 and is secured by the assets purchased in the acquisition. The Company contests the validity of the note, as such the note has not been repaid as of December 31, 2020. (see Item 3 - Legal Proceedings). The balance of the note at December 31, 2020 is $2,600,000 plus accrued interest of $307,631.
Discover Growth Fund
On December 3, 2018, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with Discover Growth Fund, LLC (the “Investor”) pursuant to which the Company issued a Senior Secured Redeemable Convertible Debenture (the “Debenture”) in the aggregate face value of $8,340,000. In connection with the issuance of the Debenture and pursuant to the terms of the SPA, the Company issued a Common Stock Purchase Warrant to acquire up to 225,000 shares of common stock for a term of three years (the “Warrant”) on a cash-only basis at an exercise price of $100.00 per share with respect to 50,000 Warrant Shares, $75.00 with respect to 75,000 Warrant Shares and $50.00 with respect to 100,000 Warrant Shares. The holder may not exercise any portion of the Warrants to the extent that the holder would own more than 4.99% of the Company’s outstanding common stock immediately after exercise. The outstanding principal amount may be converted at any time into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 95% of the Market Price less $5.00 (the conversion price is lowered by 10% upon the occurrence of each Triggering Event - the current conversion price is 75% of the Market Price less $5.00). The Market Price is the average of the 5 lowest individual daily volume weighted average prices during the period the Debenture is outstanding. On May 28, 2019, the Investor delivered to the Company a “Notice of Default and Notice of Sale of Collateral” (the “Notice”). On December 23, 2019, in arbitration between the Company and the Investor, an Interim Award was entered in favor of the Investor. On January 31, 2020, the Company was informed that a final award was entered (the “Final Award”). The Final Award affirms that certain sections of the Debenture constitute unenforceable liquidated damages penalties and were stricken. Further, it was determined that the Investor was entitled to recovery of their attorney’s fees. Consequently, the arbitrator awarded Investor an award of $4,034,444 plus interest of 7.25% accrued from May 15, 2019 and costs in the amount of $55,613. On February 18, 2020, the Company filed a motion with the United States District Court District of Nevada (the “Nevada Court”) to confirm the Final Award and a motion to consolidate Investor’s application to confirm the Final Award filed in the U.S. District Court of the Virgin Islands (Case No: 3 :20-cv-00012-CVG-RM) (the “Virgin Island Court”). On February 27, 2020, the Nevada Court denied the Company’s motion to confirm the Final Award and motion to consolidate and further decided that the confirmation of the Final Award should be litigated in the Virgin Island Court. As such, on February 27, 2020, the Company filed a Notice of Entry of Order as well as a Motion to Confirm the Arbitration Award, address the outstanding issues regarding whether Investor’s rights are subordinated to other creditors and, thereafter, oversee a commercially reasonable foreclosure sale (Case No: 3 :20-cv-00012-CVG-RM). It was the Company’s position that the Final Award must first be confirmed and all questions regarding the rights of Investor relative to those of other creditors must be determined before any foreclosure sale can proceed. It is further the position of the Company that the previously disclosed foreclosure sale scheduled by Investor is being conducted in a commercially unreasonable manner and that if Discover proceeded forward with the foreclosure sale it did so at its own risk. Nevertheless, on February 28, 2020, Investor advised that it conducted a sale of the Company’s assets. As the date of this report Investor failed to present a deed of sale for the alleged sale that allegedly took place as noticed. The Company filed with Virgin Island Court the motions disputing the validity of the alleged sale. On July 28, 2020, Investor filed in the State of Nevada a motion for attorneys $48,844 and costs $716. The Company filed an answer on August 11, 2020. On October 16, 2020, Investor motion was denied.
Power Up Lending Group
On February 18, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Power Up Lending Group Ltd., an accredited investor (“Power Up”) pursuant to which the Company issued to Power Up a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Power Note”) in the aggregate principal amount of $183,600 for a purchase price of $153,000. The Power Note has a maturity date of May 15, 2021 and the Company has agreed to pay interest on the unpaid principal balance of the Power Note at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date on which the Power Note is issued (the “Issue Date”) until the same becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or upon acceleration or by prepayment or otherwise. The Company shall have the right to prepay the Power Note, provided it makes a payment including a prepayment to Power Up as set forth in the Power Note. The transactions described above closed on February 19, 2020. The outstanding principal amount of the Power Note may not be converted prior to the period beginning on the date that is 180 days following the Issue Date. Following the 180th day, Power Up may convert the Power Note into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 85% of the lowest trading price with a 15-day look back immediately preceding the date of conversion. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default (as defined in the Power Note), the Power Note shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Power Up, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, additional amounts as set forth in the Power Note. During 2020, the full amount of the Power Note ($183,600) plus $4,590 of accrued interest was converted into shares of the Company’s common stock.
Redstart Holdings Corp.
On August 4, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Redstart Holdings Corp., an accredited investor (“Redstart”) pursuant to which the Company issued to Redstart a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Redstart Note No. 1”) in the aggregate principal amount of $153,600 for a purchase price of $128,000. The Redstart Note No. 1 has a maturity date of November 3, 2021 and the Company has agreed to pay interest on the unpaid principal balance of the Redstart Note No. 1 at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date on which the Redstart Note No. 1 is issued (the “Issue Date”) until the same becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or upon acceleration or by prepayment or otherwise. The Company shall have the right to prepay the Redstart Note No. 1, provided it makes a payment including a prepayment to Redstart as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 1. The transactions described above closed on August 5, 2020.
The outstanding principal amount of the Redstart Note No. 1 may not be converted prior to the period beginning on the date that is 180 days following the Issue Date. Following the 180th day, Redstart may convert the Redstart Note No. 1 into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 85% of the lowest trading price with a 20-day look back immediately preceding the date of conversion. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default (as defined in the Redstart Note No. 1), the Redstart Note No. 1 shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Redstart, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, additional amounts as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 1. In February 2021 Note No. 1 was converted into shares in full.
On September 15, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Redstart pursuant to which the Company issued to Redstart a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Redstart Note No. 2”) in the aggregate principal amount of $93,600 for a purchase price of $78,000. The Redstart Note No. 2 has a maturity date of September 15, 2021 and the Company has agreed to pay interest on the unpaid principal balance of the Redstart Note No. 2 at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date on which the Redstart Note No. 2 is issued (the “Issue Date”) until the same becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or upon acceleration or by prepayment or otherwise. The Company shall have the right to prepay the Redstart Note No. 2, provided it makes a payment including a prepayment to Redstart as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 2. The transactions described above closed on September 16, 2020. The outstanding principal amount of the Redstart Note No. 2 may not be converted prior to the period beginning on the date that is 180 days following the Issue Date. Following the 180th day, Redstart may convert the Redstart Note No. 2 into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 85% of the lowest trading price with a 20-day look back immediately preceding the date of conversion. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default (as defined in the Redstart Note No. 2), the Redstart Note No. 2 shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Redstart, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, additional amounts as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 2. (In March 2021 Note No. 2 was converted into shares in full.
On December 9, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Redstart pursuant to which the Company issued to Redstart a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Redstart Note No. 3”) in the aggregate principal amount of $100,200 for a purchase price of $83,500. The Redstart Note No. 3 has a maturity date of December 9, 2021 and the Company has agreed to pay interest on the unpaid principal balance of the Redstart Note No. 3 at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date on which the Redstart Note No. 3 is issued (the “Issue Date”) until the same becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or upon acceleration or by prepayment or otherwise. The Company shall have the right to prepay the Redstart Note No. 3, provided it makes a payment including a prepayment to Redstart as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 3. The transactions described above closed on December 11, 2020. The outstanding principal amount of the Redstart Note No. 3 may not be converted prior to the period beginning on the date that is 180 days following the Issue Date. Following the 180th day, Redstart may convert the Redstart Note No. 3 into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 85% of the lowest trading price with a 20-day look back immediately preceding the date of conversion. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default (as defined in the Redstart Note No. 3), the Redstart Note No. 3 shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Redstart, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, additional amounts as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 3.
On February 10, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Redstart pursuant to which the Company issued to Redstart a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Redstart Note No. 4”) in the aggregate principal amount of $184,200 for a purchase price of $153,500. The Redstart Note No. 4 has a maturity date of February 5, 2022 and the Company has agreed to pay interest on the unpaid principal balance of the Redstart Note No. 4 at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date on which the Redstart Note No. 4 is issued (the “Issue Date”) until the same becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or upon acceleration or by prepayment or otherwise. The Company shall have the right to prepay the Redstart Note No. 4, provided it makes a payment including a prepayment to Redstart as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 4. The transactions described above closed on February 10, 2021. The outstanding principal amount of the Redstart Note No. 4 may not be converted prior to the period beginning on the date that is 180 days following the Issue Date. Following the 180th day, Redstart may convert the Redstart Note No. 4 into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 85% of the lowest trading price with a 20-day look back immediately preceding the date of conversion. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default (as defined in the Redstart Note No. 4), the Redstart Note No. 4 shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Redstart, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, additional amounts as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 4.
On March 15, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Redstart pursuant to which the Company issued to Redstart a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Redstart Note No. 5”) in the aggregate principal amount of $106,200 for a purchase price of $88,500. The Redstart Note No. 5 has a maturity date of June 15, 2022 and the Company has agreed to pay interest on the unpaid principal balance of the Redstart Note No. 5 at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum from the date on which the Redstart Note No. 5 is issued (the “Issue Date”) until the same becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or upon acceleration or by prepayment or otherwise. The Company shall have the right to prepay the Redstart Note No. 5, provided it makes a payment including a prepayment to Redstart as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 5. The transactions described above closed on March 17, 2021. The outstanding principal amount of the Redstart Note No. 5 may not be converted prior to the period beginning on the date that is 180 days following the Issue Date. Following the 180th day, Redstart may convert the Redstart Note No. 5 into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to 85% of the lowest trading price with a 20-day look back immediately preceding the date of conversion. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an Event of Default (as defined in the Redstart Note No. 5), the Redstart Note No. 5 shall become immediately due and payable and the Company shall pay to Redstart, in full satisfaction of its obligations hereunder, additional amounts as set forth in the Redstart Note No. 5.
Iliad Research and Trading
On February 27, 2019, the Company entered into a note purchase agreement with a third-party investor - Iliad Research and Trading, L.P.(“Iliad”), pursuant to which the Company issued a promissory note for the original principal amount of $2,325,000. The promissory note had an original issue discount of $300,000 and the inventor paid consideration of $2,025,000 to the Company, of which $25,000 was paid for legal expenses. The outstanding balance of the promissory note is to be paid on the one-year anniversary of the issuance of the note. Interest on the note accrues at the rate of 10% per annum compounding daily. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the note, the Company may prepay all or any portion of the outstanding balance of the note at any time in an amount in cash equal to 120% of the amount repaid. In connection with transactions that generate less than $1,000,000 in proceeds, the Company has agreed to not issue any debt instrument or incurrence of any debt other than trade payables in the ordinary course of business, any securities or agreements to sell common stock with anti-dilution or price reset/reduction features or any securities that are or may be become convertible or exercisable into common stock with a price that varies with the market price of the common stock (collectively, “Restricted Issuance Transaction”). The outstanding balance of the Note will be increased by 5% in the event the Company enters into a Restricted Issuance Transaction that is approved by Iliad. The original issue discount is being amortized to interest expense over the term of the promissory note. On February 27, 2020, the Company and Iliad entered into an Amendment to the Iliad Note pursuant to which the maturity date of the Iliad Note was extended to August 27, 2020, provided that the Debt may be converted into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price equal to 80% multiplied by the lowest trading daily VWAP for the common stock during the 20 trading day period ending on the latest complete trading day prior to the conversion date, provided for the payment by the Company to Iliad of an extension fee equal to 7.5% of the outstanding balance of the Iliad Note resulting in a new balance of the Iliad Note of $2,765,983 and provided that the Company’s failure to deliver shares of common stock within three trading days of a conversion would result in an event of default. Iliad has agreed to restrict its ability to convert the Iliad Note and receive shares of common stock such that the number of shares of common stock held by it and its affiliates after such conversion or exercise does not exceed 9.99% of the then issued and outstanding shares of common stock. On July 20, 2020 the Company and Iliad entered into agreement to extend the maturity of the Iliad Note until February 27, 2021 in consideration of an extension fee of $1,000. During 2020, Iliad converted $539,000 of its convertible note to 53,175,795 shares of the Company’s common stock. The balance of the Iliad debt at December 31, 2020 was $2,446,746, including accrued interest of $14,905. On February 28, 2021 the Company and Iliad entered into agreement to further extend the maturity of the Iliad Note until May 31, 2021 in consideration of an extension fee of $1,000 representing the third extension of the original note.
Stanley Hills
The Company entered into a series of loan agreements with Stanley Hills LLC (“Stanley”) pursuant to which it received more than $1,000,000 in loans (the “Debt”) since May 2019 up to December 2019. On February 26, 2020, in order to induce Stanley to continue to provide funding, the Company and Stanley entered into a letter agreement providing that the Debt may be converted into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price equal to 85% multiplied by the lowest one trading price for the common stock during the 20-trading day period ending on the latest complete trading day prior to the conversion date. Stanley has agreed to restrict its ability to convert the Debt and receive shares of common stock such that the number of shares of common stock held by it and its affiliates after such conversion or exercise does not exceed 4.99% of the then issued and outstanding shares of common stock. The Stanley Debt is secured via a pledge agreement on the SURG shares. On or about January 27, 2020 the Company agreed that Stanley will hold title to the SURG shares which was completed on or about April 16, 2020 where the 3,333,333 SURG shares been vested under Stanley name. On or about June 23, 2020, Stanley Hills LLC (“Stanley”) which holds a pledge of 3,333,333 shares of SURG common stock via its manager/member (“Stanley’s Member”), acting as an agent for the Company, entered into an agreement with SURG, its transfer agent and an escrow officer for which it was agreed that 3,333,333 SURG shares will be cancelled for consideration of up to $700,000. The amount of $575,170 was received into a lawyer’s trust account, and 3,333,333 of SURG shares have been sent for cancelation. On August 12, 2020, the Company and its subsidiary, AltCorp Trading LLC, entered into a new pledge agreement with Stanley, where 5,500,000 SURG shares been pledged to Stanley to secure the debt payable by the Company to Stanley as well as mitigate the damages allegedly created by SURG.
GBT Technologies, S.A.
On June 17, 2019, the Company, Altcorp Trading LLC, a Costa Rica company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Altcorp”), GBT Technologies, S.A., a Costa Rica company (“GBT-CR”) and Pablo Gonzalez, a shareholder’s representative of GBT-CR (“Gonzalez”), entered into and closed an Exchange Agreement (the “GBT Exchange Agreement”) pursuant to which the parties exchanged certain securities. In accordance with the Exchange Agreement, Altcorp acquired 625,000 shares of GBT-CR representing then 25% (and currently less than 20% per GBT-CR further issuance of shares to other parties) of its issued and outstanding shares of common stock from Gonzalez in exchange for the issuance of 20,000 shares of Series H Convertible Preferred Stock of the Company and a Convertible Note in the principal amount of $10,000,000 issued by the Company (the “Gopher Convertible Note”) as well as the transfer and assignment of a Promissory Note payable by Gopher Protocol Costa Rica Sociedad De Responsabilidad Limitada to the Company in the principal amount of $5,000,000 dated February 6, 2019 (of which the underlying security for this Promissory Note is 30,000,000 restricted shares of common stock of Mobiquity) and 60,000,000 restricted shares of common stock of Mobiquity.
The GBT Convertible Note bears interest of 6% per annum and is payable at maturity on December 31, 2021. At the election of Gonzalez, the GBT Convertible Note can be converted into a maximum of 20,000 shares of Series H Preferred Stock. Each share of Series H Preferred Stock is convertible, at the option of the holder but subject to the Company increasing its authorized shares of common stock, into such number of shares of common stock of the Company as determined by dividing the Stated Value ($500 per share) by the conversion price ($10.00 per share). The Series H Preferred Stock has no liquidation preference, does not pay dividends and the holder of Series H Preferred Stock shall be entitled to one vote for each share of common stock that the Series H Preferred Stock may be convertible into.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, the reported amounts and classification of revenues and expenses during the periods presented, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and material changes in these estimates or assumptions could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded on the period in which they become known. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances and at that time, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily-apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
We believe that the accounting policies described below are critical to understanding our business, results of operations, and financial condition because they involve significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements. An accounting is deemed to be critical if it requires a judgment or accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain, and if different estimates that could have been used, or if changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact our financial statements. Other significant accounting policies, primarily those with lower levels of uncertainty than those discussed below, are also critical to understanding our financial statements. The notes to our financial statements contain additional information related to our accounting policies and should be read in conjunction with this discussion.
Presentation of Financial Statements
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
Marketable Equity Securities
The Company accounts for marketable equity securities in accordance with ASC Topic 321, Investments - equity securities. Marketable equity securities are reported at fair value based on quotations available on securities exchanges with any unrealized gain or loss being reported as a component of other income (expense) on the statement of operations. The portion of marketable equity security expected to be sold within twelve months of the balance sheet date is reported as a current asset.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), became effective for the Company on January 1, 2018. The Company’s revenue recognition disclosure reflects its updated accounting policies that are affected by this new standard. The Company applied the “modified retrospective” transition method for open contracts for the implementation of Topic 606. The Company had no significant post-delivery obligations, this new standard did not result in a material recognition of revenue on the Company’s accompanying consolidated financial statements for the cumulative impact of applying this new standard. The Company made no adjustments to its previously-reported total revenues, as those periods continue to be presented in accordance with its historical accounting practices under Topic 605, Revenue Recognition.
Revenue is recognized under Topic 606 as follows:
● executed contracts with the Company’s customers that it believes are legally enforceable;
● identification of performance obligations in the respective contract;
● determination of the transaction price for each performance obligation in the respective contract;
● allocation the transaction price to each performance obligation; and
● recognition of revenue only when the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
These five elements, as applied to each of the Company’s revenue category, is summarized below:
● IT services - revenue is recorded on a monthly basis as services are provided; and
● License fees and Royalties - revenue is recognized based on the terms of the agreement with its customer.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates all of its agreements to determine if such instruments have derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company uses a weighted average Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s only derivative financial instrument was an embedded conversion feature associated with convertible notes payable due to certain provisions that allow for a change in the conversion price based on a percentage of the Company’s stock price at the date of conversion.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
For certain of the Company’s financial instruments, including cash, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and short-term debt, the carrying amounts approximate their fair values due to their short maturities.
FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, requires disclosure of the fair value of financial instruments held by the Company. FASB ASC Topic 825, Financial Instruments, defines fair value, and establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosures of fair value measurement that enhances disclosure requirements for fair value measures. The carrying amounts reported in the consolidated balance sheets for receivables and current liabilities each qualify as financial instruments and are a reasonable estimate of their fair values because of the short period of time between the origination of such instruments and their expected realization and their current market rate of interest. The three levels of valuation hierarchy are defined as follows:
● Level 1 inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
● Level 2 inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets in inactive markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
● Level 3 inputs to the valuation methodology us one or more unobservable inputs which are significant to the fair value measurement.
The Company analyzes all financial instruments with features of both liabilities and equity under FASB ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and FASB ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
For certain financial instruments, the carrying amounts reported in the balance sheets for cash and current liabilities, including convertible notes payable, each qualify as a financial instrument, and are a reasonable estimate of their fair values because of the short period of time between the origination of such instruments and their expected realization and their current market rate of interest.
The Company uses Level 2 inputs for its valuation methodology for derivative liabilities as their fair values were determined by using the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing model based on various assumptions. The Company’s derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as adjustments to fair value of derivatives.
Dividends
The Company has not yet adopted any policy regarding payment of dividends. No cash dividends have been paid or declared since the Date of Inception.