ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that relate to future events or our future financial performance. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and other factors include, among others, those listed under “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” and those included elsewhere in this report. Our financial statements are prepared in U.S. dollars and in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.
Overview
We continue to be a biotechnology company dedicated to eradicating “cross-over” zoonotic diseases, such as COVID-19 (Coronavirus), Paratuberculosis (Johne’s disease), Mad Cow Disease, Chronic Wasting Disease, E.coli and Salmonella infections, by applying our advanced proprietary molecular sciences and robotic technologies. We focus on developing molecular diagnostic tests, therapeutics, and vaccines through our proprietary robotic technologies with the belief that improved technologies and methodologies must be developed and implemented in order to aid mankind’s control of emerging diseases in animals and in humans. We believe it has become increasingly evident that, if not properly addressed, diseases in animals may continue to cause serious and growing global problems with respect to economics, human health and biodiversity.
We previously developed proprietary diagnostic assays for use in the agricultural and veterinary markets, and we are currently developing proprietary, genetics-based diagnostic assays and vaccine solutions through our robotic technologies with the goal of controlling the spread of zoonotic infection in the human population. Our mission is to continually apply our scientific research to the more effective management of zoonotic diseases and, in so doing, realize the commercial potential of our molecular biotechnologies.
We will require significant additional funding in order to implement and achieve our business plan. There is no guarantee that we will be successful in securing the required financing, and if such financing is secured, there is no guarantee that we will fully achieve our business goals. We provide a comprehensive solution that allows diagnosing, treating and managing zoonotic diseases in animals and humans.
Our business model is based on the development of a proprietary Molecular Robotic/AI Laboratory Platform (“MORAP”), which would combine the use of advanced robotic laboratory systems integrated with AI software systems on a global scale. Upon development, MORAP would encompass a nationwide network of interactive molecular laboratories operated using advanced integrated robotic and machine learning cloud-based software systems, which would be able to share data and interact with each other. We believe MORAP would be capable of processing millions of samples and collecting, storing and analyzing data. We believe that MORAP nationwide communications network could be accomplished through advanced cloud-based software systems, machine learning and Internet-of-Things (IoT) networks. Upon development, MORAP could be readily replicated and scaled utilizing identical instrumentation and software.
Our proprietary Molecular Robotic and Therapeutic Platform (MORAPAT) is designed to prevent the spread of disease from animals and; at the same time, allow to better control of zoonotic infectious agents. More importantly, we believe that our platform can prevent the spread of viruses and bacteria in animals and /or food products and subsequent infection of human population. We have developed a molecular system for the detection of Mycobacterium Avian Paratuberculosis in the milk of infected dairy cows.
To date, we have developed a prototype computer program to track samples that will be received and processed in our commercial laboratory. This program will initially be used to track samples that will be sent out and received by our laboratory. We anticipate that research and development, or R&D, will be the source for both assay development and vaccine design/development. If we are successful in developing assays for different diseases, we intend to formalize the procedure into a commercial application through a series of laboratories to be owned and operated by us. We anticipate that R&D will be ongoing during the life of the Company, as this is the source for new products to be introduced to the market.
Our plan is to seek new innovations in the robotic biotechnology field. Our goal is to focus on both the domestic and international markets for the commercialization of our zoonotic molecular robotics and AI integrated platform. Our current competitors include primarily, Roche Diagnostics, Abbott Laboratories, IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., and academic and government institutions are also carrying out a significant amount of research in the field of health, particularly in the field zoonotic diseases. We anticipate that these institutions will become more aggressive in pursuing patent protection and negotiating licensing arrangements to collect royalties for the use of technologies they have developed and to market commercial products similar to those that we seek to develop, either on their own or in collaboration with our competitors. Any resulting increase in the cost or decrease in the availability of technology or product candidates from these institutions may affect our business.
We do not manufacture any products. We do not intend to establish a manufacturing facility to manufacture any products that we may develop anywhere in the world. Our unique approach to the testing for zoonotic diseases allows us to begin commercialization of our diagnostic tests without the need for a long and enduring approval process from the USDA. USDA approval will be required for commercialization of animal vaccines. However, it is our intention not to seek, in the foreseeable future, any approval either from the USDA or the U.S. Food & Drug Administration for any of the products we develop both, diagnostic or therapeutic. Our commercial laboratories will require a validation study to be performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the system. Validation studies will be performed according to each country’s guidelines. We had a total of two full-time employees as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources - Going Concern
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $0. We have historically financed activities with cash from the private placement of equity and debt securities and advances from related parties. Our auditors have issued a going concern opinion. This means that our auditors believe there is a substantial doubt that we can continue as an on-going business for the next twelve months unless we obtain additional capital to pay our bills. We have had negligible revenues since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $31,259,962 and negative working capital of $7,691,065 as of December 31, 2020.
Our current cash balance is not sufficient to fund our business objectives and we will need significant additional capital over the next 12 to 18 months in order to fund our planned operations. Specifically, we intend to spend significant funds on completing our robotic prototype system, validating and testing our products, seeking necessary regulatory approvals and focusing on international expansion. We will attempt to raise capital through one or more private offerings of debt or equity securities or both. We may not be able to secure the financing that we believe is necessary to implement our strategic objectives and, even if additional financing is secured, we may not achieve our strategic objectives. As of the date of this report, we do not have any firm commitments from any investors for any additional funding.
Our longer-term working capital and capital requirements will depend upon numerous factors, including revenue and profit generation, pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, the timing and cost of obtaining regulatory approvals, the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights, competing technological and market developments, collaborative arrangements. Additional capital will be required in order to attain such goals. Such additional funds may not become available on acceptable terms and we cannot give assurance that any additional funding that we do obtain will be sufficient to meet our needs in the long term.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on recoverability and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty. If we are unable to obtain additional working capital, our business may fail. Accordingly, we must raise cash from sources other than operations. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash flow from limited operations, augmented by cash proceeds from financing activities, short-term borrowings and equity contributions by our stockholders. We must raise cash to implement our projected plan of operations. Failure to obtain capital to fund short-term and long-term needs will likely result in the curtailment of our operations or cessation of certain aspects of our business strategy.
Capital Expenditures and Resources
Our operations require capital expenditures primarily for lab equipment and software development. Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $0, respectively.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue. We did not generate any revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
General and administrative expenses. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of office lease, overhead, insurance, professional advisor fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with general operations. Our total general and administrative expenses increased by $136,459 to $274,611 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $138,152 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Such increase was primarily due to increased professional and consulting fees and moving expenses.
Payroll expenses. Our payroll expenses include employee salaries and bonuses plus related payroll taxes. Our accrued payroll expenses were $466,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $601,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The employment agreements of the officers provide that the officers be awarded $135,000 worth of Series B Preferred Stock annually. The Company does not have enough authorized shares of Series B Preferred stock to satisfy the agreement. Therefore, the Company accrued $135,000 of compensation expense in 2019, but did not make the accrual for 2020, which accounts for the decrease of compensation expense from 2020 compared to 2019.
The entire amount of accrued payroll expense incurred in 2020 and 2019 was deferred due to lack of funds.
Total other expenses. We had $33,852 and $28,582 in interest expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amounts for both years relate to accrued interest expense on related party and other notes payable.
Total other income. The Company recorded a gain on the settlement with FOGT LLC of approximately $250,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared no other income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net loss. The Company incurred net losses of $774,463 and $517,651 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due mainly to the $250,083 of other income recognized in 2019 from the gain on the settlement with FOGT LLC.
Summary of Cash Flow
The net cash used in operating activities was $5,309. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net loss of $774,463 was offset by the accrual of compensation expense and other accrued expenses and depreciation expense.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $269 for the year ended December 31, 2019, but was augmented by the settlement proceeds of approximately $250,000.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
There were no contractual obligations or commitments of any kind.
Convertible Notes
In previous years we borrowed money from investors and issued convertible notes due on demand and bearing interest at an annual rate of 8%. The notes are convertible into shares our common stock at a conversion price of $0.01 to $0.05 per share. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the outstanding aggregate principal and interest on these notes was $54,500, respectively.
The Company has approximately $366,000 of convertible notes whose holders have presented conversion notices. The Company’s Stock Transfer Agent has not been able to issue shares for these notes due to the lack of beneficiaries’ communications with their investments. The Company has regularly sent Letters of Confirmations through our auditors, but the holders of Convertible Notes not yet converted, have not validated their investments and/or Promissory Notes’ outstanding debts with the Company’s auditing team. The $366,000 is included in accrued liabilities.
Related Party Loans
From time to time, certain directors, officers and stockholders have made loans to the Company.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has outstanding loan payables to Dr. Antonio Milici, its Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and principal stockholder, in the amounts of $679,783 and $673,092, respectively. This loan is unsecured, due on demand, and bears interest at 2.41%.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has outstanding loan payables to Tannya Irizarry, its Chief Administrative Officer and stockholder, in the amounts of $58,704 and $61,995, respectively. This loan is unsecured, due on demand, and bears interest at 8%.
Investment Agreement
In March 2018, the Company entered into a Milestone Investment Agreement (the “Agreement”) with FOGT, LLC (an entity controlled in part by a former member of the Company’s Board of Directors), pursuant to which FOGT, LLC (“FOGT”) agreed to invest in and purchase from the Company up to $5 million of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock pending the Company’s completion of certain operational milestones. As of December 31, 2020, FOGT had invested $550,000 and the Company issued 5,500 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock to FOGT pursuant to the terms of the Agreement. Subsequently, FOGT agreed to invest additional amounts as follows: (i) $1,500,000 upon the Company’s completion of design, assembly and validation of an advanced robotic system; and (ii) $1,750,000 upon the Company entering into a commercial agreement with a government organization and/or private entity. Subsequently, a dispute arose between the parties. FOGT ceased any further investments in the Company resulting in arbitration.
The Board member resigned. In 2019 the Company received a net settlement of approximately $250,000, which was included in Other Income, and the 10,350 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock were cancelled.
Capital Expenditures
Our operations require capital expenditures primarily for lab equipment and software development. The Company lost its lab equipment and other capital assets when the office space lease was terminated in April 2019. The equipment was fully depreciated. The Company removed these assets from its books in 2019. The Company’s fixed assets include a vehicle purchased in 2017 in the amount of $26,400 with a net book value of $10,560 as of December 31, 2020.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. However, our management will closely monitor price changes in our industry and continually maintain effective cost control in operations.
Seasonality
Our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to significant seasonal variations. This pattern may change, however, as a result of new market opportunities or new product introductions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements.
Effect of Inflation and Market Prices on Net Sales and Revenues
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. However, our management will closely monitor price changes in our industry and continually maintain effective cost control in operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles GAAP requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Property and Equipment, Net.
Property and equipment consist primarily of office and laboratory equipment, leasehold improvements, vehicle, and is stated at cost. Depreciation is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives ranging from three to seven years. The Company has one vehicle recorded in property and equipment with a net book value of $10,560 as of December 31, 2020.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.
We review the recoverability of long-lived assets to determine whether events or changes in circumstances occurred that indicate the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. The assessment of possible impairment is based on the ability to recover the carrying value of the asset from the expected future cash flows of the related operations. If these cash flows are less than the carrying value of such asset, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value and carrying value. The measurement of impairment requires management to make estimates of these cash flows related to long-lived assets, as well as other fair value determinations.
Stock-Based Compensation.
Stock-based compensation is accounted for under FASB ASC Topic No. 718 - Compensation - Stock Compensation. The guidance requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively the vesting period). The guidance also requires measurement of the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. We account for non-employee share-based awards in accordance with guidance related to equity instruments that are issued to other than employees for acquisition, or in conjunction with selling, goods or services.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments.
The carrying value of cash, accounts payable, accrued expenses and notes payable approximates fair value due to the short-term nature of these accounts.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory”, which eliminates the exception that prohibits the recognition of current and deferred income tax effects for intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory until the asset has been sold to an outside party. The updated guidance is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption of the update is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the new standard.
In June 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, “Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”)”. ASU 2018-07 expands the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. ASU 2018-07 also clarifies that Topic 718 does not apply to share-based payments used to effectively provide (1) financing to the issuer or (2) awards granted in conjunction with selling goods or services to customers as part of a contract accounted for under Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). ASU 2018-07 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The Company adopted the provisions of ASU 2018-07 in the quarter beginning January 1, 2019. The adoption of ASU 2018-07 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement presentation or disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement”, which changes the fair value measurement disclosure requirements of ASC 820. This update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and for interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2018-13 to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Management has evaluated all recent accounting pronouncements as issued by the FASB in the form of Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) through the date these financial statements were available to be issued and found no recent accounting pronouncements issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, when adopted, will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Company.