Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel small molecule therapeutics for the treatment of patients with cancer. Our first approved product by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), COSELA™ (trilaciclib), is the first and only therapy indicated to proactively help protect bone marrow from the damage of chemotherapy and is the first innovation in managing myeloprotection in decades. COSELA was developed from a technology platform that targets key cellular pathways including transient arrest of the cell cycle at G1, prior to the beginning of DNA replication. Our therapies are designed to improve outcomes for patients across multiple oncology indications.
We shall use “COSELA” when we are referring our FDA approved drug and “trilaciclib” when we are referring to our development of COSELA for additional indications.
Product Pipeline
We are advancing two clinical stage programs. Trilaciclib is a first-in-class therapy designed to help protect against chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. Trilaciclib helps protect HSPCs in bone marrow by transiently inhibiting CDK4/6 leading to a temporary arrest of susceptible host cells during chemotherapy in ES-SCLC patients. This reduces the duration and severity of neutropenia and other myelosuppressive consequences of chemotherapy. In addition, trilaciclib activates and enhances the immune system response driving increased anti-tumor efficacy, which we continue to explore in clinical trials.
On February 12, 2021, COSELA was approved by the FDA to decrease the incidence of chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression in adult patients treated with a platinum/etoposide-containing regimen or topotecan-containing regimen for extensive stage small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC). We are also exploring potential use of trilaciclib in a variety of tumors, including colorectal cancer (CRC), triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), neoadjuvant breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and bladder cancer.
Rintodestrant is an oral selective estrogen receptor degrader (SERD) for the treatment of ER+ breast cancer. In 2020, we out-licensed global rights to lerociclib, an internally discovered and differentiated oral CDK4/6 inhibitor designed to enable more effective combination treatment strategies across multiple oncology indications. We also have intellectual property focused on cyclin-dependent kinase targets.
G1 Therapeutics Product Pipeline
Candidate
Indication
Status
Development & Commercialization Rights
(all indications)
trilaciclib
Extensive-stage small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC)
COSELA (trilaciclib)
Approved by FDA
G1 Therapeutics owns all global development and commercial rights across all indications, with the exception of Greater China (Simcere)
Colorectal cancer (CRC)
Registrational trial
(initiated in 2020)
1L/2L Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
Registrational trial
(initiating in 1H 2021)
2L/3L Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
Phase 2 trial
(initiating in 1H 2021)
1L Bladder cancer
Phase 2 trial
(initiating in 1H 2021)
Neoadjuvant breast cancer
(I-SPY 2 TRIAL™)
Phase 2 trial
(initiated in 2020)
rintodestrant
ER+, HER2- breast cancer
Phase 2a
(initiated in 2019)
G1 - Global
lerociclib
Multiple
Clinical Stage
EQRx: Global and Japan (ex. Asia Pacific)
Genor Biopharma: Asia Pacific (ex. Japan)
Trilaciclib helps protect HSPCs in bone marrow by transiently inhibiting CDK4/6 leading to a temporary arrest of susceptible host cells during chemotherapy in ES-SCLC patients. This reduces the duration and severity of neutropenia and other myelosuppressive consequences of chemotherapy. In addition, trilaciclib has demonstrated immune system response enhancement which we are exploring in clinical trials to show increased anti-tumor efficacy.
Trilaciclib, a transient IV CDK4/6 inhibitor, is a novel therapeutic approach which is given before chemotherapy that temporarily blocks progression through the cell cycle. This provides two benefits. First, it proactively helps protect HSPCs in bone marrow leading to preservation of neutrophils, erythrocytes, and platelets (called myeloprotection) which reduces the occurrences and severity of neutropenia and other myelosuppressive consequences of chemotherapy. This myeloprotection benefit has been conclusively proven in double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials in extensive-stage small cell lung cancer. Second, trilaciclib activates and enhances the immune system response driving increased anti-tumor efficacy, which we are exploring in clinical trials. Our randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that trilaciclib can provide myeloprotection benefits and has the potential to improve survival as a result of its anti-tumor efficacy benefit.
Chemotherapy is an effective and important weapon against cancer. However, chemotherapy does not differentiate between healthy cells and cancer cells and kills both, including important stem cells in the bone marrow (hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, or HSPCs) that produce white blood cells, red blood cells and platelets, and immune cells. This chemotherapy-induced bone marrow damage is known as myelosuppression. When white blood cells, red blood cells and platelets become depleted, chemotherapy patients are at increased risk of infection, experience anemia and fatigue, and are at increased risk of bleeding. Myelosuppression often requires the administration of rescue interventions such as growth factors and blood or platelet transfusions and may also result in chemotherapy dose delays and reductions. Immune cell damage may decrease the ability of the immune system to fight the cancer, as well as infection.
In preclinical studies, administration of trilaciclib prior to chemotherapy has been shown to induce transient cell-cycle arrest of HSPCs, helps protect HSPCs from chemotherapy-induced damage, preserve bone marrow and immune system function, helps protect against bone marrow exhaustion, improve complete blood counts (CBC) recovery, prevent myeloid skewing and consequent lymphopenia, and enhance T-cell effector function in the tumor microenvironment.
Following evaluation of trilaciclib in a Phase 1 trial in healthy volunteers, we initiated two Phase 1b/2 trials in patients with ES-SCLC; one in a first line setting (in combination with carboplatin/etoposide) and the other in a second-/third-line setting (in combination with topotecan). Enrollment in both trials has been completed and preliminary data from the open label Phase 1b segment were reported in 2016 and 2017. In the Phase 1b segments of these two trials, we treated 51 patients with over 250 cycles of trilaciclib and chemotherapy. There were no episodes of febrile neutropenia - one of the most common adverse consequences of these chemotherapy regimens. Further, there were no drug-related serious adverse events reported during the Phase 1b segments of these two trials. There were some adverse events reported involving fatigue and cytopenias, but those adverse events were less severe and less frequent than those generally reported in trials involving the use of chemotherapy alone.
Based on these encouraging preliminary data, we advanced both SCLC trials into the randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind Phase 2 segment. Enrollment in the first-line SCLC Phase 2 trial was completed in the second quarter of 2017 and positive multilineage myeloprotection results were reported in March 2018, with additional data reported at the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) 2018 Congress and published in Annals of Oncology in 2019. Enrollment in the second-/third-line SCLC Phase 2 trial was completed in the second quarter of 2018, with positive multilineage myeloprotection data reported in the fourth quarter of 2018 and full data presented at an oral session at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 2019 Annual Meeting. These data were also published in Advances in Therapy (Hart et al.) in 2020.
Our third trial in SCLC was initiated in 2017, as part of our non-exclusive collaboration with Genentech, with the goal of exploring the use of trilaciclib in combination with chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor. The trial was a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind Phase 2 trial of trilaciclib in combination with Tecentriq® (atezolizumab)/carboplatin/etoposide in first-line SCLC patients. We completed enrollment in February 2018 and reported positive multilineage myeloprotection data in November 2018. Additional data, including myeloprotection and anti-tumor efficacy findings (as measured by overall survival, or “OS”), were reported at the 2019 ESMO Congress. and featured in a concurrent publication in The Lancet Oncology
All three SCLC trials demonstrated that trilaciclib, when added to standard of care chemotherapy or chemotherapy/checkpoint inhibitor regimens, decreases the incidence of clinically significant chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression. The FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation for trilaciclib based on myeloprotection data from our three randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled SCLC clinical trials, as well as safety data collected across all completed and ongoing clinical trials. The Breakthrough Therapy program is designed to expedite development and review of drugs intended for serious or life-threatening conditions. In August 2020, the FDA accepted our New Drug Application (NDA) for trilaciclib in SCLC, granting Priority Review with a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) action date of February 15, 2021. Discussions with European regulatory authorities have indicated existing data is sufficient to support a Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) to the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for trilaciclib for myeloprotection in SCLC, which we plan to pursue in collaboration with a partner.
On February 12, 2021, COSELA was approved by the FDA to decrease the incidence of chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression in adult patients when administered prior to a platinum/etoposide-containing regimen or topotecan-containing regimen for extensive-stage small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC). We expect COSELA to be commercially available through G1’s specialty pharmacy partner network in early March. COSELA is administered intravenously as a 30-minute infusion completed within 4 hours prior to the start of chemotherapy and is the first and only FDA-approved therapy that helps proactively deliver multilineage myeloprotection to patients with extensive-stage small cell lung cancer being treated with chemotherapy. The approval of COSELA is based on data from three randomized, placebo-controlled trials that showed patients receiving COSELA prior to chemotherapy had clinically meaningful and statistically significant reduction in the duration and severity of neutropenia, reduction of red blood cell transfusions, as well as improvements in other myeloprotection measures, compared to patients receiving chemotherapy without COSELA.
In June 2020, we entered into a three-year co-promotion agreement for COSELA™ (trilaciclib) in the United States and Puerto Rico with Boehringer Ingelheim. The agreement is limited to support for SCLC. Under the terms of the agreement, we will book revenue in the United States and Puerto Rico and retain development and commercialization rights to trilaciclib. We will lead marketing, market access and medical engagement initiatives; Boehringer Ingelheim will lead sales force engagements.
In August 2020, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Nanjing Simcere Dongyuan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd (“Simcere”) for development and commercialization rights for trilaciclib in all indications in Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan). Under the terms of the agreement, we received an upfront payment of $14.0 million and will be eligible to receive up to $156.0 million in development and commercial milestone payments. Simcere will also pay us tiered low double-digit royalties on annual net sales of trilaciclib in Greater China. As part of the agreement, Simcere will participate in global clinical trials of trilaciclib and the companies will be responsible for all development and commercialization costs in their respective territories.
We are also executing on our tumor-agnostic strategy to evaluate the potential benefits of trilaciclib to patients with other tumors that are treated with chemotherapy. We have two on-going trials: a pivotal 1L colorectal cancer (CRC) study and a Phase 2 neoadjuvant breast cancer (I-SPY 2). We intend to initiate a pivotal study in mTNBC (including 1L and 2L patients) and have two additional Phase 2 studies: a 2L/3L non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) trial in post-checkpoint patients and a 1L bladder cancer trial with chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor. These studies across treatment settings and tumor types will evaluate trilaciclib’s dual benefits in both multi-lineage myeloprotection and anti-tumor efficacy.
Pivotal 1L Colorectal Cancer (CRC)
We enrolled the first patient in a randomized, placebo-controlled registrational trial of trilaciclib in colorectal cancer (CRC) in the first quarter of 2021. CRC is a large indication commonly treated with 5-FU-based chemotherapy. We have extensive preclinical research demonstrating myeloprotection and potential efficacy in 5-FU-based regimens with trilaciclib. Our ongoing 1L CRC trial is with FOLFOXIRI, which is the most efficacious chemo regimen in this tumor but is also highly myelosuppressive. By reducing the toxicity of FOLFOXIRI, we believe we will significantly expand its use in CRC and potentially improve overall survival.
1L/2L Metastatic Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (mTNBC)
In 2017, we initiated a randomized Phase 2 trial of trilaciclib in patients with first-/second-/third-line metastatic triple-negative breast cancer (mTNBC) receiving gemcitabine and carboplatin. Enrollment was completed in the second quarter of 2018. At the 2018 SABCS, we presented preliminary trilaciclib data demonstrating improvement in progression-free survival (PFS). In September 2019, we presented updated data demonstrating significant improvement in OS (preliminary). Though the trial did not meet the primary myeloprotection endpoints, patients receiving trilaciclib were able to receive approximately 50% more cycles of chemotherapy, without additional hematological toxicity. These data were presented at the 2019 ESMO Congress and were concurrently published in The Lancet Oncology. Updated safety and efficacy data from this trial were presented at the 2020 SABCS. Data included that compared to GC alone (Group 1), OS was improved in both trilaciclib arms (Groups 2 and 3) (Group 2: HR=0.31, p=0.0016; Group 3: HR=0.40, p=0.0004). Median OS was 12.6 months in Group 1, not reached for Group 2, and 17.8 months in Group 3. The median OS for Groups 2 and 3 combined was 19.8 months (HR=0.37, p<0.0001). OS findings in patients receiving trilaciclib were consistent with previously-reported data from this trial. The median OS for GC alone (Group 1, 12.6 months) was consistent with the previous trial findings and historical data. Patients with both PD-L1-positive and PD-L1-negative tumors treated with trilaciclib and GC demonstrated improvement in OS compared to patients receiving GC alone, with the PD-L1-positive subset achieving statistically significant improvement. Further, data from T cell clonality analyses suggest that administering trilaciclib prior to chemotherapy enhanced immune system function. These compelling Phase 2 data supported the potential effectiveness of trilaciclib in mTNBC. We expect to initiate a randomized, placebo-controlled registrational trial in in 1L patients and 2L post-checkpoint patients with mTNBC in the first half of 2021. TNBC is a difficult and aggressive tumor to treat with many new therapies only effective in certain subpopulations
Phase 2 Neoadjuvant Breast Cancer (I-SPY 2)
In January 2020, we announced that trilaciclib will be included in a new randomized, investigational treatment arm for the ongoing I-SPY 2 TRIAL™ for neoadjuvant treatment of locally advanced breast cancer. The trial, initiated in the second quarter of 2020 and run by the non-profit Quantum Leap Healthcare Collaborative, is designed to rapidly screen promising experimental treatments and identify those most effective in specific patient subgroups based on molecular characteristics (biomarker signatures). This trial will generate myeloprotection and anti-tumor efficacy data across the different subtypes of breast cancer.
2L/3L Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
Evaluating trilaciclib in 2L/3L NSCLC (post-checkpoint setting) will provide us with meaningful data in an area of high unmet with a large patient population. NSCLC is a known immunogenic tumor which may provide trilaciclib an opportunity to increase anti-tumor efficacy through its distinct mechanism even after checkpoint inhibitors have failed. There is also a high complementary commercial fit with our initial SCLC indication.
1L Bladder Cancer
We intend to initiate a 1L bladder cancer trial in the first half of 2021 with chemotherapy and a checkpoint inhibitor. There is a strong rationale to evaluate trilaciclib in 1L bladder cancer: (1) bladder is a known immunogenic tumor proven to be responsive to chemotherapy; (2) the most common chemotherapy regimen used in 1L bladder is gemcitabine and platinum, which is similar to the chemotherapy regimen in our TNBC study (gemcitabine and carboplatin) where we showed significant OS benefits; and (3) we have observed synergistic benefits combining trilaciclib with checkpoints.
Rintodestrant: Our differentiated oral SERD
Rintodestrant is an oral SERD which we plan to initially develop as a monotherapy and in combination with CDK4/6 inhibitors, initially Ibrance® (palbociclib), for the treatment of ER+, HER2- breast cancer. Based on compelling preclinical efficacy and safety data, we filed an Investigational New Drug application (IND) with the FDA in the fourth quarter of 2017. In 2018, we initiated a Phase 1b (dose escalation/dose expansion) clinical trial in ER+, HER2- breast cancer. Preliminary data from the Phase 1 portion of
this trial were presented at the 2019 ESMO Congress, showing that rintodestrant was well tolerated and demonstrated evidence of anti-tumor activity in heavily pre-treated patients. The mature monotherapy data were presented at the 2020 SABCS, confirming the safety and efficacy results of the preliminary analysis. Based on those results we advanced an 800 mg dose of rintodestrant into a 40-patient Phase 2 combination trial with palbociclib, a CDK4/6 inhibitor. We completed enrollment of patients in this trial in October 2020 and expect to disclose initial safety and efficacy data in the second quarter of 2021. If the Phase 2 data are promising, we will seek to partner rintodestrant. Palbociclib is being provided under a non-exclusive clinical supply agreement that we signed with Pfizer in February 2020.
Lerociclib: Our differentiated CDK4/6 inhibitor for patients with CDK4/6-dependent tumors
Lerociclib is a differentiated oral CDK4/6 inhibitor being developed for use in combination with other targeted therapies in multiple oncology indications. In 2020, we entered into separate, exclusive agreements with EQRx, Inc. (rights for U.S., Europe, Japan and all markets outside Asia-Pacific) and Genor Biopharma Co. Inc. (rights for Asia-Pacific, excluding Japan) for the development and commercialization of lerociclib in all indications. Combined, these agreements provided $26.0 million in upfront payments, along with sales-based royalties, and the opportunity for up to $330.0 million in potential milestone payments. EQRx, Inc. and Genor Biopharma Co. Inc. are responsible for all costs related to the development and commercialization of lerociclib in their respective territories.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) impact on operations
We have implemented business continuity plans to address the COVID-19 pandemic and minimize disruptions to ongoing operations. Enrollment of patients in current and future clinical trials may be impacted by COVID-19. We do not anticipate significant supply chain delays or shortages as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 travel limitations and government-mandated work-from-home or shelter-in-place orders, may reduce the number of in-person meetings with prescribers and fewer patient visits with physicians, potentially resulting in fewer new prescriptions.
We established a COVID-19 response team which continually monitors the impact of COVID-19 on our operations. The COVID-19 response team manages our workplace protocols that governs our employees use of our office. To mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on our business, we put in place the following safety measures for our employees, patients, healthcare professionals, and suppliers to limit exposure: we substantially restricted travel, supplied personal protective equipment to employees, limited access to our headquarters and asked most of our staff to work remotely. In addition, we transitioned most of our employees to working remotely and added bandwidth and VPN capacity to our infrastructure. We will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our operations and report to our Board regularly on the progress of our response to the COVID-19 outbreak.
Financial Overview
Since our inception in 2008, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to synthesizing, acquiring, testing and developing our product candidates, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations as well as securing intellectual property protection for our product candidates. As of February 2021, COSELA is our only product approved for sale. COSELA has not generated any revenues from product sales in 2020. We expect COSELA to start generating revenue in the first quarter of 2021. We recorded $45.3 million of license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $0 million of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities, our loan agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc., and licensing arrangements. Under our licensing arrangements, we are eligible to receive certain development and sales-based milestones. Our ability to earn these milestones and the timing of achieving these milestones is primarily dependent upon the outcome of the licensee’s activities and is uncertain at this time.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $207.3 million. Since inception, we have incurred net losses. Our net losses were $99.3 million, $122.4 million and $85.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $436.1 million. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs, our commercial launch preparations, and from general and administrative expenses associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses. We expect our research and development, commercial activities, and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in connection with our ongoing and future activities as we:
•
continue development of our product candidates, including initiating additional clinical trials of trilaciclib and rintodestrant;
•
identify and develop new product candidates;
•
seek marketing approvals for our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•
grow our sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize COSELA and any future products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•
achieve market acceptance of our product candidates in the medical community and with third-party payors;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•
hire additional personnel;
•
enter into collaboration arrangements, if any, for the development of our product candidates or in-license other products and technologies;
•
add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and planned future commercialization efforts; and
•
continue to incur increased costs as a result of operating as a public company.
License agreement with the University of Illinois - Rintodestrant
In November 2016, and as amended in March 2017, we entered into a license agreement with the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, or the University. Pursuant to the license agreement, as amended, the University licensed patent rights to the Company, with rights to sublicense, to make, have made, use, import, sell and offer for sale SERDs, including rintodestrant, covered by certain patent rights owned by the University. The rights licensed to us are exclusive, worldwide, non-transferable rights, for all fields of use. Under the terms of the agreement, as amended, we paid a one-time only, non-refundable upfront fee of $0.5 million, and are required to pay the University low single-digit royalties on all net sales of products and a share of any sublicensing revenues. We are also obligated to pay annual maintenance fees, which are fully creditable against any royalty payments made by us. In addition, the Company may also be required to pay the University milestone payments of up to an aggregate of $2.6 million related to the initiation and execution of clinical trials, with payments made for the initial dosing for each phase of the clinical trials, as well as the first commercial sale of a product in another country. To date, the Company has made milestone payments totaling $0.6 million, of which $0 was incurred during 2020. We will also be responsible for any future patent prosecution costs that may arise. See “Business-Intellectual Property-Exclusive License for rintodestrant.”
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenues
To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sale of products. Our revenues have been derived from our license agreements.
We entered into an exclusive license agreement with Nanjing Simcere Dongyuan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd (“Simcere”) in August 2020 and granted them the rights to develop and commercialize trilaciclib in Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan) (the “Simcere Territory”). We received an upfront payment of $14.0 million (less applicable withholding taxes of $1.4 million) in September 2020. This was recognized in December 2020 when we transferred the license and related technology know-how. We have the potential to receive $156.0 million upon reaching development and commercial milestones, and receive tiered low double-digit royalties on annual net sales of trilaciclib in the Simcere Territory.
We entered into an exclusive license agreement with EQRx, Inc. (“EQRx”) in July 2020 and granted them the rights to develop and commercialize lerociclib in the U.S., Europe, Japan and all other global markets, excluding the Asia-Pacific region (except Japan) (the “EQRx Territory”). We received an upfront payment of $20.0 million in August 2020. This was recognized as revenue in September 2020 when we transferred the license and related technology and know-how. We have the potential to receive $290.0 upon reaching development and commercial milestones, and receive tiered royalties ranging from mid-single digits to mid-teens based on annual net sales of lerociclib in the EQRx Territory.
We entered into an exclusive license agreement with Genor Biopharma Co. Inc. (“Genor”) in June 2020 and granted them the rights to develop and commercialize lerociclib in the Asia-Pacific Region, excluding Japan (the “Genor Territory”). We received an upfront payment of $6.0 million in July 2020. This was recognized as revenue in September 2020 when we transferred the license and related technology and know-how. We have the potential to receive $40.0 million upon reaching development and commercial milestones, and receive tiered royalties ranging from high single to low double-digits based on annual net sales of lerociclib in the Genor Territory.
We entered into an exclusive license agreement with ARC Therapeutics, LLC (“ARC”) in May 2020. The Company granted ARC an exclusive, worldwide, royalty-bearing license of its CDK2 inhibitor compounds in exchange for an upfront payment and equity in ARC with a total value of approximately $2.1 million, which resulted in the recognition of related party revenue. The Company is entitled to receive additional milestone payments and sales-based royalties, and has right of first negotiation to re-acquire these assets.
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expenses into two categories: research and development and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense, comprise a significant component of each of these expense categories. We allocate expenses associated with personnel costs based on the nature of work associated with these resources.
Research and Development Expenses
The largest component of our total operating expenses since inception has been research and development activities, including the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Our research and development expense primarily consists of:
•
salaries and personnel-related costs, including bonuses, benefits and any stock-based compensation, for our scientific personnel performing or managing out-sourced research and development activities;
•
costs incurred under agreements with contract research organizations and investigative sites that conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
costs related to manufacturing pharmaceutical active ingredients and drug products for preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
costs related to upfront and milestone payments under in-licensing agreements;
•
fees paid to consultants and other third parties who support our product candidate development;
•
other costs incurred in seeking regulatory approval of our product candidates; and
•
allocated facility-related costs and overhead.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. Accordingly, we expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from our product candidates to offset these expenses. Our expenditures on current and future preclinical and clinical development programs are subject to numerous uncertainties in timing and cost to completion. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors including:
•
the scope, rate of progress, and expenses of our ongoing as well as any additional clinical trials and other research and development activities;
•
future clinical trial results;
•
achievement of milestones requiring payments under our in-licensing agreements;
•
uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rates or drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•
significant and changing government regulation; and
•
the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
We track research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis only for clinical-stage product candidates. Preclinical research and development expenses and chemical manufacturing research and development expenses are not assigned or allocated to individual development programs. In 2020, we had two clinical-stage product candidates, trilaciclib and rintodestrant.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation. Other general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs not otherwise allocated to research and development expense, professional fees, pre-commercialization costs, expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents and costs of our information systems. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development and commercialization of COSELA.
We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses in 2020 as we support continued research and development activities and support our operations in a public company environment, including expenses related to compliance with
the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq, additional insurance expenses, and expenses related to investor relations activities, commercialization costs and other administration and professional services.
Total other income (expense), net
Total other income (expense), net consists of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents and interest expenses incurred under our loan and security agreement with Hercules.
Income taxes
To date, we have not been required to pay U.S. federal or state income taxes because we have not generated taxable income. Income tax expense recognized in 2020 related to the foreign withholding taxes incurred as a result of the upfront payment received from the Simcere license agreement entered into during the quarter.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
For elements of those arrangements that we determine should be accounted for under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), we assess which activities in our license or collaboration agreements are performance obligations that should be accounted for separately and determine the transaction price of the arrangement, which includes the assessment of the probability of achievement of future milestones and other potential consideration. For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, such as granting a license or performing manufacturing or research and development activities, we allocate the transaction price based on the relative standalone selling price and recognize revenue that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) control is transferred to the customer and the performance obligation is satisfied. Accordingly, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. These key assumptions may include revenue forecasts, clinical development timelines and costs, discount rates and probabilities of clinical and regulatory success.
Licenses of Intellectual Property
If a license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue associated with the bundled performance obligation. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of progress and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes developmental and regulatory milestone payments, the Company evaluates whether the achievement of each milestone specifically relates to the Company’s efforts to satisfy a performance obligation or transfer a distinct good or service within a performance obligation. The Company evaluates each milestone to determine when and how much of the milestone to include in the transaction price. The Company first estimates the amount of the milestone payment that the Company could receive using either the expected value or the most likely amount approach. The Company primarily uses the most likely
amount approach as that approach is generally most predictive for milestone payments with a binary outcome. Then, the Company considers whether any portion of that estimated amount is subject to the variable consideration constraint (that is, whether it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur upon resolution of the uncertainty). The Company updates the estimate of variable consideration included in the transaction price at each reporting date which includes updating the assessment of the likely amount of consideration and the application of the constraint to reflect current facts and circumstances.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, the Company will recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, the Company has not recognized any revenue related to sales-based royalties or milestone payments based on the level of sales.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we estimate and accrue research and development expenses, including external clinical study costs associated with clinical trial activities. The process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, identifying services that have been provided on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs.
Costs for clinical trial activities are recognized based on an evaluation of our vendors’ progress towards completion of specific tasks, using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors regarding their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of individual contracts and payment timing may differ significantly from the period in which the services were performed. We determine accrual estimates through reports from and discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of trials, or the services completed. Our estimates of accrued external clinical study costs as of each balance sheet date are based on the facts and circumstances known at the time.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from the amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of the services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values. Our stock-based compensation awards have historically consisted of stock options.
We recognize compensation costs related to stock options granted to employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards. We account for forfeitures as they occur, rather than estimating forfeitures as of the date of grant.
We recorded non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $18.8 million, $16.4 million and $10.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We calculate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the expected volatility of our common stock, the assumed dividend yield, the expected term of our stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options, and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. In applying these assumptions, we considered the following factors:
•
we do not have sufficient history to estimate the volatility of our common stock; we calculate expected volatility based on reported data for selected similar publicly traded companies for which the historical information is available as we do not have sufficient history to estimate volatility using only our common stock; in 2019, we began incorporating our historical stock price in conjunction with selected similar publicly traded companies; we plan to continue to use the guideline peer group volatility information until the historical volatility of our common stock is sufficient to measure expected volatility for future option grants;
•
the assumed dividend yield of zero is based on our expectation of not paying dividends for the foreseeable future;
•
our estimates of expected term used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model were based on the estimated time from the grant date to the date of exercise;
•
we determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to implied yields available from U.S. Treasury securities with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant; and
•
we account for forfeitures as they occur, rather than estimating forfeitures as of an award’s grant date.
See “Note 9 - Stock-Based compensation” to the accompanying audited financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report for the weighted average assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for awards granted in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Prior to our initial public offering, the fair value of our common shares underlying our stock options was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value of our common shares underlying granted stock options, our board of directors considered, among other things, timely valuations of our common shares prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Given the absence of a public trading market for our common shares, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common shares, including (1) our business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting our operations; (2) our forecasted operating performance and projected future cash flows; (3) the illiquid nature of our common shares; (4) liquidation preferences and other rights and privileges of our common shares; (5) market multiples of our most comparable public peers and (6) market conditions affecting our industry. Since our IPO, our board of directors has determined the fair value of each common share underlying share-based awards based on the closing price of our common shares as reported by the Nasdaq on the date of grant.
Income taxes
We recognize deferred income taxes for temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statement and income tax purposes. We periodically evaluate the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Based upon the weight of the available evidence, which includes historical operating performance, reported cumulative net losses since inception and difficulty in accurately forecasting our future results, we maintained a full valuation allowance on the net deferred tax assets for all periods presented. We intend to maintain a full valuation allowance on the U.S. deferred tax assets for the foreseeable future until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of the valuation allowance.
At December 31, 2020, the Company has federal net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) of approximately $373.1 million, which are available to offset future taxable income. Of the $373.1 million available, $95.4 million will begin to expire in 2029. The remaining $277.6 million has an indefinite carryforward period. Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”), federal NOLs arising after December 31, 2017 may be carried forward indefinitely. However, for NOLs arising after December 31, 2017, NOL carryforwards will be limited to 80% of taxable income. Our NOLs generated in 2017 and in prior years will not be subject to the 80% limitation under the Tax Act. In addition, we had state net operating loss carryforwards totaling approximately $379.8 million, which are available to offset future state taxable income. State net operating losses begin to expire in 2024. Because we had incurred cumulative net operating losses since inception, all tax years remain open to examination by U.S. federal and state income tax authorities. As of December 31, 2020, we also had federal research and development (R&D) credit carryforwards of approximately $14.0 million available to offset future income tax which begin to expire in 2035.
Our ability to utilize net operating losses and research and development credit carryforwards may be substantially limited due to ownership changes that may have occurred or that could occur in the future, as required by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the Code), as well as similar state provisions. These ownership changes may limit the amount of NOL and R&D credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively. In general, an “ownership change,” as defined by Section 382 of the Code, results from a transaction or series of transactions over a three-year period resulting in an ownership change of more than 50 percent of the outstanding stock of a company by certain stockholders or public groups.
In April 2019, we completed an evaluation study as to whether an “ownership change” had occurred and determined that the limitation would be approximately $8.0 million on federal net operating loss carryforwards, $1.2 million on state net operating loss carryforwards, and $0.1 million on R&D tax credit carryforwards. The carryforward amounts reported above have already been reduced for these limitations. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance on the remaining NOLs as we believe that it is more likely than not that all of the deferred tax asset associated with the NOLs will not be realized regardless of whether an “ownership change” has occurred.
Results of operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue was $45.3 million and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively. The revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to $42.1 million in revenue recognized from the Simcere, EQRx, Genor and ARC upfront payments under the respective license agreements following the transfer of the related technology and know-how which occurred during the period. We also recognized $1.3 million for clinical trial costs and $0.4 million in patent costs to be reimbursed by EQRx, Genor, and Simcere. Additionally, we recognized $1.3 million in revenue for existing inventory transfers to EQRx and Genor which occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Research and development
Research and development expenses were $73.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $89.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $15.7 million, or -18%, was primarily due to a decrease of $10.2 million in our clinical program costs due to a decrease in spend for ongoing clinical trials of $5.7 million and decrease of $5.9 million related to a regulatory filing expense of $2.9 million incurred in 2019 and reimbursed in 2020, partially offset by an increase in personnel costs of $1.4 million. The decrease of $1.3 million in costs for manufacturing of active pharmaceutical ingredient and drug product to support our clinical trials, as well as a decrease in research and development expenses was also due to a decrease of $4.2 million in external costs related to discovery and preclinical development. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses allocated to trilaciclib, rintodestrant, lerociclib, and unallocated research and development expenses for the periods indicated:
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses were $68.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $28.5 million, or 71%, was due to an increase of $6.8 million in personnel related costs due to increased headcount, of which $1.7 million related to non-cash stock compensation expense, an increase of $15.8 million in pre-commercialization activities, an increase of $2.0 million in medical affairs costs related to trilaciclib, an increase of $0.8 million in information technology systems and related expenses, and an increase of $3.1 million professional services, insurance, and other administrative costs.
Total other income (expense), net
Total other income, net was $(1.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income of $8.0 million was primarily driven by a lower balance of money market funds due to cash used in operating activities and changes in interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense on loan payable, and loss on disposal of fixed assets.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was related to the foreign withholding taxes incurred as a result of the upfront payment received from the Simcere license agreement entered into in 2020.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018
Revenue
Revenue was $0 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Research and development
Research and development expenses were $89.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $18.3 million, or 26%, was primarily due to an increase of $11.8 million in our clinical program costs which reflects increased costs in our ongoing clinical trials, increased headcount-related expenses to support these trials, and costs associated with seeking regulatory approval for our product candidates. The increase in research and development expenses was also due to an increase of $6.0 million in costs for manufacturing of active pharmaceutical ingredient and drug product to support our clinical trials, as well as an increase of $0.5 million in external costs related to discovery and preclinical development. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses allocated to trilaciclib, rintodestrant, lerociclib and unallocated research and development expenses for the periods indicated:
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses were $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $21.4 million, or 115%, was due to an increase of $8.1 million in personnel related costs due to increased headcount, of which $5.2 million related to non-cash stock compensation expense, an increase of $5.5 million in pre-commercialization activities, an increase of $3.1 million in medical affairs costs related to trilaciclib, an increase of $1.6 million in information technology systems and related expenses, and an increase of $3.1 million professional services, insurance, and other administrative costs.
Total other income (expense), net
Total other income, net was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $2.6 million was due to additional interest income earned on a higher balance of cash and cash equivalents during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred cumulative losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception in 2008. We incurred net losses of $99.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, $122.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and $85.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $436.1 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $207.3 million. To date, we have funded our operations primarily through proceeds from our initial public offering, our follow-on stock offerings, our debt agreement with Hercules Capital, and proceeds from our license agreements. Under our licensing arrangements, we are eligible to receive certain development and sales-based milestones. Our ability to earn these milestones and the timing of achieving these milestones is primarily dependent upon the outcome of the licensee’s activities and are uncertain at this time.
Follow-on offering
On March 12, 2018, we closed an underwritten public offering of 3,910,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $29.50 per share, including 510,000 shares of common stock issued upon exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares. The gross proceeds from the offering were $115.3 million and net proceeds were $107.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us.
At-the-market offering
On June 15, 2018, we entered into a sales agreement for “at the market offerings” with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”), which allows us to issue and sell shares of common stock pursuant to a shelf registration statement for total gross sales proceeds of up to $125.0 million from time to time through Cowen, acting as our agent. Between June 18, 2018 and August 2, 2018, we sold 752,008 shares of common stock pursuant to this agreement resulting in $36.1 million in net proceeds, realizing $12.1 million in the second quarter and the remaining $24.0 million by August 2, 2018.
Between January 14, 2021 and February 9, 2021, we sold 3,513,027 shares of common stock pursuant to this agreement resulting in $86.4 million in net proceeds. As of February 9, 2021, we have used the entirety of the remaining availability under the sales agreement with Cowen.
Follow-on offering
On September 21, 2018, we closed an underwritten public offering of 3,450,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $60.00 per share, including 450,000 shares of common stock issued upon exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares, pursuant to a shelf registration statement. The gross proceeds from the offering were $207.0 million and net proceeds were $194.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us.
Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules
On May 29, 2020, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc. (“Hercules”) under which Hercules has agreed to lend us up to $100.0 million, to be made available in a series of tranches, subject to specified conditions. We borrowed $20.0 million at loan closing. The term of the loan is approximately 48 months, with a maturity date of June 1, 2024. No principal payments are due during an interest-only period, commencing on the initial borrowing date and continuing through June 1, 2022. The interest only period may be extended through January 1, 2023 upon satisfaction of certain milestones. Following the interest only period, we will repay the principal balance and interest of the advances in equal monthly installments through June 1, 2024.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $83.7 million, which consisted of a net loss of $99.3 million, a decrease in net operating assets and liabilities of $4.0 million, and a decrease in non-cash equity interest of $0.9 million, partially offset by non-cash stock compensation expense of $18.8 million, $0.6 million of depreciation expense, $0.6 million in amortization of debt issuance costs, $0.3 million loss on disposal of fixed assets, and $0.2 million of non-cash interest expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $99.6 million, which consisted of a net loss of $122.4 million, partially offset by non-cash stock compensation expense of $16.4 million, working capital adjustments of $6.0 million and $0.4 million of depreciation expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in operating activities was $74.3 million, which consisted of a net loss of $85.3 million, partially offset by non-cash stock compensation expense of $10.2 million, working capital adjustments of $0.6 million and $0.2 million of depreciation expense.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represented proceeds from the disposal of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $2.7 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities represented purchases of property and equipment, primarily associated with laboratory equipment and leasehold improvements for new office space.
Net cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $21.7 million, which consisted of $2.3 million in net proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $20.0 million in proceed from our loan agreement with Hercules, partially offset by $0.6 million in payments related to debt issuances costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.7 million in net proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was $340.5 million, consisting of $338.7 million of net proceeds from our public offerings, after deducting cash paid for underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses, and $1.8 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Operating capital requirements and plan of operations
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates, and begin to commercialize COSELA. We are subject to all of the risks inherent in the development of new products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company and we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our projected cash needs for greater than 12 months following the filing of this Annual Report.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of nonclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•
the scope, prioritization and number of our research and development programs;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the extent to which we enter into non-exclusive, jointly funded clinical research collaboration arrangements, if any, for the development of our product candidates in combination with other companies’ products;
•
our ability to establish such collaborative co-development arrangements on favorable terms, if at all;
•
the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under our license agreement and any collaboration agreements into which we enter;
•
the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, clinical trial costs under future collaboration agreements, if any;
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license product candidates and technologies, such as rintodestrant, and the terms of such in-licenses;
•
the costs of future commercialization activities, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•
revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates; and
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds except for amounts included under our licensing arrangements and the loan agreement with Hercules. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our clinical trial commitments, consulting fees, operating lease commitments and long-term debt obligations. The following table summarizes these contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Represents future minimum lease payments under the non-cancelable lease for our headquarters in Research Triangle Park, NC and our former headquarters in Research Triangle Park, NC. The lease for the new office space commenced in September 2019 for approximately 60,000 square feet of laboratory space and office space in Research Triangle Park, NC. The lease will expire in September 2027, with the Company having the option to renew for an additional 5 years. The lease for our former headquarters will expire in December 2022. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
(2)
Amounts in the table reflect payments due for our loan agreement under an arrangement with Hercules for $20.0 million. The amounts in the table above reflect interest-only payments through June 1, 2022 with payments on principal beginning thereafter. For purposes of the table above, interest payments were calculated using an annual interest rate of 9.65%, which was the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, the table above includes a payment due upon maturity of the loan of $2.1 million. See Note 7 of the financial statements for further discussion of the Hercules loan agreement.
(3)
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with contract research organizations (CROs) for clinical trials and with vendors for preclinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes which are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30-60 days prior written notice. As of December 31, 2020, we have several on-going clinical studies in various stages. Under agreements with various CROs and clinical study sites, we incur expenses related to clinical studies of our product candidates and potential other clinical candidates. The timing and amounts of these disbursements are contingent upon the services rendered or as expenses are incurred by the CROs or clinical trial sites. Therefore, we cannot estimate the potential timing and amount of these payments and they have been excluded from the table above. Also, the above amounts exclude potential payments to be made under our license agreement for rintodestrant with the University of Illinois that are based on the progress of rintodestrant, as these payments are not determinable.
(4)
Effective on October 22, 2019, we entered into a Product Agreement with Patheon Manufacturing Services, LLC as issued under the Master Manufacturing Services Agreement dated August 27, 2019 to manufacture and supply trilaciclib for commercial production. The initial term of the agreement is effective until December 31, 2024. If the annual volume of product ordered does not meet a specified amount, a true-up payment to this minimum will be due at the end of the applicable year. This minimum purchase amount was excluded from the table above as the conditions of the committed amount make it undeterminable at this time.
(5)
The Company entered into a three-year co-promotion agreement in the United States and Puerto Rico with Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or BI, in June 2020. Under the terms of the agreement, we will record revenue in the United States and Puerto Rico and retain development and commercialization rights to trilaciclib. We will lead marketing, market access and medical engagement initiatives; BI will lead sales force engagements. The agreement is limited to promotional support in the U.S. for the initial extensive stage small cell lung cancer indication.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our financial statements.