Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements that are based upon current expectations and involve risks, assumptions and uncertainties.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains not only statements that are historical facts, but also statements that are forward-looking. Forward-looking statements are, by their very nature, uncertain and risky. Forward-looking statements are often identified by words like: “believe”, “expect”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, “intend”, “project” and similar expressions, or words that, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this prospectus. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results or our predictions. These risks and uncertainties include international, national, and local general economic and market conditions; our ability to sustain, manage, or forecast growth; our ability to successfully make and integrate acquisitions; new product development and introduction; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply with, government regulations; adverse publicity; competition; the loss of significant customers or suppliers; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results; change in business strategy or development plans; business disruptions; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; the ability to protect technology; the risk of foreign currency exchange rate; and other risks that might be detailed from time to time in our filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this prospectus.
Although the forward-looking statements in this annual report on Form 10-K reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such statements can only be based on facts and factors currently known by them. Consequently, and because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, the actual results and outcomes may differ materially from the results and outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. You are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in herein and in our other reports as we attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors that may affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations and prospects.
Our financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (USD or US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. All references to “common stock” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
Overview
Global Technologies, Ltd is a publicly quoted company that was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware on January 20, 1999 under the name of NEW IFT Corporation. On August 13, 1999, the Company filed an Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation with the State of Delaware to change the name of the corporation to Global Technologies, Ltd. Our principal executive offices are located at 501 1st Ave N., Suite 901, St. Petersburg, FL 33701 and our telephone number is (727) 482-1505. Our website address is www.globaltechnologiesltd.info. The information provided on our website is not part of this Annual Report and is therefore not incorporated by reference unless such information is otherwise specifically referenced elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Prior Operational History
From inception until March 2011, Global Technologies was a technology portfolio company that acquired nascent technology and related innovations, inventions and IP assets to enhance their growth and development. The Company built revenues and asset value through a model of continuous growth, income from or sale of its portfolio holdings, and technology licensing or distribution agreements.
The Company invested primarily in innovative and promising clean/renewable energy or bio-tech technologies that had reached the stage in the critical Technology Development & Demonstration phase of the Innovative Cycle, which includes Prototype, Demonstration and Market Analysis.
In March 2011, the Company abandoned its operations. Mr. Jimmy Wayne Anderson, our sole officer and director, was appointed a director of the Company in December 2017 and an officer in January 2018.
Current Operations
Global Technologies, Ltd (“Global”) is a holding corporation, which through its subsidiaries, has operations engaged in the online sales of CBD and hemp related products, the acquisition of intellectual property in the safety and security space and as a portal for entrepreneurs to provide immediate access to live shopping, e-commerce and product placement in brick and mortar retail outlets.
On November 30, 2019, the Company entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement (the “Agreement”) for the purchase of TCBM Holdings, LLC (“TCBM”). Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company issued a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of $2,000,000 to Jetco Holdings, LLC for the purchase of all issued and outstanding membership units of TCBM and its subsidiaries, HMNRTH, LLC and 911 Help Now, LLC. As of March 15, 2021, the outstanding principal and interest on the Note were $503,714 and $46,485, respectively. On this same date, the Holder agreed to forgive $253,714 in outstanding principal and all outstanding interest leaving a remaining principal balance of $250,000. On March 15, 2021, the Company issued the Holder fifty (50) shares of the Company’s Series L Preferred Stock in satisfaction of the $250,000 principal balance. As of June 30, 2021, there was no outstanding principal or interest due. Please see NOTE F - NOTES PAYABLE, THIRD PARTIES for further information.
On March 11, 2020, the Company, through its two wholly owned subsidiaries, HMNRTH, LLC (the “Seller”) and TCBM Holdings, LLC (the “Owner”) (together Seller and Owner the “Selling Parties”) entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Edison Nation, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiary, Scalematix, LLC (together the “Buyer”), for the sale of certain assets in the health and wellness industry and related consumer products industry. Under the terms of the Agreement, Buyer was to remit $70,850 via wire transfer at Closing and issue to a representative of the Selling Parties Two Hundred Thirty-Eight Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty (238,750) shares of restricted common stock. In addition, the Selling Parties shall have the right to additional earn out compensation based upon the following metrics: (i) at such time as the purchased assets achieve cumulative revenue of $2,500,000, the Selling Parties shall earn One Hundred Twenty-Five Thousand (125,000) shares of common stock; and (ii) at such time as the purchased assets achieve cumulative revenue of $5,000,000, the Selling Parties shall earn One Hundred Twenty-Five Thousand (125,000) shares of common stock. The Closing of the transaction occurred on March 11, 2020. As of the date of this filing, the Company has received the 238,750 shares of restricted common stock valued at $477,500 and the $70,850 in cash compensation due under the terms of the Agreement. The shares and cash compensation were subsequently transferred to the principal of Jetco Holdings, LLC as payment against the November 30, 2019 Convertible Promissory Note issued to Jetco Holdings, LLC.
On September 3, 2020, the Company entered into a Commitment to be Bound by the Amended Operating Agreement to Effect Transfer of Membership Interest in order to facilitate the transfer of 25 Membership Units (the “Units”) issued by Global Clean Solutions, LLC (“Global”) and held in the name of Graphene Holdings, LLC (“Graphene”) to the Company. In exchange for the transfer of the Units to the Company, the Company issued to Graphene a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of $250,000. Please see NOTE F - NOTES PAYABLE, THIRD PARTIES and NOTE M - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS for further information.
Our wholly owned subsidiaries:
About TCBM Holdings, LLC
TCBM Holdings, LLC (“TCBM”) was formed as a Delaware limited liability company on August 10, 2017. TCBM is a holding corporation, which operated through its two wholly owned subsidiaries, HMNRTH, LLC and 911 Help Now, LLC.
About HMNRTH, LLC
HMNRTH, LLC (“HMN”) was formed as a Delaware limited liability company on July 30, 2019. HMNRTH operates as an online store selling a variety of hemp and CBD related products. The Company’s business model is to bridge the gap between the lifestyle and knowledge components within the cannabis industry. The Company’s goal is to educate every consumer while cultivating an experience by providing quality products, branded cutting-edge content, and diversified product lines for any purpose. Most importantly, we want our clients to discover their inner HMN, redefine their inner HMN and Empower their inner HMN.
In order for the Company to generate revenue through HMNRTH, we will need to: (i) produce additional inventory for retail sales through the Company’s ecommerce site or sales, or (ii) sales to third party distributors, or (iii) direct sales to brick and mortar CBD retail outlets, or (iv) generate additional CBD formulas to be utilized in new products At present, the Company does not have the required capital to initiate any of the options and there is no guarantee that we will be able to raise the required funds.
About 911 Help Now, LLC
Help Now, LLC (“911”) was formed as a Delaware limited liability company on February 2, 2018. 911 was a holding company of intellectual property in the safety and security space. At present, we own no intellectual property within our 911 subsidiary. In order to generate future revenue within 911, we will need to identify and either acquire or license intellectual property. In the event of an acquisition, we will then need to either develop products utilizing our intellectual property or license out our intellectual property to a third party. There is no guarantee that we will be successful with an acquisition or licensing of any intellectual property.
About Markets on Main, LLC
Markets on Main, LLC (“MOM”) was formed as a Florida limited liability company on April 2, 2020. MOM is A full service, sales and distribution, third-party logistics provider and portal to multi-channel sales opportunities. MOM’s focus is on bringing small businesses and entrepreneurs to large opportunities and distribution. MOM will provide the following services to its clients: inventory management, brand management, fulfillment and drop-ship capabilities, retail distribution and customer service. MOM’s website can be found at www.marketsonmain.com.
Investments:
Global Clean Solutions, LLC Investment
Global Clean Solutions (“Global Clean”) was founded as a special purpose entity in the Personal Protective Equipment Industry during the initial stages of the pandemic in 2020. Its management set out with a simple mission; deliver customers PPE while removing the panic from the pandemic. Global Clean has created a solid and repeatable foundation and is able to satisfy the needs of both government municipalities and corporations that many companies have tried, and few have succeeded.
● Direct to factory relationships
● Proprietary hand sanitizer ready to ship
● Funding programs available
● Government contract expertise
● Overseas production capabilities
● Distribution centers in CA and FL
The Company elected to impair its investment in Global Clean as it does not anticipate generating any further revenue from this investment.
Services:
Consulting Services
On May 10, 2021, the Company entered into a Consulting Agreement (the “Agreement”) with CoroWare, Inc. (“CoroWare”). Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company is to prepare the following financial reports for CoroWare: (i) Registration Statement and all subsequent amendments, (ii) Quarterly Reports for the periods ended March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021, and (iii) Annual Report for the period ended December 31, 2021. The Agreement shall have a term one (1) year or until CoroWare’s Annual Report is filed with OTC Markets or the SEC. The Company shall be compensated a total of $45,000 in three equal payments of $15,000.
Plan of Operation
Our plan of operations is to raise capital through the issuance of debt and/or equity to meet our ongoing operating expenses and attempt to identify acquisition candidates to create value for our shareholders. There can be no assurance that we will successfully complete any additional acquisitions. Any merger or acquisition completed by us can be expected to have a significant dilutive effect on the percentage of shares held by our current stockholders.
Financing Needs
In order to fund our operations, we rely upon direct investments, partnerships and joint ventures with accredited investors. Once the Company becomes profitable, we intend to fund our operations from free cash flow.
At present, the Company only has sufficient funds to conduct its operations for two to three months. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to the Company, if at all.
If we are not successful in generating sufficient liquidity from Company operations or in raising sufficient capital resources, on terms acceptable to us, this could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, results of operations liquidity and financial condition.
The Company presently does not have any available credit, bank financing or other external sources of liquidity. Due to its brief history under its current business model and historical operating losses, the Company’s operations have not been a source of liquidity. The Company will need to obtain additional capital in order to expand operations and become profitable. In order to obtain capital, the Company may need to sell additional shares of its common stock or borrow funds from private lenders. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in obtaining additional funding.
The Company will need additional investments in order to continue operations. Additional investments are being sought, but the Company cannot guarantee that it will be able to obtain such investments. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. In the event there is a downturn in the U.S. stock and debt markets, this could make it more difficult to obtain financing through the issuance of equity or debt securities. Even if the Company is able to raise the funds required, it is possible that it could incur unexpected costs and expenses, fail to collect significant amounts owed to it, or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force it to seek alternative financing. Further, if the Company issues additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders.
Results from Operations - For the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
Our results of operations for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are summarized below:
Revenues
Since our inception on January 20, 1999, we have generated minimal revenue from our operations. We cannot guarantee we will be successful in our business operations. We have limited financial resources and limited operations until such time that we are able to begin to generate revenue from our own operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business plan through the acquisition of TCBM Holdings, LLC and the formation of Markets on Main, LLC, including the financial risks associated with the limited capital resources currently available to us and risks associated with the implementation of our business strategies.
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we generated $15,000 and $548,350 in revenue, respectively. Our revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 was 100% comprised of consulting revenue with one customer. Our revenue for the year ended June 30, 2020 was 100% comprised of the sale of hemp and CBD inventory through our subsidiary. HMNRTH, LLC. The sale of inventory was part of the normal operations of the Company, and it is anticipated that we will recognize similar operating activity with other customers during fiscal 2022. The lack of revenue from HMNRTH during the year ended June 30, 2021 was largely attributable to the Company’s inability to raise capital for inventory. The Company is in discussions with the manufacturer of its CBD products to formulate two new flavors upon successful financing.
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, our cost of goods sold was $0 and $70,850, respectively. The makeup of the cost of goods sold for the year ended June 30, 2020 was 100% comprised of costs for the development and production of the hemp and CBD products sold.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses were $366,804 and $709,736 for years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We incurred $0 and $0 in advertising expenses for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We incurred $80,000 (including $40,000 stock-based compensation) and $80,000 (including $40,000 stock-based compensation) in officer and director related expenses for years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company anticipates that these expenses will increase during fiscal 2022 as the Company expands the operations of Markets on Main and the Company will need to expand its management and ancillary staff.
Loss from Operations
The Company’s loss from operations increased to $(351,804) for the year ended June 30, 2021 from $(232,236) in 2020, an increase of $(119,568). The increase in loss from operations is largely attributable to a decrease in revenue and increase in selling, general and administrative expenses during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other Income (Expenses) included interest expense, interest income, gain on derivative liability, investment income, forgiveness of debt and accrued interest, loss on issuance of convertible notes and amortization of debt discounts in the amount of $(3,876,857) during the year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to $(318,705) the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in other income (expenses) during the year ended June 30, 2021 is largely attributable to the Company’s loss on issuance of convertible notes in the amount of $(2,759,425), amortization of debt discounts in the amount of $(841,124) and impairment of goodwill in the amount of $(473,322).
Net Income (Loss)
For the year ended June 30, 2021, our net loss increased to $(4,228,661), as compared to a net loss of $(550,941) for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of $(3,677,720). The increase in net loss is largely attributable to the Company’s loss on issuance of convertible notes, amortization of debt discounts and impairment of goodwill.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash on Hand
Our cash on hand as of June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 was $56,300 and $25, respectively.
We currently have no external sources of liquidity such as arrangements with credit institutions or off-balance sheet arrangements that will have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition or immediate access to capital.
We are dependent on the sale of our securities or issuance of debt to fund our operations and will remain so until we generate sufficient revenues to pay for our operating costs. Our officers and directors have made no written commitments with respect to providing a source of liquidity in the form of cash advances, loans and/or financial guarantees.
If we are unable to raise the funds, we will seek alternative financing through means such as borrowings from institutions or private individuals. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations from the sale of our securities. We have not located any sources for these funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations. If we fail to raise funds, we expect that we will be required to seek protection from creditors under applicable bankruptcy laws.
Our independent registered public accounting firm has expressed doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and believes that our ability is dependent on our ability to implement our business plan, raise capital and generate revenues. Please see NOTE L- GOING CONCERN UNCERTAINTY for further information.
Notes payable, third parties
Our Notes payable third parties were $649,750 and $1,293,027 at June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. Please see NOTE F - NOTES PAYABLE, THIRD PARTIES for a full schedule of all notes payable to third parties, including issue date, maturity date and interest rate.
Notes payable, related parties
Our Note payable related party was $0 and $124,800 June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. Please see NOTE G - NOTE PAYABLE, RELATED PARTY for a full schedule of all notes payable to related parties, including issue date, maturity date and interest rate.
Use of Cash
We had net cash provided (used) in operating activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 of $(141,564) and $(176,789), respectively.
We had net cash provided (used) in investing activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 of $- and $-, respectively.
We had net cash provided (used) by financing activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 of $197,839 and $176,814, respectively.
Our cash flows for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are summarized below: