Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview
Introduction. The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Gray Television, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (except as the context otherwise provides, “Gray,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere herein.
This section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. A detailed discussion of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Business Overview. We are a television broadcast company headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia, that is the largest owner of top-rated local television stations and digital assets in the United States. We currently own and/or operate television stations and leading digital properties in 94 television markets that collectively reach approximately 24% of US television households. During 2020, our stations were ranked first in average all-day ratings in 70 markets, and ranked first and/or second in 86 markets, as calculated by Comscore’s audience measurement service. We also own video program production, marketing, and digital businesses including Raycom Sports, Tupelo-Raycom, and RTM Studios, the producer of Power Nation programs and content, which we refer to collectively as our “production companies.”
Our operating revenues are derived primarily from broadcast and internet advertising, retransmission consent fees and, to a lesser extent, other sources such as production of television and event programming, television commercials, tower rentals and management fees. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we generated revenue of $2.4 billion, $2.1 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively.
Impact of COVID-19 global pandemic and Related Government Restrictions on our Markets and Operations. The impact of COVID-19 global pandemic and measures to prevent its spread are affecting our businesses in a number of ways. We have experienced a disruption in creation of content that we broadcast on our television stations and of events and programs we produce at our production companies, including the cancellation of certain sports events and the shutting down of production of certain television content. The extent to which the COVID-19 global pandemic impacts our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict or assess, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; the negative impact it has on global and regional economies and economic activity, changes in advertising customers and consumer behavior, impact of governmental regulations that might be imposed in response to the pandemic; its short and longer-term impact on the levels of consumer confidence; actions governments, businesses and individuals take in response to the pandemic; and how quickly economies recover after the COVID-19 global pandemic subsides. The COVID-19 global pandemic’s impact on the capital markets could impact our cost of borrowing.
We have been actively monitoring the global outbreak and spread of COVID-19 and taking steps to mitigate the risks posed by its spread and related circumstances and impacts. We are focused on navigating the challenges presented by the COVID-19 global pandemic through protecting the safety of our employees, seeking to maintain revenues, reducing expenses and delaying capital expenditures. There are certain limitations on our ability to mitigate the adverse financial impact of the pandemic, including the high fixed-cost nature of our businesses. The COVID-19 global pandemic also makes it more challenging for management to estimate future performance of our businesses, particularly over the near to medium term, and consequently the broader impact that it could have on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. See “The novel coronavirus disease and its related diseases (“COVID-19”) global pandemic has had and is expected to continue to have an adverse impact on our business.” in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Since March 2020, most of our employees have been working from home, with only essential employees working on site. For employees working on site, we have instituted social distancing protocols, increased the level of cleaning and sanitizing in those sites and undertaken other actions to make these sites safer. We have reduced employee travel to only essential business needs. We are generally following the requirements and protocols published by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the World Health Organization and state and local governments. We cannot predict when or how we will begin to curtail these efforts or lift these restrictions, including work from home requirements and travel restrictions. Currently, we do not believe our work from home protocol has adversely impacted our internal controls, financial reporting systems or our operations.
Impact of Coronavirus Relief Measures. In response to the COVID-19 global pandemic, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in March 2020. The CARES Act and related rules and guidelines include several significant provisions, including delaying certain payroll tax payments, mandatory transition tax payments, and estimated income tax payments that we are deferring to future periods. We do not expect the CARES Act to have a material impact on our financial condition, including on our estimated effective tax rate or our liquidity. We will continue to monitor and assess the impact that the CARES Act and all other current or future federal and state relief measures may have on our business, financial condition or results of operations.
Pending Acquisition of Quincy Media. On January 31, 2021, we entered into an agreement with, among others, Quincy Media, Inc. (“Quincy”), to acquire all of the outstanding shares of capital stock of Quincy for $925 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments, including, among other things, adjustments based on a determination of net working capital, cash, transaction expenses and indebtedness, as provided in the purchase agreement (the “Quincy Transaction”). Upon closing the Quincy Transaction, and net of divestitures required to meet regulatory requirements, we will own television stations serving 102 television markets that collectively will reach over 25% of US television households, including the number-one ranked television station in 77 markets and the first and/or second highest ranked television station in 93 markets according to Comscore’s average all-day ratings for calendar year 2020.
The completion of the Quincy Transaction is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain customary conditions, including, among others: (i) the receipt of approval from the FCC and the expiration or early termination of the waiting period applicable to the Quincy Transaction under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended, and (ii) the absence of certain legal impediments to the consummation of the Quincy Transaction. We believe that the Quincy Transaction will be completed during the second or third quarter of 2021. Either party may terminate the Quincy purchase agreement if the Quincy Transaction is not consummated on or before January 31, 2022, with an automatic extension to May 1, 2022, if necessary, to obtain regulatory approval under the circumstances specified in the Quincy purchase agreement. The purchase agreement includes a provision that we must pay a termination fee of $25 million if the purchase agreement is terminated as a result of a failure to satisfy certain regulatory approvals.
Revenues, Operations, Cyclicality and Seasonality. Broadcast advertising is sold for placement generally preceding or following a television station’s network programming and within local and syndicated programming. Broadcast advertising is sold in time increments and is priced primarily on the basis of a program’s popularity among the specific audience an advertiser desires to reach. In addition, broadcast advertising rates are affected by the number of advertisers competing for the available time, the size and demographic makeup of the market served by the station and the availability of alternative advertising media in the market area. Broadcast advertising rates are generally the highest during the most desirable viewing hours, with corresponding reductions during other hours. The ratings of a local station affiliated with a major network can be affected by ratings of network programming. Most advertising contracts are short-term, and generally run only for a few weeks.
We also sell internet advertising on our stations’ websites and mobile apps. These advertisements may be sold as banner advertisements, video advertisements and other types of advertisements or sponsorships.
Our broadcast and internet advertising revenues are affected by several factors that we consider to be seasonal in nature. These factors include:
●
Spending by political candidates, political parties and special interest groups increases during the even-numbered “on-year” of the two-year election cycle. This political spending typically is heaviest during the fourth quarter of such years;
●
Broadcast advertising revenue is generally highest in the second and fourth quarters each year. This seasonality results partly from increases in advertising in the spring and in the period leading up to, and including, the holiday season;
●
Local and national advertising revenue on our NBC-affiliated stations increases in certain years as a result of broadcasts of the Olympic Games; and
●
Because our stations and markets are not evenly divided among the Big Four broadcast networks, our local and national advertising revenue can fluctuate between years related to which network broadcasts the Super Bowl.
Automotive advertisers have traditionally accounted for a significant portion of our revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we derived approximately 21% and 25% respectively, of our total broadcast advertising revenue (excluding political advertising revenue) from customers in the automotive industry. Strong demand for our advertising inventory from political advertisers can require significant use of available inventory, which in turn can lower our advertising revenue from our non-political advertising revenue categories in the even numbered “on-year” of the two-year election cycle. These temporary declines are expected to reverse in the following “off-year” of the two-year election cycle.
While our total revenues have increased in recent years as a result of our acquisitions, our revenue remains under pressure from the impact on the advertising market as a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic and from the internet as a competitor for advertising spending. We have been taking steps to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 and we continue to enhance and market our internet websites in an effort to generate additional revenue. Our aggregate internet revenue is derived from both advertising and sponsorship opportunities directly on our websites.
Our primary broadcasting operating expenses are employee compensation, related benefits and programming costs. In addition, the broadcasting operations incur overhead expenses, such as maintenance, supplies, insurance, rent and utilities. A large portion of the operating expenses of our broadcasting operations is fixed. We continue to monitor our operating expenses and seek opportunities to reduce them where possible.
Please see our “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections below for further discussion of our operating results.
Risk Factors. The broadcast television industry relies primarily on advertising revenue and faces significant competition. For a discussion of certain other presently known, significant risk factors that may affect our business, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere herein.
Revenue
Set forth below are the principal types of revenue, less agency commissions, and the percentage contribution of each to our total revenue (dollars in millions):
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 (“2020”) Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019 (“2019”)
Revenue. Total revenue increased approximately $259 million, or 12%, to $2.4 billion for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of increased political advertising revenue, due to 2020 being the “on-year” of the two-year election cycle and increases in retransmission consent revenue. Political advertising revenue increased approximately $362 million, or 532% to $430 million. Retransmission consent revenue increased by approximately $71 million or 9% to $867 million primarily due to higher retransmission consent rates. Combined, local and national advertising revenue decreased by $158 million or 14% to $969 million and production company revenue decreased by $26 million to $61 million. We attribute these decreases primarily to the effects of the COVID-19 global pandemic which has affected our customers and our sports and event programming. Local and national revenue from the broadcast of the 2020 Super Bowl on our FOX-affiliated stations was approximately $3 million, compared to $5 million that we earned from the broadcast of the 2019 Super Bowl on our CBS-affiliated stations.
Broadcast operating expenses. Broadcast operating expenses (before depreciation, amortization and gain on disposal of assets) increased $15 million, or 1%, to $1.3 billion for 2020, compared to 2019. Compensation expenses decreased by approximately $9 million in 2020. Non-payroll broadcast operating expenses increased by approximately $24 million which included retransmission expense that increased by $76 million in 2020 consistent with the increased retransmission consent revenue. Bad debt expense decreased by approximately $8 million in 2020, due to consistency of the balance of accounts receivable and the related reserves, compared to the significant increase in 2019 related to balances acquired in the Raycom Merger. Broadcast transaction related expenses were not significant in 2020, compared to $45 million in 2019. We recorded broadcast non-cash stock-based amortization expense of $5 million in each of 2020 and 2019.
Production Company Operating Expenses. Production company operating expenses (before depreciation, amortization and gain on disposal of assets) decreased by approximately $22 million in 2020 to $52 million, compared to $74 million 2019. Compensation expenses decreased by $4 million, and non-compensation expenses decreased by $18 million in 2020. These decreases were primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 global pandemic.
Corporate and administrative expenses. Corporate and administrative expenses (before depreciation, amortization and gain or loss on disposal of assets) decreased by $39 million, or 38%, to $65 million in 2020 compared to 2019. These decreases were the result of a decrease of $33 million of transaction related expenses incurred in 2019 that did not re-occur in the current year. In addition, other corporate expenses decreased by a further $6 million in 2020. We recorded corporate non-cash stock-based amortization expense of $11 million in each of 2020 and 2019.
Depreciation. Depreciation of property and equipment totaled $96 million and $80 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Depreciation expense increased due to purchases of property and equipment at our existing stations.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets totaled $105 million and $115 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Amortization expense decreased primarily due to finite-lived intangible assets acquired in prior years becoming fully amortized.
Gain on disposal of assets, net. We reported gains on disposals of assets of $29 million in 2020 and $54 million in 2019. These gains were primarily related to asset disposals from the FCC Repack process. During 2019, we also recorded a gain of $19 million related to the divestiture of television stations to facilitate regulatory approval of the television stations acquired in 2019.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased $36 million, or 16%, to $191 million for 2020 compared to 2019 due to decreases in the average interest rates. During 2020, the average interest rate on our senior credit facility, excluding the amortization of deferred financing costs, decreased to 3.0% from 4.7% in 2019.
Income tax expense. Our effective income tax rate decreased to a net provision of 25% for 2020 from 30% for 2019. Our effective income tax rates differed from the statutory rate due to the following items:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General. The following tables present data that we believe is helpful in evaluating our liquidity and capital resources (dollars in millions):
Financing Transactions. On October 19, 2020, we issued $800 million of our 2030 Notes and used the net proceeds therefrom, after deducting transaction fees and estimated expenses, to redeem all of our outstanding 2024 Notes and to pay all fees and expenses in connection with the offering, including the redemption premium applicable to the 2024 Notes. We intend to use the remaining net proceeds to complete our pending acquisitions and for general corporate purposes, which could include the repayment of outstanding debt from time to time.
The interest rate and yield on the 2030 Notes is 4.75%. The 2030 Notes rank equally with the 2027 Notes and the 2026 Notes. The 2030 Notes mature on October 15, 2030 and interest is payable semiannually, on April 15 and October 15 of each year.
Income Taxes. We file a consolidated federal income tax return and such state or local tax returns as are required based on our current forecasts. We estimate that these income tax payments, net of refunds, will be within a range of $21 million to $23 million in 2021.
Dividend on common stock and Class A common stock. On February 24, 2021, the Board declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.08 per share of its common stock and Class A common stock. The first dividend is payable on March 31, 2021, to stockholders of record on March 15, 2021.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating, Investing and Financing Activities - 2020 Compared to 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $267 million to $652 million in 2020 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $385 million in 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to the net impact of several factors including: an increase in net income of $231 million; a net increase of $71 million in non-cash expenses; and a decrease of $35 million due to changes in working capital balances.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $2.4 billion to $211 million for 2020 compared to $2.7 billion for 2019. The net decrease was due primarily to $2.8 billion of cash used to finance our acquisitions of businesses in 2019. In 2020, we completed only $91 million of acquisition transactions. Other significant changes in 2020 compared to 2019 included the receipt in 2019 of $253 million in proceeds from the divestiture of television stations to facilitate regulatory approval of our acquisitions of businesses in 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $120 million in 2020 compared to $1.1 billion in 2019. This decrease of $944 million was due primarily to the borrowings of $1.4 billion in term loan financing to fund a portion of the cash consideration of the Raycom Merger in 2019 compared to issuance of $800 million of our 2030 Notes in 2020. During 2020, we redeemed our 2024 Notes in the amount of $525 million. During 2019, we made total payments of $211 million to reduce the balance outstanding of our 2019 Term Loan. Also during 2020, we used $75 million of cash to repurchase shares of our common stock compared to $32 million in 2019. During 2020, we used $52 million of cash to pay dividends on our Series A Perpetual Preferred stock, compared to $39 million in 2019. During 2020, we paid $14 million of deferred loan costs related to the 2030 Notes compared to $50 million related the refinancing of our 2019 Senior Credit facility and 2027 Notes in 2019.
Retirement Plans
We sponsor and contribute to defined benefit and defined contribution retirement plans. Our defined benefit pension plan is the Gray Television, Inc. Retirement Plan (the “Gray Pension Plan”). Benefits under the Gray Pension Plan are frozen and can no longer increase, and no new participants can be added to the plan.
Our funding policy is consistent with the funding requirements of existing federal laws and regulations under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. A discount rate is selected annually to measure the present value of the benefit obligations. In determining the selection of a discount rate, we estimated the timing and amounts of expected future benefit payments and applied a yield curve developed to reflect yields available on high-quality bonds. The yield curve is based on an externally published index specifically designed to meet the criteria of United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The discount rate selected for determining benefit obligations as of December 31, 2020 was 2.38%, which reflects the results of this yield curve analysis. The discount rate used for determining benefit obligations as of December 31, 2019 was 3.14%. Our assumptions regarding expected return on plan assets reflects asset allocations, the investment strategy and the views of investment managers, as well as historical experience. In 2020, we use an assumed rate of return of 6.50% for our assets invested in the Gray Pension Plan. The estimated asset returns for this plan, calculated on a mean market value assuming mid-year contributions and benefit payments, were a gain of 11.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and a loss of 17.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other significant assumptions relate to inflation, retirement and mortality rates. Our inflation assumption is based on an evaluation of external market indicators. Retirement rates are based on actual plan experience and mortality rates are based on the Pri-2012 total mortality table and the MP-2020 projection scale published by the Society of Actuaries.
During each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we contributed an aggregate of $3 million to the Gray Pension Plan, and we anticipate making an aggregate contribution of approximately $4 million to the Gray Pension Plan in 2021. The use of significantly different assumptions, or if actual experienced results differ significantly from those assumed, could result in our funding obligations being materially different.
The Gray Television, Inc. Capital Accumulation Plan (the “Capital Accumulation Plan”) is a defined contribution plan intended to meet the requirements of section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Beginning in 2019, employer contributions under the Capital Accumulation Plan include matching cash contributions at a rate of 100% of the first 1% of each employee’s salary deferral, and 50% of the next 5% of each employee’s salary deferral. In addition, the Company, at its discretion, may make an additional profit-sharing contribution, based on annual Company performance, to those employees who meet certain criteria. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our matching contributions to our Capital Accumulation Plan were approximately $13 million and $11, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we accrued contributions of approximately $6 million and $5 million respectively, as discretionary profit-sharing contributions. Each of these discretionary profit-sharing contributions was subsequently made in the form of shares of our common stock.
See Note 11 “Retirement Plans” of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein for further information concerning the retirement plans.
Capital Expenditures
In April 2017, the FCC began the process of requiring certain television stations to change channels and/or modify their transmission facilities (“Repack”). Capital expenditures, including Repack, for each of the 2020 and 2019 periods were $110 million. Excluding Repack, our capital expenditures were $87 million and $89 million, respectively. Our capitalized Repack costs for the 2020 and 2019 periods were $23 million and $21 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the amount requested from the FCC for Repack, but not yet received, was approximately $7 million. Excluding Repack, we expect that our capital expenditures will be approximately $80 million during 2021. Additional capital expenditures for Repack during 2021 are expected to be approximately $7 million and we anticipate being reimbursed for the majority of these Repack costs. However, reimbursement may be received in periods subsequent to those in which they were expended.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Operating Commitments. We have various commitments for syndicated television programs.
We have two types of syndicated television program contracts: first run programs and off network reruns. First run programs are programs such as Wheel of Fortune and off network reruns are programs such as Seinfeld. First run programs have not been produced at the time the contract to air such programming is signed, and off network reruns have already been produced. For all syndicated television contracts, we record an asset and corresponding liability for payments to be made only for the current year of the first run programming and for the entire contract period for off network programming. Only an estimate of the payments anticipated to be made in the year following the balance sheet date of the first run contracts are recorded on the current balance sheet, because the programs for the later years of the contract period have not been produced or delivered.
The total license fee payable under a program license agreement allowing us to broadcast programs is recorded at the beginning of the license period and is charged to operating expense over the period that the programs are broadcast. The portion of the unamortized balance expected to be charged to operating expense in the succeeding year is classified as a current asset, with the remainder classified as a non-current asset. The liability for license fees payable under program license agreements is classified as current or long-term, in accordance with the payment terms of the various license agreements.
Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations as of December 31, 2020. The following table aggregates our material expected contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in millions):
(1) “Long-term debt obligations” represent current and long-term principal payment obligations under the 2019 Senior Credit Facility, 2030 Notes, 2027 Notes and 2026 Notes at December 31, 2020. These amounts are recorded as liabilities as of the balance sheet date net of the $61 million of unamortized deferred loan costs and unamortized original issue premium on the 2026 Notes. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on the balance outstanding under the 2019 Senior Credit Facility was 2.6%, excluding amortization of deferred financing costs. As of December 31, 2020, the coupon interest rate and the yield on the 2030 Notes were each 4.75%. As of December 31, 2020, the coupon interest rate and the yield on the 2027 Notes were each 7%. As of December 31, 2020, the coupon interest rate and the yield on the 2026 Notes were each 5.875% and 5.398%, respectively. See Note 4 “Long-term Debt” to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein for more information on the 2019 Senior Credit Facility.
(2)
“Accrued interest” represents interest on long-term debt obligations accrued as of December 31, 2020.
(3)
“Accrued Preferred Stock dividends” represents accrued dividends as of December 31, 2020, that were paid according to their terms on January 15, 2021. Please refer to Note 7 “Preferred Stock” of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein for further information.
(4)
“Programming obligations currently accrued” represents obligations for syndicated television programming whose license period has begun and the product is available. These amounts are recorded as liabilities as of the current balance sheet date.
(5)
“Operating lease obligations” represents the gross accrued current and long-term lease payment obligations due under non-cancellable leases, including amounts representing imputed interest. Please refer to Note 9 “Leases” of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein for further information.
(6) “Cash interest on long-term debt obligations” consists of estimated interest expense on long-term debt excluding interest expense accrued as of December 31, 2020 described in note (2) above. The estimate is based upon debt balances as of December 31, 2020 and required future principal repayments under those obligations. The 2030 Notes, 2027 Notes and 2026 Notes mature on October 15, 2030, May 15, 2027, and July 15, 2026, respectively. The maturity date of the term loan under the 2019 Senior Credit Facility is February 7, 2024. This estimate of cash interest on long-term debt obligations assumes that current interest rates will remain consistent and the principal obligations underlying these interest estimates will not be replaced by other long-term obligations prior to or upon their maturity.
(7)
“Preferred Stock dividends” represents estimated dividends payable on our Preferred Stock excluding accrued dividends as of December 31, 2020 described in note (3) above. For the column headed “More than 5 Years” we cannot estimate an amount, due to the perpetual nature of the preferred stock. Please refer to Note 7 “Preferred Stock” for further information.
(8) “Programming obligations not currently accrued” represent obligations for syndicated television programming whose license period has not yet begun or the product is not yet available. These amounts are not recorded as liabilities as of the current balance sheet date.
(9) “Network affiliation agreements” represent the fixed obligations under our current agreements with broadcast networks. Our network affiliation agreements expire at various dates primarily through December 2023.
(10) “Service and other agreements” represents minimum amounts payable for various non-cancelable contractual agreements for maintenance services and other professional services.
Estimates of the amount, timing and future funding obligations under our pension plan include assumptions concerning, among other things, actual and projected market performance of plan assets, investment yields, statutory requirements and demographic data for pension plan participants. Pension plan funding estimates are therefore not included in the table above because the timing and amounts of funding obligations for all future periods cannot be reasonably determined. We expect to contribute approximately $4 million in total to our defined benefit pension plan during 2021.
Inflation
The impact of inflation on operations has not been significant to date. However, there can be no assurance that a high rate of inflation in the future would not have an adverse effect on operating results, particularly since amounts outstanding under the 2019 Senior Credit Facility incur interest at a variable rate.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make judgments and estimations that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those reported amounts. We consider our accounting policies relating to intangible assets and income taxes to be critical policies that require significant judgments or estimations in their application where variances may result in significant differences to future reported results. Our policies concerning intangible assets and income taxes are disclosed below.
Annual Impairment Testing of Broadcast Licenses and Goodwill. We evaluate broadcast licenses and goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or more often when certain triggering events occur. Goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level.
In the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 global pandemic and measures to prevent its spread began to affect our businesses in a number of ways. In the first quarter of 2020, we concluded that the uncertainties surrounding this event were a triggering event that required us to evaluate whether or not it was more likely than not that the value of our goodwill and other intangible assets were impaired. Based upon our analysis of both qualitative and quantitative factors, we concluded that such assets were not impaired. We will continue to evaluate both the subjective and objective criteria that may cause us to re-evaluate this conclusion in the future.
In the performance of our annual broadcast license and reporting unit impairment assessments, we have the option of performing a qualitative assessment to determine if it is more likely than not that the respective asset has been impaired. In 2020, we performed a qualitative assessment for 55 of our broadcast licenses and 36 of our reporting units. In 2019, we performed a qualitative assessment for 53 of our broadcast licenses and 43 of our reporting units.
As part of this qualitative assessment we evaluate the relative impact of factors that are specific to the reporting units as well as industry, regulatory, and macroeconomic factors that could affect the significant inputs used to determine the fair value of the assets. We also consider the significance of the excess fair value over the carrying value reflected in prior quantitative assessments and the changes to the reporting units’ carrying value since the last impairment test.
If we conclude that it is more likely than not that a broadcast license or reporting unit is impaired, or if we elect not to perform the optional qualitative assessment, we perform the quantitative assessment which involves comparing the estimated fair value of the broadcast license or reporting unit to its respective carrying value.
For our annual broadcast licenses impairment test in 2020, we concluded that it was more likely than not that all of our broadcast licenses that were evaluated were not impaired based upon our qualitative assessments. We elected to perform a quantitative assessment for our remaining broadcast licenses and concluded that their fair values exceeded their carrying values. To estimate the fair value of our broadcast licenses, we utilize a discounted cash flow model assuming an initial hypothetical start-up operation maturing into an average performing station in a specific television market and giving consideration to other relevant factors such as the technical qualities of the broadcast license and the number of competing broadcast licenses within that market.
For our annual goodwill impairment test in 2020, we concluded that it was more likely than not that goodwill was not impaired based upon our qualitative assessments for our reporting units. We elected to perform a quantitative assessment for our remaining reporting units and concluded that their fair values exceeded their carrying values. To estimate the fair value of our reporting units, we utilize a discounted cash flow model supported by a market multiple approach. We believe that a discounted cash flow analysis is the most appropriate methodology to test the recorded value of long-term assets with a demonstrated long-lived/enduring franchise value. We believe the results of the discounted cash flow and market multiple approaches provide reasonable estimates of the fair value of our reporting units because these approaches are based on our actual results and reasonable estimates of future performance, and also take into consideration a number of other factors deemed relevant by us including, but not limited to, expected future market revenue growth, market revenue shares and operating profit margins. We have historically used these approaches in determining the value of our reporting units. We also consider a market multiple approach to corroborate our discounted cash flow analysis. We believe that this methodology is consistent with the approach that a strategic market participant would utilize if they were to value one of our television stations.
We believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized appropriate assumptions to evaluate whether the fair values of our broadcast licenses and reporting units were less than their carrying values. If future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, including future events such as a deterioration of market conditions or significant increases in discount rates, we could be exposed to impairment charges in the future. Any resulting impairment loss could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and consolidated statements of cash flows.
The recorded value of our broadcast licenses was $3.6 billion at each of December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the recorded value of our goodwill was $1.5 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively. See Note 13 “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein, for the results of our annual impairment tests for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Valuation of Network Affiliation Agreements. We believe that the value of a television station is derived primarily from the attributes of its broadcast license rather than its network affiliation agreement. These attributes have a significant impact on the audience for network programming in a local television market compared to the national viewing patterns of the same network programming.
Certain other broadcasting companies have valued their stations on the basis that it is the network affiliation and not the other attributes of the station, including its broadcast license, which contributes to the operational performance of that station. As a result, we believe that these broadcasting companies allocate a significant portion of the purchase price for any station that they may acquire to the network affiliation relationship and include in their network affiliation valuation amounts related to attributes which we believe are more appropriately reflected in the value of the broadcast license or reporting units.
The methodology we used to value our stations was based on our evaluation of the broadcast licenses acquired and the characteristics of the markets in which they operated. Given our assumptions and the specific attributes of the stations we acquired from 2002 through December 31, 2020, we generally ascribe no incremental value to the incumbent network affiliation relationship in each market beyond the cost of negotiating a new agreement with another network and the value of any terms of the affiliation agreement that were more favorable or unfavorable than those generally prevailing in the market. Due to certain characteristics of a small number of the stations acquired in 2020 and 2019, we ascribed approximately $11 million and $50 million of the value of those transactions to network affiliations, respectively.
Some broadcast companies may use methods to value acquired network affiliations different than those that we use. These different methods may result in significant variances in the amount of purchase price allocated to these assets among broadcast companies.
If we were to assign higher values to all of our network affiliations and less value to our broadcast licenses or goodwill and if it is further assumed that such higher values of the network affiliations are finite-lived intangible assets, this reallocation of value might have a significant impact on our operating results. There is diversity of practice within the industry, and some broadcast companies have considered such network affiliation intangible assets to have a life ranging from 15 to 40 years depending on the specific assumptions utilized by those broadcast companies.
The following table reflects the hypothetical impact of the reassignment of value from broadcast licenses to network affiliations for our historical acquisitions (the first acquisition being in 1994) and the resulting increase in amortization expense assuming a hypothetical 15-year amortization period as of our most recent impairment testing date of December 31, 2020 (in millions, except per share data):
For future acquisitions, if any, the valuation of the network affiliations may differ from the values of previous acquisitions due to the different characteristics of each station and the market in which it operates.
Income Taxes. As of December 31, 2020, we have an aggregate of approximately $204 million of federal operating loss carryforwards that expire at various dates between the years 2023 through 2037. We project to have federal taxable income in the carryforward periods. Therefore, we believe that it is more likely than not that all of the federal operating loss carryforwards will be utilized. We have an aggregate of approximately $567 million of various state operating loss carryforwards. We expect to have state taxable income in the carryforward periods. Therefore, we believe that it is more likely than not that approximately half of the state operating loss carryforwards will be utilized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. See Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein for more information.