Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Restatement
As described in the Explanatory Note above and in Note 2 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements,” we have restated our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017.
General
On June 14, 2018, we completed the $349.8 million acquisition of Layne Christensen Company (“Layne”), a U.S.-based global water management, infrastructure services and drilling company in a stock-for-stock merger which was comprised of $321.0 million in Company common stock, $28.8 million in cash to settle all outstanding stock options, restricted stock awards and unvested Layne performance shares and we assumed $191.5 million in convertible notes at fair value. On April 3, 2018, we acquired LiquiForce, a privately owned company which provides sewer lining rehabilitation services to public and private sector water and wastewater customers in both Canada and the U.S. We acquired LiquiForce for $35.9 million in cash primarily borrowed under our revolving credit facility. See Notes 3 and 15 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further discussion of Layne and Liquiforce acquisitions. On May 22, 2019, we acquired certain assets and equipment of Lametti & Sons, Inc. a Minnesota-based company with expertise in cured-in-place pipe rehabilitation and trenchless renewal for $6.2 million in cash.
We deliver infrastructure solutions for public and private clients primarily in the United States. We are one of the largest diversified infrastructure companies in the United States. Within the public sector, we primarily concentrate on heavy-civil infrastructure projects, including the construction of streets, roads, highways, mass transit facilities, airport infrastructure, bridges, trenchless and underground utilities, power-related facilities, water-related facilities, well drilling, utilities, tunnels, dams and other infrastructure-related projects. Within the private sector, we perform site preparation, mining services and infrastructure services for residential development, energy development, commercial and industrial sites, and other facilities, as well as provide construction management professional services.
Our reportable business segments are the same as our operating segments and correspond with how our chief operating decision maker (our President) regularly reviews financial information to allocate resources and assess performance. Our reportable business segments are: Transportation, Water, Specialty and Materials. See Note 22 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information about our reportable business segments. In addition to business segments, we review our business by operating groups. In alphabetical order, our operating groups are defined as follows: (i) California; (ii) Federal, which primarily includes offices in California, Colorado, Texas and Guam; (iii) Heavy Civil, which primarily includes offices in California, Florida and Texas (the New York office was closed in January 2021); (iv) Midwest, which primarily includes offices in Illinois; (v) Northwest, which primarily includes offices in Alaska, Arizona, Nevada, Utah and Washington; and (vi) Water and Mineral Services, which includes offices across the United States, Canada and Mexico.
The five primary economic drivers of our business are (i) the overall health of the U.S. economy; (ii) federal, state and local public funding levels; (iii) population growth resulting in public and private development; (iv) the need to build, replace or repair aging infrastructure; and (v) the pricing of certain commodity related products. A stagnant or declining economy will generally result in reduced demand for construction and construction materials in the private sector. This reduced demand increases competition for private sector projects and will ultimately also increase competition in the public sector as companies migrate from bidding on scarce private sector work to projects in the public sector. In addition, a stagnant or declining economy tends to produce less tax revenue for public agencies, thereby decreasing a source of funds available for spending on public infrastructure improvements. Some funding sources that have been specifically earmarked for infrastructure spending, such as diesel and gasoline taxes, are not as directly affected by a stagnant or declining economy, unless actual consumption is reduced or gasoline sales tax revenues decline consistent with fuel prices. However, even these can be temporarily at risk as federal, state and local governments take actions to balance their budgets. Additionally, fuel prices and more fuel efficient vehicles can have a dampening effect on consumption, resulting in overall lower tax revenue. Conversely, increased levels of public funding as well as an expanding or robust economy will generally increase demand for our services and provide opportunities for revenue growth and margin improvement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates and related judgments and assumptions are continually evaluated based on available information and experiences; however, actual amounts could differ from those estimates.
The following are accounting policies and estimates that involve significant management judgment and can have significant effects on the Company’s reported results of operations. The Audit/Compliance Committee of our Board of Directors has reviewed our disclosure of critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is primarily derived from construction contracts that can span several quarters or years in our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments and from sales of construction related materials in our Materials segment. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and subsequently issued additional related ASUs (“Topic 606”), which we adopted on January 1, 2018. Topic 606 provides for a five-step model for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers as follows:
1.
Identify the contract
2.
Identify performance obligations
3.
Determine the transaction price
4.
Allocate the transaction price
5.
Recognize revenue
Generally, our contracts contain one performance obligation. Contracts with customers in our Materials segment are typically defined by our customary business practices and are valued at the contractual selling price per unit. Our customary business practices are for the delivery of a separately identifiable good at a point in time which is typically when delivery to the customer occurs. Contracts in our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments may contain multiple distinct promises or multiple contracts within a master agreement (e.g. contracts that cross multiple locations/geographies and task orders), which we review at contract inception to determine if they represent multiple performance obligations or multiple separate contracts. This review consists of determining if promises or groups of promises are distinct within the context of the contract, including whether contracts are physically contiguous, contain task orders, purchase or sales orders, termination clauses and/or elements not related to design and/or build.
The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. The contractual consideration from customers of our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments may include both fixed amounts and variable amounts (e.g. bonuses/incentives or penalties/liquidated damages) to the extent that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved (i.e., probable and estimable). When a contract has a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is attributed to that performance obligation. When a contract has more than one performance obligation, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on estimated relative standalone selling prices of the goods or services at the inception of the contract, which typically is determined using cost plus an appropriate margin.
Subsequent to the inception of a contract in our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments, the transaction price could change for various reasons, including executed or unapproved change orders and unresolved contract modifications and/or affirmative claims. Changes that are accounted for as an adjustment to existing performance obligations are allocated on the same basis at contract inception. Otherwise, changes are accounted for as separate performance obligation(s) and the separate transaction price is allocated as discussed above.
Changes are made to the transaction price from unapproved change orders to the extent the amount can be reasonably estimated and recovery is probable.
On certain projects we have submitted and have pending unresolved contract modifications and/or affirmative claims (“affirmative claims”) to recover additional costs and the associated profit, if applicable, to which the Company believes it is entitled under the terms of contracts with customers, subcontractors, vendors or others. The owners or their authorized representatives and/or other third parties may be in partial or full agreement with the modifications or affirmative claims, or may have rejected or disagree entirely or partially as to such entitlement.
Changes are made to the transaction price from affirmative claims with customers to the extent that additional revenue on a claim settlement with a customer is probable and estimable. A reduction to costs related to affirmative claims with non-customers with whom we have a contractual arrangement (“back charges”) is recognized when the estimated recovery is probable and estimable. Recognizing affirmative claims and back charge recoveries requires significant judgments of certain factors including, but not limited to, dispute resolution developments and outcomes, anticipated negotiation results, and the cost of resolving such matters.
Certain construction contracts in our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments include retention provisions to provide assurance to our customers that we will perform in accordance with the contract terms and are not considered a financing benefit. The balances billed but not paid by customers pursuant to these provisions generally become due upon completion and acceptance of the project work or products by the customer. We have determined there are no significant financing components in our contracts during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Typically, performance obligations related to contracts in our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments are satisfied over time because our performance typically creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced. We recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied and control of the promised good and/or service is transferred to the customer. Revenue in our Transportation, Water and Specialty segments is ordinarily recognized over time as control is transferred to the customers by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation(s) using an input (i.e., “cost to cost”) method. Under the cost to cost method, costs incurred to-date are generally the best depiction of transfer of control.
All contract costs, including those associated with affirmative claims, change orders and back charges, are recorded as incurred and revisions to estimated total costs are reflected as soon as the obligation to perform is determined. Contract costs consist of direct costs on contracts, including labor and materials, amounts payable to subcontractors, direct overhead costs and equipment expense (primarily depreciation, fuel, maintenance and repairs).
The accuracy of our revenue and profit recognition in a given period depends on the accuracy of our estimates of the forecasted revenue and cost to complete each project. Cost estimates for all of our significant projects use a detailed “bottom up” approach. There are a number of factors that can contribute to changes in estimates of contract cost and profitability. The most significant of these include:
•
changes in costs of labor and/or materials;
•
subcontractor costs, availability and/or performance issues;
•
extended overhead and other costs due to owner, weather and other delays;
•
changes in productivity expectations;
•
changes from original design on design-build projects;
•
our ability to fully and promptly recover on affirmative claims and back charges for additional contract costs;
• a change in the availability and proximity of equipment and materials;
• complexity in original design;
•
length of time to complete the project;
•
the availability and skill level of workers in the geographic location of the project;
•
site conditions that differ from those assumed in the original bid;
• costs associated with scope changes; and
•
the customer’s ability to properly administer the contract.
The foregoing factors, as well as the stage of completion of contracts in process and the mix of contracts at different margins may cause fluctuations in gross profit and gross profit margin from period to period. Significant changes in revenue and cost estimates, particularly in our larger, more complex, multi-year projects have had, and can in future periods have, a significant effect on our profitability.
All state and federal government contracts and many of our other contracts provide for termination of the contract at the convenience of the party contracting with us, with provisions to pay us for work performed through the date of termination including demobilization cost.
Costs to obtain our contracts (“pre-bid costs”) that are not expected to be recovered from the customer are expensed as incurred and included in selling, general and administrative expenses on our consolidated statements of operations. Although unusual, pre-bid costs that are explicitly chargeable to the customer even if the contract is not obtained are included in accounts receivable on our consolidated balance sheets when we are notified that we are not the low bidder with a corresponding reduction to selling, general and administrative expenses on our consolidated statements of operations.
Goodwill
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, we had eight reporting units in which goodwill was recorded as follows:
•
Midwest Group Transportation
•
Midwest Group Specialty
•
Northwest Group Transportation
•
Northwest Group Materials
•
California Group Transportation
•
Water and Mineral Services Group Water
•
Water and Mineral Services Group Specialty
•
Water and Mineral Services Group Materials
The three reporting units related to the Water and Mineral Services Group were primarily derived from the Layne and LiquiForce acquisitions in 2018.
We perform our goodwill impairment tests annually as of November 1 and more frequently when events and circumstances occur that indicate a possible impairment of goodwill. Examples of such events or circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
a significant adverse change in the business climate;
•
a significant adverse change in legal factors or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
•
a more likely than not expectation that a segment or a significant portion thereof will be sold; or
•
the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within the segment.
In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we can elect to perform a qualitative assessment to test a reporting unit’s goodwill for impairment or perform a quantitative impairment test. Based on a qualitative assessment, if we determine that the fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not to be less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test will be performed.
In performing the quantitative goodwill impairment tests, we calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit in which the goodwill is recorded using the discounted cash flows and market multiple methods. Judgments inherent in these methods include the determination of appropriate discount rates, the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, revenue and margin growth rates, and appropriate benchmark companies. The cash flows used in our 2019 discounted cash flow model were based on five-year financial forecasts developed internally by management adjusted for market participant-based assumptions. Our discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the equity cost of capital and appropriate capital structure for our reporting units. To assess for reasonableness we compare the estimated fair values of the reporting units to our current market capitalization.
The estimated fair value is compared to the net book value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its net book value, goodwill of the reporting unit is considered not impaired. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its net book value, goodwill is impaired and the excess of the reporting unit’s net book value over the fair value is recognized as a non-cash impairment charge.
For our 2019 annual goodwill impairment test, we conducted quantitative impairment tests for the Midwest Group Specialty and Water and Mineral Services Group Water, Specialty and Materials reporting units, and concluded that goodwill was not impaired since the estimated fair value for each of our reporting units exceeded their respective net book values. The assessment for the Midwest Group Specialty and Water and Mineral Services Group Specialty reporting units indicated that their estimated fair values exceeded their net book values (i.e., headroom) by over 30%. The Midwest Group Specialty reporting unit is susceptible to fluctuations in results depending on awarded work given the large size and limited frequency of awards. The assessment for the Water and Mineral Services Group Water and Water and Mineral Services Group Materials reporting units indicated that their estimated fair value exceeded their net book value by under 20%, as the estimated fair values align with the recent purchase prices of the reporting units to which these assets are assigned. While we believe the current headroom is adequate to absorb fluctuations, a material decline in job win rates or insufficient business growth could have a material impact to these reporting units’ estimated fair values.
After assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of Midwest Group Transportation, Northwest Group Transportation, Northwest Group Materials and California Group Transportation reporting units were greater than the carrying amounts; therefore, we elected to perform a qualitative analysis and a quantitative goodwill impairment test was not performed for these reporting units. Factors we considered were macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, changes in management or key personnel, changes in strategy, changes in customers, changes in the composition or carrying amount of a reporting segments’ net assets, and changes in our stock price.
Insurance Estimates
We carry insurance policies to cover various risks, primarily general liability, automobile liability, workers compensation and employee medical expenses under which we are liable to reimburse the insurance company for a portion of each claim paid. The amounts for which we are liable for general liability and workers compensation generally range from the first $0.5 million to $1.0 million per occurrence. We accrue for probable losses, both reported and unreported, that are reasonably estimable using actuarial methods based on historic trends, modified, if necessary, by recent events. Changes in our loss assumptions caused by changes in actual experience would affect our assessment of the ultimate liability and could have an effect on our operating results and financial position up to $1.0 million per occurrence for general liability and workers compensation or $0.3 million for medical insurance.
Current Economic Environment and Outlook
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in substantial economic disruption for the foreseeable future. While there is optimism that the pandemic will come to an end with the prevalence of vaccines, significant uncertainty continues to exist with the resurgence of cases and the economic restrictions in many states.
With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, our first priority is to continue to do everything we can to ensure the safety, health and hygiene of our employees, customers, suppliers and others with whom we partner in our business activities. Subject to that and with appropriate risk mitigation and safety practices, we are doing everything we can to carry on our operations in this unprecedented business environment in which we find ourselves.
Work on most of our projects continues as the Company performs services that are categorized under one or more of the “Essential Critical Infrastructure Sectors,” as defined by federal and state law. However, our operations in Mexico and Canada have been impacted with local COVID-19 work restrictions and travel bans, and we have experienced temporary suspensions or reduced project activities as a result of COVID-19 contributing in some cases to employee and subcontractor absences. This disruption has been most impactful to our Water and Mineral Services Group and certain operations located in Washington and Arizona.
In the face of rapidly changing market conditions, we are continually monitoring the status of our balance sheet and access to liquidity. Despite the ongoing pandemic, our balance sheet has strengthened in response to the efforts of our teams across the country. Given the uncertain market environment including the uncertain impact of reduced state and local tax receipts due to the pandemic, Granite continues to be focused on our liquidity through maximizing the return on capital investments and minimizing travel and related expenditures.
Granite’s backlog continues to be strong. This year we are seeing increased interest in best-value or alternative delivery procurement work by the state Department of Transportations, such as California and Utah, along with other state agencies. This shift will create a delay in certain project bookings in the short term, but we believe will give us the opportunity for larger future work with historically higher margins.
Funding for our public work projects, which is around 75% of our portfolio, is dependent on federal, state, regional and local revenues. At the federal level, Congress on September 30, 2020 approved the one-year extension of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (“FAST”) Act with flat funding levels as well as a $13.6 billion infusion to the Highway Trust Fund from the general fund, providing state and local governments the visibility needed to plan for 2021 construction programs. In late December 2020, Congress approved a $10 billion relief spending bill for state departments of transportation as part of the Coronavirus Response and Relief Act to help offset pandemic-induced revenue declines. Based on estimates provided by The Federal Highway Administration, over $1.5 billion of the relief fund is apportioned to Granite Construction’s vertically-integrated states. While a permanent revenue solution for the Highway Trust Fund is not yet in place, it continues to remain a stabilizing force for transportation markets. We are optimistic that Congress and the Administration will jointly move forward in 2021 to pass a bipartisan Federal Infrastructure Bill, which we believe will meaningfully improve the programming visibility for state and local governments, starting with the 2022 construction season.
At state, regional and local levels, voter-approved state and local transportation measures continue to support infrastructure spending. In the November 2020 elections, voters in 18 states approved 94% of state and local ballot initiatives that will provide an additional $14 billion in one-time and recurring revenue for transportation improvements. In California, our top revenue-generating state, a significant part of the state infrastructure spend is funded through Senate Bill 1 (SB-1), the Road Repair and Accountability Act of 2017, which is a 10-year, $54.2 billion program. Revenue collected through SB-1 is on track to increase over the next 5 years. While we are encouraged by these funding supports, some of our core states are nevertheless experiencing financial headwinds from the pandemic, which may negatively impact transportation infrastructure spending during the first nine months of 2021. We closely monitor these funding trends and manage our pursuit pipeline accordingly.
While funding uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the normal cadence of project bids in our water-related construction, water resources and wastewater rehabilitation businesses, market demand and local funding opportunities remain resilient. Across the Water segment’s end markets, states and municipal water authorities are weighing options for overdue water and wastewater infrastructure investment. For our wastewater rehabilitation business, this includes potential awards for infrastructure improvements mandated through consent decrees. At the federal level, Congress approved the Water Resources Development Act of 2020 and authorized spending $9.9 billion for 46 new flood control, harbor, ecosystem and lock and dam projects on waterways across the nation. This legislation unlocked the roughly $10 billion balance in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund including allowing access to $500 million in appropriations to the Army Corps.
For a further discussion of the uncertainties and business risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Quarterly Report.
Heavy Civil Strategic Review
Through this challenging time, the Company has not lost sight of its strategic review initiatives related to the Heavy Civil operating group to reduce enterprise exposure to large, complex projects where risks are difficult to mitigate. The Company concluded that historical industry pricing and associated risk for this type of work does not align with the Company’s stakeholder expectations. Under a new management team, we have narrowed the footprint of our Heavy Civil operating group, including the closure of our New York office in January 2021. Our focus is to pursue opportunities in markets where Granite’s presence, capabilities and resources provide strategic advantages, with strong margin expectations.
Impact of Independent Audit/Compliance Committee Investigation
As a result of our delay in filing our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, there are jurisdictions across the country where we were unable to bid on public projects due to various financial statement filing requirements. This has mainly impacted certain public agency bidding opportunities. Granite teams across the country have continued to work with the various public agencies on these challenges. Through the work of Granite teams, the inability to bid in certain jurisdictions has not had a significant impact to Granite’s liquidity or results of operations.
Results of Operations
Our operations are typically affected more by weather conditions during the first and fourth quarters of our fiscal year which may alter our construction schedules and can create variability in our revenues and profitability.
Revenue
Total Revenue by Segment
Transportation Revenue
Transportation revenue in 2019 decreased $54.6 million, or 2.8%, compared to 2018 primarily due to a decrease from net negative revisions in estimates of approximately $73.5 million primarily in the Heavy Civil operating group related to increased project completion costs, schedule delays, lower productivity than originally anticipated, performance of a significant amount of unresolved disputed work and an unfavorable court ruling on a designer back charge claim (see Note 4 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for more information). The revenue decline was also due to a decrease in the California operating group from unfavorable weather during the first half of 2019 and was partially offset by increased activity levels in the Northwest operating group from beginning the year with higher contract backlog as well as from new awards in 2019. During 2019 and 2018, the predominant source of revenue earned in the Transportation segment was from the public sector.
Water Revenue
Water revenue in 2019 increased $122.9 million, or 35.5%, compared to 2018 primarily due to the Water and Mineral Services operating group 2019 revenue including full year results from the Layne and LiquiForce acquisitions both of which occurred in the second quarter of 2018. The increases were partially offset by decreases in the California operating group from unfavorable weather conditions during the first half of 2019 and from emergency work performed in early 2018 that was not repeated in 2019. During 2019 and 2018, the predominant source of revenue earned in the Water segment was from the public sector.
Specialty Revenue
Specialty revenue in 2019 increased $101.9 million, or 16.3%, when compared to 2018 due to increased activity levels in the Northwest operating group which began the year with higher contract backlog and made progress on existing projects, in the California and Federal operating groups from new awards in 2019 and in the Water and Mineral Services operating group from the acquisition of Layne in the second quarter of 2018. These increases were partially offset by decreases in the Midwest operating group which began the year with lower contract backlog. During 2019 and 2018, revenue in the Specialty segment was from both the public and private sectors.
Materials Revenue
Materials revenue in 2019 decreased $11.6 million, or 3.1%, when compared to 2018 resulting from decreases in the California and Water and Mineral Services operating groups from reduced volume due to unfavorable weather conditions in the first half of 2019, partially offset by increases in the Northwest operating group.
Contract Backlog
Our contract backlog consists of the revenue we expect to record in the future on awarded contracts, including 100% of our consolidated joint venture contracts and our proportionate share of unconsolidated joint venture contracts. We generally include a project in our contract backlog at the time a contract is awarded and to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable. Certain government contracts where funding is appropriated on a periodic basis are included in contract backlog at the time of the award when it is probable the contract value will be funded and executed. Awarded contracts that include unexercised contract options or unissued task orders are included in contract backlog to the extent option exercise or task order issuance is probable, respectively, and are identified as other awards in the tables below. Contract options and task orders are included in unearned revenue when exercised or issued, respectively. Substantially all of the contracts in our contract backlog may be canceled or modified at the election of the customer; however, we have not been materially adversely affected by contract cancellations or modifications in the past.
Total Contract Backlog by Segment
Transportation Contract Backlog
(1) Other awards include contract awards to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable.
Transportation contract backlog of $2.8 billion at December 31, 2019 was $98.3 million, or 3.4%, lower than 2018 primarily due to progress on existing projects in our Heavy Civil operating group reflecting the wind down of projects that began several years ago partially offset by increases from new awards. Significant new awards during the fourth quarter of 2019 included a $347 million highway improvement project in Utah, a $32 million highway reconstruction project in Central California and a $16 million interstate rehabilitation project in Illinois.
Non-controlling partners’ share of Transportation contract backlog as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $310.2 million and $218.5 million, respectively.
At December 31, 2019, four contracts in our Transportation segment had total forecasted losses with remaining revenue of $263.6 million, or 9.4%, of Transportation contract backlog. At December 31, 2018, three contracts in our Transportation segment had forecasted losses with remaining revenue of $462.2 million, or 15.9%, of Transportation contract backlog. Provisions are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations for the full amount of estimated losses on uncompleted contracts whenever evidence indicates that the estimated total cost of a contract exceeds its estimated total revenue.
Water Contract Backlog
(1) Other awards include contract awards to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable.
Water contract backlog of $226.0 million as of December 31, 2019 was $104.1 million, or 31.5%, lower than at December 31, 2018 due to progress on existing projects in the Water and Mineral Services operating group partially offset by increases in the Heavy Civil and California operating groups due to increased success rate on bidding activity.
Specialty Contract Backlog
(1) Other awards include contract awards to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable.
Specialty contract backlog of $696.6 million as of December 31, 2019 was $149.4 million, or 27.3%, higher than at December 31, 2018 primarily due to increases in the Heavy Civil and California operating groups from increased success rate on bidding activity partially offset by decreases in the Northwest and Midwest operating groups from progress on existing projects.
Non-controlling partners’ share of Specialty contract backlog as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $89.1 million and $119.4 million, respectively.
Gross Profit
The following table presents gross profit by business segment for the respective periods:
Transportation gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $82.1 million, or 59.9%, when compared to 2018 and segment gross profit as a percentage of segment revenue for 2019 decreased to 2.9% from 7.0% in 2018. The decreases were primarily due to an increase in the net negative impact from revisions in estimates of approximately $84.4 million in the Heavy Civil operating group (see Note 4 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements”).
Water gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $29.4 million, or 49.7%, when compared to 2018 and segment gross profit as a percentage of segment revenue for 2019 decreased to 6.4% from 17.1% in 2018. The decreases were primarily a result of decreased revenue in our California operating group due to unfavorable weather in early 2019 and from emergency work performed in early 2018 that was not repeated in 2019 as well as from an increase in the negative net impact from revisions in estimates (See Note 4 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements”).
Specialty gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $3.2 million, or 3.6%, when compared to 2018 and segment gross profit as a percentage of segment revenue for 2019 decreased to 11.9% from 14.4% in 2018. The decreases were primarily due to an increase in negative net impact from revisions in estimates (See Note 4 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements”).
Materials gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $1.5 million, or 3.1%, when compared to 2018 and segment gross profit as a percentage of segment revenue for 2019 increased to 14.0% from 13.2% in 2018 driven by cost reductions.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The following table presents the components of selling, general and administrative expenses for the respective periods:
Selling Expenses
Selling expenses include the costs for estimating and bidding, including offsetting customer reimbursements for portions of our selling/bid submission expenses (i.e. stipends), business development and materials facility permits. Selling expenses can vary depending on the volume of projects in process and the number of employees assigned to estimating and bidding activities. As projects are completed or the volume of work slows down, we temporarily redeploy project employees to bid on new projects, moving their salaries and related costs from cost of revenue to selling expenses. Selling expenses for 2019 increased $2.1 million, or 2.8%, compared to 2018, primarily due to an increase in salaries and related expenses as a result of our acquisitions of Layne and LiquiForce in the second quarter of 2018.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include costs related to our operational offices that are not allocated to direct contract costs and expenses related to our corporate functions. Other general and administrative expenses include travel and entertainment, outside services, information technology, depreciation, occupancy, training, office supplies, changes in the fair market value of our Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation plan liability and other miscellaneous expenses, none of which individually exceeded 10% of total general and administrative expenses. Total general and administrative expenses for 2019 increased $33.1 million, or 16.9%, compared to 2018 due to an increase in other general and administrative expenses primarily related to a change in the fair market value of our Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation plan liability, which is offset in other income, net, as well as increases in salaries and other general and administrative expenses primarily as a result of our acquisitions of Layne and LiquiForce in the second quarter of 2018.
Acquisition and Integration expenses
Acquisition and integration expenses were $15.3 million and $61.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and were primarily related to the acquisition and integration of LiquiForce and Layne. The decrease during the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to 2018 was due to a reduction in acquisition expenses as 2019 expenses are primarily related to integration.
Other Income
The following table presents the components of other income for the respective periods:
Interest income for 2019 increased $1.4 million when compared to 2018 primarily due to an increase in interest rates associated with our marketable securities and cash equivalents. Interest expense for 2019 increased $3.8 million when compared to 2018 primarily due to draws under our Credit Agreement during 2019 and higher average debt in 2019 reflecting the acquisition of Layne and Liquiforce. Equity in income of affiliates for 2019 increased $4.5 million when compared to 2018 primarily due to an increase in income from foreign affiliates as a result of our acquisition of Layne in the second quarter of 2018. Other income, net for 2019 increased $3.6 million primarily due to changes in the fair market values of our Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation plan assets.
Income Taxes
The following table presents the (benefit from) provision for income taxes for the respective periods:
Our tax rate increased by 64.9% from (38.5)% to 26.4% when compared to 2018 primarily due to the relative impact of one-time adjustments to provisional amounts recorded in 2018 related to the impact of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 enacted in December 2017 and non-controlling interest recorded in 2018 which is partially offset by one-time nondeductible acquisition and integration expenses incurred in 2018, which net to a tax benefit, relative to the insignificant income before benefit from income taxes.
Amount Attributable to Non-controlling Interests
The following table presents the income amount attributable to non-controlling interests in consolidated subsidiaries for the respective periods:
The increase for 2019 when compared to 2018 was primarily due to income from consolidated construction joint ventures awarded in the third quarter of 2017 winding down.
Prior Years
Revenue: Transportation revenue in 2018 increased $34.7 million, or 1.8%, compared to 2017 due to entering the year with greater contract backlog in the Heavy Civil, California and Midwest operating groups as well as improved success rate on bidding activity in the California and Midwest groups. The increases were partially offset by a decrease in the Northwest operating group due to beginning the year with lower contract backlog.
Water revenue in 2018 increased $212.9 million, or over 100%, compared to 2017 primarily due to increases in the Water and Mineral Services operating group from the Layne and LiquiForce acquisitions. See Note 3 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further discussion of acquisitions.
Specialty revenue in 2018 increased $5.0 million, or 0.8%, when compared to 2017 due to increases in the Northwest operating group from new awards and in the Federal operating group from entering the year with greater contract backlog in addition to an increase in Water and Mineral Services operating group from the acquisitions of Layne and LiquiForce. The increases were partially offset by decreases in the Midwest and California operating groups from beginning the year with lower contract backlog.
Materials revenue in 2018 increased $76.0 million, or 26.0%, when compared to 2017. In addition to increases in the Water and Mineral services operating group from the acquisition of Layne, increases in the California and Northwest operating groups were due to increases in aggregate and asphalt pricing and volume.
Gross Profit: Transportation gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2018 increased by $7.2 million, or 5.6%, when compared to 2017 primarily resulting from increased revenue volume and margin improvement in our California operating group due to an increase in highway rehabilitation work partially offset by a decline in our Northwest operating group from reduced revenue volume and in our Heavy Civil operating group from a net negative impact from revisions in estimates (see Note 4 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for more information). Transportation gross margin as a percentage of segment revenue for 2018 increased to 7.0% from 6.8% in 2017.
Water gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2018 increased by $47.6 million, or over 100%, when compared to 2017 primarily due to increased revenue volume and margin improvement from the acquisition of Layne and LiquiForce.
Specialty gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2018 decreased by $2.3 million, or 2.5%, when compared to 2017. The increases were primarily due to increased revenue volume and margin improvement from the acquisition of Layne partially offset by a decline in our Midwest operating group from reduced revenue volume.
Materials gross profit for the year ended December 31, increased by $ 3.6 million, or 8.0%, when compared to 2017 due to increased revenue. Gross profit as a percentage of segment revenue for 2018 decreased to 13.2% from 15.4% when compared to 2017 driven by a decrease in fixed cost absorption and increased material costs at certain asphalt plants.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2018 increased $52.4 million, or 23.8%, compared to 2017. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue increased to 8.3% in 2018 from 7.5% in 2017. Selling expenses for 2018 increased $17.1 million, or 28.3%, compared to 2017, primarily due to the addition of Layne and LiquiForce expenses as well as salaries and related expenses and pre-bid costs from increased bidding activities. Total general and administrative expenses for 2018 increased $35.3 million, or 22.0%, compared to 2017 primarily due to increases in other general and administrative expenses primarily from the addition of Layne and LiquiForce as well as an increase in salaries and related expenses from an increase in employee benefits and compensation.
Other Expense (Income): Interest income for 2018 increased $1.3 million when compared to 2017 primarily due to an increase in interest rates associated with our marketable securities and cash equivalents. Interest expense for 2018 increased $3.8 million when compared to 2017 primarily due to draws under our revolving credit facility to fund the acquisitions of LiquiForce and Layne. Other income, net for 2018 decreased $3.0 million primarily due to changes in the fair market values of our Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation plan assets.
Provision for Income Taxes: Our 2018 tax rate decreased by 76.3% from 37.8% to (38.5)% when compared to 2017 primarily due to the relative impact of one-time adjustments to provisional amounts recorded in 2018 related to the impact of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 enacted in December 2017 and non-controlling interest recorded in 2018 which is partially offset by one-time nondeductible acquisition and integration expenses incurred in 2018, which net to a tax benefit, relative to the insignificant income before benefit from income taxes.
Amount Attributable to Non-controlling Interests: The increase for 2018 when compared to 2017 was primarily due to income from consolidated construction joint ventures awarded in the third quarter of 2017.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, available borrowing capacity and cash expected to be generated from operations. We may also from time to time access our revolving credit facility, issue and sell equity, debt or hybrid securities or engage in other capital markets transactions. Additionally, in November 2019, we issued $230 million of our 2.75% convertible senior notes due 2024. See Note 15 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further discussion regarding the convertible notes. As of December 31, 2019, our cash and cash equivalents consisted of deposits and money market funds held with established national financial institutions and marketable securities consisted of U.S. Government and agency obligations. Our credit facility consists of a term loan and a revolving credit facility. Of the $350.0 million revolving credit facility, $293.1 million was available for borrowing at December 31, 2019. See Note 15 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further discussion regarding the revolving credit facility.
Our principal uses of liquidity are paying the costs and expenses associated with our operations, servicing outstanding indebtedness, making capital expenditures and paying dividends on our capital stock. We may also from time to time prepay or repurchase outstanding indebtedness and acquire assets or businesses that are complementary to our operations. We believe our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, available borrowing capacity and cash expected to be generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our expected working capital needs, capital expenditures, financial commitments, cash dividend payments, and other liquidity requirements associated with our existing operations for the next twelve months. There can be no assurance that sufficient capital will continue to be available in the future or that it will be available on terms acceptable to us.
In evaluating our liquidity position and needs, we also consider cash and cash equivalents held by our consolidated construction joint ventures (“CCJVs”). The following table presents our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, including amounts from our CCJVs, as of the respective dates:
(1) The volume and stage of completion of contracts from our CCJVs may cause fluctuations in joint venture cash and cash equivalents between periods. The assets of each consolidated and unconsolidated construction joint venture relate solely to that joint venture. The decision to distribute joint venture assets must generally be made jointly by a majority of the members and, accordingly, these assets, including those associated with estimated cost recovery of customer affirmative claims and back charge claims, are generally not available for the working capital needs of Granite until distributed.
(2) All marketable securities were classified as held-to-maturity and consisted of U.S. and agency obligations as of all periods presented.
Granite’s portion of CCJV cash and cash equivalents was $44.3 million and $75.5 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Excluded from the table above is Granite’s portion of unconsolidated construction joint venture cash and cash equivalents of $60.4 million and $68.3 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
As a large infrastructure contractor and construction materials producer, our revenue, gross profit and the resulting operating cash flows can differ significantly from period to period due to a variety of factors, including seasonal cycles, our projects’ progressions toward completion, outstanding contract change orders and affirmative claims and the payment terms of our contracts. Additionally, operating cash flows are impacted by the timing related to funding construction joint ventures and the resolution of uncertainties inherent in the complex nature of the work that we perform, including claim and back charge settlements. Our working capital assets result from both public and private sector projects. Customers in the private sector can be slower paying than those in the public sector; however, private sector projects generally have higher gross profit as a percentage of revenue. While we typically invoice our customers on a monthly basis, our contracts frequently provide for retention that is a specified percentage withheld from each payment by our customers until the contract is completed and the work accepted by the customer.
Cash provided by operating activities of $111.4 million during 2019 represents a $25.0 million increase when compared to 2018. The change was primarily a result of a $41.6 million increase in cash provided in working capital primarily due to an increase cash provided by accounts payable from payment timing differences as well as an increase from CCJVs, and a $22.7 million decrease in net contributions to unconsolidated joint ventures and affiliates partially offset by a $39.2 million decrease in cash provided by net loss after adjusting for non-cash items.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities of $40.3 million during 2019 remained relatively unchanged when compared to 2018.
Financing activities
Cash used in financing activities of $81.6 million during 2019 represents a $79.8 million increase when compared to 2018. The change was due to an increase in cash paid for the purchase of an equity derivative instrument in connection with the offering of our 2.75% Convertible Notes and repurchases of common stock as part of the repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors. These changes were partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of our 2.75% Convertible Notes and warrants, net of fees. See Note 15 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further discussion regarding the 2.75% Convertible Notes and warrants.
Prior Year
Cash provided by operating activities of $86.4 million during 2018 represents a $59.8 million decrease when compared to 2017. The decrease was primarily due to a $110.4 million increase in net contributions to unconsolidated joint ventures and an $18.3 million increase in cash used by working capital partially offset by a $32.3 million increase in net income after adjusting for non-cash items.
Cash used in investing activities of $39.6 million during 2018 represents a $19.6 million decrease when compared to 2017. The change was primarily due to an increase in maturities, net of purchases, of marketable securities and proceeds from the sale of certain non-core assets and the associated liabilities related to the water delivery business within our Water and Mineral Services operating group partially offset by cash used to fund the acquisitions of Layne and LiquiForce and an increase in purchases, net of sales proceeds, of property and equipment (see Capital Expenditures discussion below).
Cash used in financing activities of $1.9 million during 2018 represents a $40.8 million decrease when compared to 2017. The change was primarily due to increase in proceeds, net of principal repayments from debt partially offset by an increase in repurchases of common stock related to shares surrendered to pay taxes for vested restricted stock units as well as shares repurchased as part of the repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors and an increase in net distributions to non-controlling partners related to CCJVs.
Capital Expenditures
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had capital expenditures of $106.8 million compared to $111.1 million during 2018. Major capital expenditures are typically for aggregate and asphalt production facilities, aggregate reserves, construction equipment, buildings and leasehold improvements and investments in our information technology systems. The timing and amount of such expenditures can vary based on the progress of planned capital projects, the type and size of construction projects, changes in business outlook and other factors. During the year ended December 31, 2020, capital expenditures were approximately $90.0 million.
Derivatives
We recognize derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets at fair value using Level 2 inputs. See Note 9 to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further information. The hedge option and warrant derivative transactions related to the 2.75% Convertible Notes were recorded to equity on our consolidated balance sheets based on the cash proceeds. See Note 15 to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for further information.
Debt and Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant obligations outstanding as of December 31, 2019:
(1) Debt issuance costs are excluded from the table. Included in the table is $36.3 million of unamortized debt discount related to the 2.75% Convertible Notes (as defined in Note 15 to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements”).
(2) Included in the table are future interest payments related to borrowings under our Credit Agreement for both the term loan and revolving credit facility. Interest for the term loan was calculated using the fixed rate associated with the cash flow hedge of 2.76% plus the applicable margin and interest for the revolving credit facility was calculated using one-month LIBOR plus the applicable margin. Borrowings were subject to a 75bp LIBOR floor from March 26, 2020. As forecasted LIBOR was below 75bps for all future periods after June 30, 2020, the 75bp LIBOR floor was utilized thereafter. Future interest payments may differ from actual results. Also included in the table is $31.6 million in interest related to borrowings under our 2.75% Convertible Notes. See Note 15 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.”
(3) These obligations represent the minimum rental and equipment lease commitments and minimum royalty requirements under all noncancellable agreements. See Note 16 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.”
(4) These obligations represent firm purchase commitments for equipment and other goods and services not directly connected with our construction contract backlog which are individually greater than $10,000 and have an expected fulfillment date after December 31, 2019.
(5) The timing of expected payment of deferred compensation is based on estimated dates of retirement. Actual dates of retirement could be different and could cause the timing of payments to change.
(6) Asset retirement obligations represent reclamation and other related costs associated with our owned and leased quarry properties, the majority of which have an estimated settlement date beyond five years. See Note 12 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.”
In addition to the significant obligations described above, as of December 31, 2019, we had approximately $18.8 million associated with uncertain tax positions filed on our tax returns which were excluded because we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of potential payments relative to such reserves.
Surety Bonds and Real Estate Mortgages
We are generally required to provide various types of surety bonds that provide an additional measure of security under certain public and private sector contracts. At December 31, 2019, approximately $3.5 billion of our contract backlog was bonded. Performance bonds do not have stated expiration dates; rather, we are generally released from the bonds after the owner accepts the work performed under contract. The ability to maintain bonding capacity to support our current and future level of contracting requires that we maintain cash and working capital balances satisfactory to our sureties.
Our investments in real estate affiliates are subject to mortgage indebtedness. This indebtedness is non-recourse to Granite but is recourse to the real estate entities. The terms of this indebtedness are typically renegotiated to reflect the evolving nature of the real estate projects as they progress through acquisition, entitlement and development. Modification of these terms may include changes in loan-to-value ratios requiring the real estate entity to repay portions of the debt. Our unconsolidated investments in our foreign affiliates are subject to local bank debt primarily for equipment purchases and working capital. This debt is non-recourse to Granite, but it is recourse to the affiliates. The debt associated with our unconsolidated non-construction entities is included in Note 11 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.”
Covenants and Events of Default
Our Credit Agreement requires us to comply with various affirmative, restrictive and financial covenants, including the financial covenants described below. Our failure to comply with these covenants would constitute an event of default under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, our failure to pay principal, interest or other amounts when due or within the relevant grace period on our 2.75% Convertible Notes or our Credit Agreement would constitute an event of default under the indenture governing our 2.75% Convertible Notes or the Credit Agreement. A default under our Credit Agreement could result in (i) us no longer being entitled to borrow under such facility; (ii) termination of such facility; (iii) the requirement that any letters of credit under such facility be cash collateralized; (iv) acceleration of amounts owed under the Credit Agreement; and/or (v) foreclosure on any lien securing the obligations under such facility. A default under the indenture governing our 2.75% Convertible Notes could result in acceleration of the maturity of the notes.
The most significant financial covenants under the terms of our Credit Agreement require the maintenance of a minimum Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio and a maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio. As of December 31, 2019, the Consolidated Leverage Ratio was 1.72, which did not exceed the maximum of 3.25. Our Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio was 10.95, which exceeded the minimum of 4.00. To accommodate the delays in filing our financial statements, we entered into amendments with our lenders to extend the deadline for filing the 2019 Form 10-K and all of our 2020 Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Qs to February 28, 2021.
Share Purchase Program
As announced on April 29, 2016, on April 7, 2016, the Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to $200.0 million of our common stock at management’s discretion. As part of this authorization we have established a plan to facilitate common stock repurchases. During the third quarter of 2019, we purchased approximately 100,000 shares at an average price of $29.10 per share for $2.9 million. During the fourth quarter of 2019, we purchased approximately 1.26 million shares at an average price of $23.75 per share for $29.9 million in connection with the issuance of our 2.75% Convertible Notes. As of December 31, 2019, $157.2 million of the authorization remained available. The specific timing and amount of any future repurchases will vary based on market conditions, securities law limitations and other factors.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under the captions Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements and Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements.