ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
GSE is a leading provider of professional and technical engineering, staffing services and simulation software to clients in the power and process industries. We provide customers with simulation, engineering and plant services that help clients reduce risks associated with operating their plants, increase revenue through improved plant and employee performance, and lower costs through improved operational efficiency. In addition, we provide professional services that systematically help clients fill key vacancies in the organization on a short-term basis, primarily in procedures, engineering, technical support and training focused on regulatory compliance and certification in the nuclear power industry. Our operations also include interactive computer-based tutorials and simulation software for the refining, chemical, and petrochemical industries.
Early in 2020 as the pandemic unfolded, the end markets that GSE serves, namely the power industries, delayed the essential services it could and dramatically cut back on non-essential services. Although this impacted GSE, as an essential services provider to an essential industrial base, GSE benefited from maintaining a baseline of business to continue and align itself to the realities of the pandemic. As GSE enters 2021, the effects of the pandemic are still impacting the end markets we serve, but those effects may be mitigated for a number of factors, including the following: the pandemic largely has had a targeted effect on the population; there now are number of vaccines in the market being distributed and, despite logistical challenges, making solid progress for those in most need; the economy of the United States has not had as much disruption as was initially feared which has benefited our end markets; and most importantly the end markets of GSE seem poised to spend to catch up on essential services that had been delayed as a result of the pandemic. As GSE ended 2020 and began 2021, we have had a number of significant contract wins that have been publicly announced, which we hope is a harbinger of a more solid 2021 business environment.
On April 23, 2020, we received funds under the Paycheck Protection Program, a part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The loan is serviced by Citizens Bank (the “Bank”), and the application for these funds required us to, in good faith, certify that the current economic uncertainty made the loan necessary to support our ongoing operations. We used funds for payroll and related costs, rent and utilities. The receipt of these funds, and the forgiveness of the PPP Loan attendant to these funds, is dependent on our ability to adhere to the forgiveness criteria. The PPP Loan bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum and matures on April 23, 2022, with the first payment deferred until August 9, 2021. Under the terms of the PPP Loan, certain amounts may be forgiven if they are used in accordance with the CARES Act. As of the period end, we have maintained compliance with all of the requirements to obtain forgiveness of the full amount of the PPP Loan. We believe that our use of the proceeds and other conditions consistent with the requirements for forgiveness have been met but are unable to determine the amount that may be ultimately forgiven.
Results of Operations.
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the periods presented expressed as a percentage of revenue.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019.
Revenue. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $57.6 million, which was 30.6% less than the $83.0 million of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Performance Improvement Solutions revenue decreased 28.4% from $45.8 million to $32.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of revenue was primarily due to several significant projects ending in the prior fiscal year and delays in commencing new contracts remotely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We recorded total Performance Improvement Solutions orders of $26.2 million and $27.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Nuclear Industry Training and Consulting revenue decreased 33.3% to $24.8 million compared to revenue of $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to stoppage of existing projects and delays in commencing new contracts due to the COVID-19 pandemic resulting a reduction in demand for staffing from our major customers. We recorded total new orders of $19.1 million and $31.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s backlog was $40.4 million, $30.3 million was attributed to the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and $10.1 million was attributed to the Nuclear Industry Training and Consulting segment. At December 31, 2019, the Company’s backlog was $52.7 million with $37.2 million attributed to the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and $15.5 million attributed to the Nuclear Industry Training and Consulting segment. The decrease in our backlog over fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to lower orders during fiscal year 2020.
Gross profit. Gross profit was $14.8 million, or 25.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $20.3 million, or 24.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Performance Improvement Solutions segment’s gross profit decreased by $3.8 million during fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019. The decrease is primarily related to lower revenue and several significant projects completed in the prior year that were not replaced with new orders, while overall profitability of remaining and new smaller projects increased the profit margin.
The Nuclear Industry Training and Consulting segment’s gross profit decreased by $1.7 million during fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019. The decrease in gross profit was primarily driven by a decrease in revenue in the NITC business partially offset by a reduction in direct costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses totaled $15.8 million and $16.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Fluctuations in the components of SG&A spending were as follows:
Corporate charges decreased $0.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the use of external contractors for accounting and finance support services of $0.2 million and the corporate development charges of $0.8 million during fiscal year 2019 for the acquisition of DP Engineering, with no similar charges during fiscal year 2020.
Business development charges decreased $0.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower commission costs and reduced headcount in 2020.
Facility O&M expenses decreased $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease during fiscal year 2020 was mainly due to lease abandonments in fiscal year 2019 and lease terminations in fiscal year 2020.
As a result of the triggering event with our subsidiary DP Engineering in fiscal year 2019, we determined the fair value of the contingent consideration recorded in connection with the acquisition in February 2019 was zero. We recorded the reduction in the contingent consideration as an offset to selling, general and administrative expenses in the amount of
$1.2 million.
Bad debt expense. We recorded bad debt expense of $103 thousand and $31 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. GSE’s bad debt allowance is based on historical trends of past due accounts, write-offs, and specific identification and review of customer accounts.
Research and development. Research and development costs consist primarily of software engineering personnel and other related costs. Research and development costs, net of capitalized software, totaled $0.7 million for both the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Restructuring charges. Restructuring charges totaled $1.3 million and $2.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. On December 27, 2017, the Board of GSE Systems, Inc. approved an international restructuring plan to streamline and optimize the Company’s global operations. Under this international restructuring plan, we have incurred cumulative restructuring charges of $3.1 million. The Company expects no future charges relating to the international restructuring plan, excluding any tax impacts and cumulative translation adjustments from the final disposal of foreign entities. Additionally, during the third quarter of 2019, the Company implemented a restructuring plan as a result of the work suspension of DP Engineering’s largest customer and subsequent notification on August 6, 2019 that the EOC contract was being terminated. This plan was put in place to align the workforce with the expected level of business moving forward. Under this restructuring plan, we have incurred total restructuring of $2.6 million. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a severance expense of $0.7 million, lease termination fee of $1.6 million and $0.1 million related to international restructuring. In the twelve months ending December 31, 2020, we recorded $1.0 million to international restructuring, and $0.2 million of related employee termination benefits. The increase in our 2020 restructuring plan charges resulted, in part from the continuation of rightsizing the Company due to the impact of the work suspension of DP Engineering’s largest customer in 2019.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense totaled $0.3 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to fully depreciated assets in 2020 and no additional acquisitions in the current fiscal year.
Amortization of definite-lived intangible assets. Amortization expense related to definite-lived intangible assets totaled $1.9 million and $2.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in amortization expense was primarily due to the reduction in the carrying value of DP Engineering’s intangible assets, due to the $4.3 million impairment in Q1 2020.
Interest expense. Interest expense totaled $0.6 million and $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The decrease is due to a paydown of the outstanding credit revolver in 2020.
Loss on derivative instruments, net. The Company periodically enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to manage market risks associated with the fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates on foreign-denominated trade receivables. The Company had not designated the contracts as hedges and recognized a loss on the change in the estimated fair value of the contracts of $17 thousand and $6 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We had no foreign exchange contracts outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The foreign currency denominated trade receivables, unbilled receivables, billings in excess of revenue earned and subcontractor accruals that are related to the outstanding foreign exchange contracts are remeasured at the end of each period into the functional currency using the current exchange rate at the end of the period. The gain or loss resulting from such remeasurement is also included in gain (loss) on derivative instruments net in the consolidated statements of operations. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred gain of $15 thousand and $38 thousand, respectively, from the remeasurement of such assets and liabilities.
Other income (expense), net. The Company recognized $4 thousand of other expense, net and $2.1 million of other income, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is due to the DP Engineering settlement and release agreement on December 30, 2019 in the amount of $2.0 million related to the loss of a major customer post acquisition.
Provision for Income Taxes. The Company files tax returns in the United States federal jurisdiction and in several state and foreign jurisdictions. Because of the net operating loss carryforwards, the Company is subject to U.S. federal and state income tax examinations for tax years 2000, and forward, and is subject to foreign tax examinations by tax authorities for the years 2015 and forward. Open tax years related to state and foreign jurisdictions remain subject to examination but are not considered material to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s tax expense in 2020 was $0.4 million, representing an annual effective tax rate of (3.5)%, and consisted of $0.4 million of current tax provision. The Company’s tax expense in 2019 was $5.7 million, representing an annual effective rate of (90.3)% and consisted of $0.4 million of current tax provision and $5.3 million of deferred taxes. The difference between the effective rate and statutory rate in 2020 primarily resulted from a change in valuation allowance, permanent differences, accruals related to uncertain tax positions for certain foreign tax contingencies, foreign restructuring and the tax impact of stock compensation forfeitures.
The significant change of $5.4 million in deferred tax expense was primarily driven by the prior year recognition of $6.8 million of valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets related to the U.S. and foreign entities which was partially offset by the generation of a deferred tax asset related to the GAAP goodwill and intangible impairment in the U.S. entities.
The difference between the effective rate and statutory rate primarily resulted from a change in valuation allowance, permanent differences, accruals related to uncertain tax positions for certain foreign tax contingencies, foreign restructuring and the tax impact of stock compensation forfeitures. Please see Note 15 for additional information.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act
On March 27, 2020, the United States enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act). The Cares Act is an emergency economic stimulus package that includes spending and tax breaks to strengthen the United States economy and fund a nationwide effort to curtail the effect of COVID-19. While the CARES Act provides sweeping tax changes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, some of the more significant provisions which are expected to impact the Company’s financial statements include removal of certain limitations on utilization of net operating losses and increasing the ability to deduct interest expense, as well as amending certain provisions of the previously enacted Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The Company has evaluated the CARES Act and has determined that it does not have a material benefit on its business.
Consolidated Appropriations Act
On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA) was signed into law. The CAA included additional funding through tax credits as part of its economic package for 2021. The Company evaluated these items in its tax computation as of December 31, 2020 and determined that the items do not have a material benefit on the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing the Company’s consolidated financial statements, management makes several estimates and assumptions that affect the Company’s reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Those accounting estimates that have the most significant impact on the Company’s operating results and place the most significant demands on management’s judgment are discussed below. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as forecast, and the best estimates may require adjustment.
Revenue Recognition. The Company derives its revenue through three broad revenue streams: 1) System Design and Build (SDB), 2) Software, and 3) Training and Consulting services. We recognize revenue from SDB and software contracts mainly through the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and the training and consulting service contracts through both the Performance Improvement Solutions segment and Nuclear Industry Training and Consulting segment.
The SDB contracts are typically fixed-price and consist of initial design, engineering, assembly and installation of training simulators which include hardware, software, labor, and post contract support (PCS) on the software. We generally have two main performance obligations for an SDB contract: the training simulator build and PCS. The training simulator build performance obligation generally includes hardware, software, and labor. The transaction price under the SDB contracts is allocated to each performance obligation based on its standalone selling price. We recognize the training simulator build revenue over the construction and installation period using the cost-to-cost input method as our performance creates or enhances assets with no alternative use to the Company, and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Cost-to-cost input method best measures the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. PCS revenue is recognized ratably over the service period, as PCS is deemed as a stand-ready obligation.
In applying the cost-to-cost input method, we use the actual costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated costs to measure the work progress toward the completion of the performance obligation and recognize revenue accordingly. Estimated contract costs are reviewed and revised periodically as the work progresses, and the cumulative effect of any change in estimates is recognized in the period in which the change is identified. Estimated losses are recognized in the period such losses are identified. Uncertainties inherent in the performance of contracts include labor availability and productivity, material costs, change order scope and pricing, software modification and customer acceptance issues. The reliability of these cost estimates is critical to the Company’s revenue recognition as a significant change in the estimates can cause the Company’s revenue and related margins to change significantly from the amounts estimated in the early stages of the project.
The SDB contracts generally provide a one-year base warranty on the systems. The base warranty is not accounted for as a separate performance obligation under the contract because it does not provide the customer with a service in addition to the assurance that the completed project complies with agreed-upon specifications. Warranties extended beyond our typical one-year period, if any, are evaluated on a case by case basis to determine if it provides more than just assurance that the product operates as intended, which would require carve-out as a separate performance obligation.
Revenue from the sale of perpetual standalone and term software licenses, which do not require significant modification or customization, is recognized upon its delivery to the customer. Revenue from the sale of cloud-based subscription-based software licenses is recognized ratably over the term of such licenses following delivery to the customer. Delivery is considered to have occurred when the customer receives a copy of the software and is able to use and benefit from the software.
A software license sale contract with multiple performance obligations typically includes the following elements: license, installation and training services and PCS. The total transaction price of a software license sale contract is typically fixed, and is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. Revenue is recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied. Specifically, license revenue is recognized when the software license is delivered to the customer; installation and training revenue is recognized when the installation and training is completed without regard to a detailed evaluation of the point in time criteria due to the short-term nature of the installation and training services (one to two days on average); and PCS revenue is recognized ratably over the service period, as PCS is deemed as a stand-ready obligation.
The contracts within the training and consulting services revenue stream are either time and materials (T&M) based or fixed-price based. Under a typical T&M contract, the Company is compensated based on the number of hours of approved time provided by workers and the bill rates which are fixed per type of work, as well as approved expenses incurred. The customers are billed on a regular basis, such as weekly, biweekly or monthly. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606-10-55-18, we elected to apply the “right to invoice” practical expedient, under which we recognize revenue in the amount to which we have the right to invoice. The invoice amount represents the number of hours of approved time worked by each worker multiplied by the bill rate for the type of work, as well as approved expenses incurred. Under a typical fixed-price contract, we recognize the revenue on a Percentage of Completion basis as it relates to GSE Construction Contracts with revenue recognized based on project delivery over time. Revenue from the sale of short-term contracts with a delivery period of one month or less is recognized in the month completed.
For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract price to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers.
Impairment of Intangible Assets, including Goodwill. The Company’s intangible assets impairment analysis includes the use of undiscounted cash flow and discounted cash flow models that require management to make assumptions regarding estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates and future economic that may impact each asset group. We review goodwill and intangible assets for impairment annually as of December 31 and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. We test goodwill at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment, as defined by U.S. GAAP (See Note 7).
Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2011-08, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Testing Goodwill for Impairment (ASU 2011-08) permits an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test. An entity is not required to perform step one of the goodwill impairment test for a reporting unit if it is more likely than not that its fair value is greater than its carrying amount (Step 0). If the Step 0 test indicates the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then additional impairment testing is required in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other.
Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment (“ASU 2017-04”). ASU 2017-04 simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment by eliminating Step 2 of the current goodwill impairment test, which required a hypothetical purchase price allocation. Goodwill impairment will now be the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, limited to the carrying value of the goodwill.
At December 31, 2020, we performed a quantitative step 1 analysis and have concluded that the estimated fair values of each of our reporting units as of December 31, 2020, is more likely than not, greater than their respective carrying values. At December 31, 2019, we performed a quantitative step 1 analysis and have concluded that the estimated fair values of each of our reporting units as of December 31, 2019, exceeded their respective carrying values. Following the February 23, 2019 event occurring at a DP Engineering customer location and subsequent receipt of the Notice of Suspension on February 28, 2019, the Company concluded that DP Engineering’s relationship with it’s largest customer has been adversely impacted. The DP Engineering customer contracts and relationships were the major components of the definite-lived intangible assets recognized in connection with the acquisition. Accordingly, the Company determined that a triggering event had occurred requiring an interim assessment of whether a potential impairment of definite-lived intangible asset impairment test was necessary in accordance with the related impairment guidance. As a result, it was determined that a material impairment had occurred, requiring an impairment of $5.6 million of goodwill recorded in 2019.
Our goodwill impairment analysis includes the use of a discounted cash flow model that requires management to make assumptions regarding estimates of growth rates used to forecast revenue, operating margin and terminal value as well as determining the appropriate risk-adjusted discount rates and other factors that impact fair value determinations. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. The timing and frequency of our goodwill impairment tests are based on an ongoing assessment of events and circumstances that would indicate a possible impairment. We will continue to monitor our goodwill and intangible assets for impairment and conduct formal tests when impairment indicators are present.
Capitalization of Computer Software Development Costs. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the Company capitalizes computer software development costs incurred after technological feasibility has been established, but prior to the release of the software product for sale to customers. Once the product is available to be sold, the Company amortizes the costs, on a straight-line method, over the estimated useful life of the product, which is typically three years. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has net capitalized software development costs of $0.6 million. On an annual basis, and more frequently as conditions indicate, the Company assesses the recovery of the unamortized software development costs by estimating the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the sale of the product. If the undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover the unamortized software costs, the Company will write-down the investment to its estimated fair value based on future discounted cash flows. The excess of any unamortized computer software costs over the related net realizable value is written down and charged to operations. Included in capitalized software development costs are certain expenses associated with the development software services. These are similarly capitalized, although not subjected to the same recoverability considerations. Significant changes in the sales projections could result in an impairment with respect to the capitalized software that is reported on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Deferred Income Tax Valuation Allowance. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. Management makes a regular assessment of the realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets. In making this assessment, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities and projected future taxable income of the Company in making this assessment. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the total deferred income tax asset to its realizable value. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s largest deferred tax asset was $6.2 million of net operating losses, excluding the impact of uncertain tax positions. It primarily relates to a U.S. net operating loss carryforward of $6.2 million; $4.6 million of the net operating loss carryforward expires in various amounts between 2023 and 2037; $1.6 million of the net operating loss carryforward is an indefinite lived deferred tax asset. The Company does not believe that it is more likely than not that it will be able to realize its deferred tax assets for its U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020, therefore we have recorded a $9.2 million valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
As of December 31, 2020, GSE had cash and cash equivalents of $6.7 million compared to $11.7 million at December 31, 2019.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $1.1 million and $4.0 million, respectively. The year over year decrease in cash provided by operating activities was largely driven by:
•
A $0.8 million increase in net inflows from changes in net working capital primarily due to a lower accounts receivable balance as of December 31, 2020 compared to prior year.
•
A $0.6 million decrease in operating expenses (excluding non-cash operating expenses) mainly driven by higher administrative cost in 2019 due to acquisitions.
•
A $5.5 million decrease in gross profit, primarily driven by lower revenue due to COVID-19.
Net cash used in investing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million compared to net cash of $14.1 million used in investing activities in the prior year. The increase in cash outflow in 2019 was primarily due to the acquisition of DP Engineering, which resulted in a cash outflow of $13.5 million.
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net cash (used in) provided by financing activities totaled $(6.1) million and $9.7 million, respectively. The increase in the cash used by financing activities is largely driven by the repayment of a long-term debt of $18.5 million, net of the proceeds from Paycheck Protection Program loan of $10.0 million and from line of credit of $3.0 million.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan (“PPP Loan”)
We entered into the PPP Loan agreement with the Bank, which was approved and funded on April 23, 2020, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The PPP Loan matures on April 23, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. Monthly amortized principal and interest payments are due for any portion of the loan balance that is not forgiven and are automatically deferred or ten months after the last day of our covered period through August 9, 2021.
The PPP Loan contains events of default and other provisions customary for a loan of this type, including: (1) the use of PPP Loan amount shall be limited to certain qualifying expenses, (2) 100% of the principal amount of the loan is guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) and (3) an amount up to the full principal amount may qualify for loan forgiveness in accordance with the terms of CARES Act. We have accumulated forgivable expenses beyond our loan amount and provided all prescribed support with our application for forgiveness with our Bank. Our Bank has reviewed our application for forgiveness and associated documentation, forwarding it to the SBA with their determination that the loan is fully forgivable on February 26, 2021. However, we are ultimately subject to the SBA’s process and conclusion for forgiveness. To the extent the loan amount is not forgiven under the PPP, we are obligated to make equal monthly payments of principal and interest, beginning after determination of forgiveness by the SBA.
As of December 31, 2020, we have classified the $10.0 million of outstanding PPP Loan and accrued interest of $69 thousand as debt in our consolidated balance sheets. We classified $5.0 million as current and $5.0 million as noncurrent in our consolidated balance sheets. We recorded $69 thousand of interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company notes the short term liability value for its PPP Loan in the Q3 2020 financial statements was reported as $447 thousand and should have been $1,256 thousand, a $809 thousand change off-set by an equal amount in its long term liability value for the PPP Loan. The Company has made this correction in the Q4 consolidated balance sheets and deems it to be immaterial.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in full compliance with all requirements in order to apply for forgiveness under the PPP Loan.
Credit Facilities
On December 29, 2016, we entered into a 3-year $5.0 million revolving line of credit facility (“RLOC”) with the Bank to fund general working capital needs and provide funding for acquisitions. The credit facility agreement was subject to certain financial covenants and reporting requirements.
On May 11, 2018, we entered into the Amended and Restated Credit and Security Agreement (“the Credit Agreement”) with the Bank to include (a) a $5.0 million revolving credit facility, not be subject to a borrowing base, with a letter of credit sub-facility, and (b) a $25.0 million delayed draw term loan facility available to be drawn upon for up to 18 months to finance certain permitted acquisitions. The credit facilities had a term of five years and accrued interest at one-month USD LIBOR plus a margin that varies depending on our overall leverage ratio. Revolving loans are interest-only with principal due at maturity, while term loans require monthly payments of principal and interest based on an amortization schedule. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by our wholly owned subsidiaries Hyperspring, Absolute, True North, DP Engineering and by any future material domestic subsidiaries (collectively, the Guarantors).
On January 6, 2020, due to a projected violation of our covenants, we entered into the Sixth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement and effective on December 31, 2019 with our Bank to relax the fixed charge coverage ratio and leverage ratio and delay testing of both financial covenants. We agreed to an additional covenant, requiring us to maintain a consolidated Adjusted EBITDA target of $4.3 million, tested quarterly as of December 31, 2019, March 31, 2020 and June 30, 2020. Further, we agreed to maintain a minimum USA liquidity of at least $5.0 million in the aggregate, tested bi-weekly as of the fifteenth and the last day of each month, beginning on December 31, 2019 and until June 30, 2020. In addition to the revised covenants, we agreed to make accelerated principal payments of $3.0 million on January 6, 2020; $1.0 million on March 31, 2020; and $1.0 million on June 30, 2020. We incurred $20 thousand of debt issuance costs related to this amendment.
On April 17, 2020, effective March 31, 2020, we entered into the Seventh Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement, which requires us to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.25 to 1.00, tested quarterly as of the last day of each quarter, beginning with the quarter ending June 30, 2021. In addition, we agreed to not exceed a maximum leverage ratio, tested quarterly as of the last day of each quarter and beginning with the quarter ending September 30, 2020 as follows: (i) 3.00 to 1.00 for the period ending September 30, 2020; (ii) 2.50 to 1.00 for the period ending December 31, 2020; and (iii) 2.25 to 1.00 for the period ending March 31, 2021 and for the periods ending December 31, March 31, June 30 and September 30, thereafter. We additionally agreed to make accelerated principal payments of $0.75 million on April 17, 2020 and $0.5 million on June 30, 2020. We incurred $50 thousand of debt issuance costs related to this amendment.
On August 28, 2020, we signed the Eighth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement, with an effective date of June 29, 2020, due to violating our minimum Adjusted EBITDA covenant during the three months ended June 30, 2020. As part of the amendment, we agreed to pay $10 million to the Bank during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $0.7 million was paid to reduce our RLOC and $9.1 million to pay-off the term debt. We paid out $0.2 million for the unwinding of the interest rate swap agreement during the year. We incurred $10 thousand in additional debt issuance costs related to the amendment, which we expensed along with a $70 thousand previously deferred debt issuance cost during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The amendment removed our minimum Adjusted EBITDA covenant and changed our other debt covenants on an ongoing basis as follows: our maximum fixed charge coverage ratio will be tested quarterly as of the last day of each quarter, beginning with the quarter ending December 31, 2021 and must be 1.00 to 1.00; our leverage ratio will be tested quarterly, starting on March 31, 2021 as follows: (i) 3.00 to 1.00 for the period ending March 31, 2021; (ii) 2.75 to 1.00 for the period ending June 30, 2021, (iii) 2.50 to 1.00 for the period ending September 30, 2021, and (iv) 2.00 to 1.00 for the period ending December 31, 2021 and for the periods ending each December 31st, March 31st, June 30th and September 30th thereafter. We are also required to maintain a minimum of $3.5 million in aggregate USA liquidity, which was tested on September 15, 2020 and will be tested bi-weekly on an on-going basis. We are currently projecting to be in violation of our Q1 2021 leverage ratio and are considering several options at our disposal to address the matter (See Note 1).
On March 29, 2021, due to a projected violation of Q1 2021 leverage ratio, we signed the Ninth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement with an effective date of March 29, 2021 (See Note 25).
The PPP Loan does not factor into the expenses or liabilities used in the calculation of our debt covenants, unless we determine that more than $1 million of the original PPP Loan balance will not be forgiven. The Bank agreed to remove its collateral agreement with the Company’s subsidiaries as part of the repayment of our outstanding term loans during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings of $3.0 million under the RLOC and three letters of credit totaling $933 thousand outstanding to certain of our customers. After consideration of letters of credit, the amount available under the RLOC was approximately $1.1 million as of December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2019, there were no outstanding borrowings under the RLOC and four letters of credit totaling $1.2 million. The amount available at December 31, 2019, after consideration of the letters of credit was approximately $3.8 million.
We intend to continue using the RLOC for short-term working capital needs and the issuance of letters of credit in connection with business operations. Letter of credit issuance fees range between 1.25% and 2.00% of the value of the letter of credit, depending on our overall leverage ratio. We pay an unused RLOC fee quarterly based on the average daily unused balance.
Going Concern Consideration
In 2019, our operating results were negatively impacted by the loss of a major customer in our DP Engineering subsidiary. In 2020, we had several projects delayed and new orders postponed because of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have amended our credit facility with Citizens Bank in 2020 based upon expected covenant violations and have been required to curtail term debt in exchange for revised financial covenants. Scheduled term loan repayments and agreed upon curtailment required us to use $18.5 million in available cash to pay-off our term debt in 2020. As such, our working capital position on December 31, 2020 was a deficit of $2.7 million. This working capital deficit includes $5.0 million from current maturities on our PPP loan, which we expect will be forgiven and have not received any indications to the contrary (See Note 4). If the PPP loan is not forgiven, in part or in whole, we will work with our bank to extend repayment terms as permitted to mitigate the impact on our cashflows. However, if unforgiven and unamended, our PPP loan would be due April 23, 2022 in part or in whole and may stress our free cash flow and the business to a degree that may cause our covenants to fail.
The COVID-19 macroeconomic environment is considered fluid and although recovery is anticipated to steadily occur over the next 12 months, a further decline will stress our ability to meet covenant requirements. Further continuance of delays in commencing work on outstanding orders or a continued loss of orders, further disruption of our business because of worker illness or mandated shutdowns may also exacerbate the situation. Jurisdictions where our businesses operate across the country are pushing toward re-opening places of business and government support, through the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, will continue support the broad economy on that path. However, the timing of these elements taking place are not predictable and may not serve to mitigate our situation or improve our specific company’s health.
We signed the Ninth Amendment and Reaffirmation Agreement (the “Nineth Amendment”), with our bank on March 29, 2021 to waive the fixed charge coverage ratio and leverage ratio for the quarters ending March 31 and June 30, 2021, and to adjust the thresholds for future covenants to ease the risk of non-compliance experienced in previous quarters (See Note 25). However, our new covenant compliance is dependent on meeting future projections which are subject to the variability and unknown speed and extent of post-COVID-19 recovery.
The company also maintains options to compensate for a further decline in operations to bolster cash positions by raising capital through its access to the public markets or entering alternative finance arrangements afforded to it through established financial relationships. Impact to net income could be mitigated through one or many of the various cost cutting measures at its disposal, directed at compensation, vendor augmentation or delay of investment initiatives in its corporate office.
These actions and options, which are further supported by positively trending macroeconomic conditions, and the potential to see recovering business and orders ease the risk to the bank covenants experienced in previous quarters. However, when considering the unpredictability of the above, there continues to be substantial doubt the Company will continue as a going concern over the next twelve months.
Foreign Exchange.
A portion of the Company’s international sales revenue has been and may be received in a currency other than the currency in which the expenses relating to such revenue are paid. Accordingly, the Company periodically enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to manage the market risks associated with the fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not hold a position in forward foreign exchange contracts.
Off-balance Sheet Obligations.
The Company has no off-balance sheet obligations as of December 31, 2020, except for its operating lease commitments and outstanding letters of credit and surety bonds.
Other Matters.
Management believes inflation has not had a material impact on the Company’s operations.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation (in thousands)
References to “EBITDA” mean net (loss) income, before taking into account interest expense (income), provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization. References to Adjusted EBITDA exclude the impact of loss on impairment, change in fair value of contingent consideration, restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of derivative instruments, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related legal settlement. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Management believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, in addition to operating profit, net income and other GAAP measures, are useful to investors to evaluate the Company’s results because it excludes certain items that are not directly related to the Company’s core operating performance that may, or could, have a disproportionate positive or negative impact on our results for any particular period. Investors should recognize that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA might not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies. This measure should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, any measure of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of non-GAAP EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure in accordance with SEC Regulation G follows:
Adjusted Net (Loss) Income and Adjusted EPS Reconciliation (in thousands, except per share amounts)
References to Adjusted net (loss) income exclude the change in fair value of contingent consideration, loss on impairment, restructuring charges, stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of derivative instruments, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related legal settlement, amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions, release of valuation allowance, and income tax expense impact of adjustments. Adjusted
Net Income and adjusted earnings per share (adjusted EPS) are not measures of financial performance under GAAP. Management believes adjusted net income and adjusted EPS, in addition to other GAAP measures, are useful to investors to evaluate the Company’s results because they exclude certain items that are not directly related to the Company’s core operating performance and non-cash items that may, or could, have a disproportionate positive or negative impact on our results for any particular period. These measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, any measure of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of non-GAAP adjusted net income and adjusted EPS to GAAP net income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is as follows: