Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the unaudited condensed financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 21, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities, or a business combination, which we have not yet identified. We will not be limited to a particular industry or geographic region in our identification and acquisition of a target company. Our Sponsor is ACON S2 Sponsor, L.L.C., a Delaware limited liability company, or our Sponsor.
Our registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on September 16, 2020. On September 21, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 units, or the Units and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the Public Shares, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $14.4 million, inclusive of approximately $8.8 million in deferred underwriting commissions. The Underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 3,750,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. The over-allotment option expired unexercised on October 31, 2020.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated a private placement (the “Private Placement”) of 4,666,667 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7.0 million. If the over-allotment option was exercised, our Sponsor agreed to purchase an additional amount of up to 500,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant. The over-allotment option expired unexercised on October 31, 2020.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $250.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account, or the Trust Account, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering (i.e., by September 21, 2022) or if we have not executed either a letter of intent, an agreement in principle, or a definitive agreement for an initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering (i.e., by September 21, 2022), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten (10) business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation and organization, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We have generated non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents following the Initial Public Offering. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from July 21, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $704,000, which consisted of approximately $709,000 in general and administrative costs, partially offset by gain on our marketable securities of approximately $5,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $470,000 in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $684,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined below), the loan to us under a note agreement from our Sponsor of approximately $112,000 (the “Note”), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on September 21, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and Initial Shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Until the consummation of a Business Combination, the Company will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. The Company will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, September 22, 2022. The financial statements hereunder do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial position, results of operations and/or our search for and ability to identify a prospective target business and have concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements hereunder do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an administrative services agreement to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the Underwriters a 45-day option from the date of our final prospectus in connection with our initial public offering to purchase up to 3,750,000 additional Units at our initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The over-allotment option expired unexercised on October 31, 2020.
The Underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of our initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.8 million in the aggregate will be payable to the Underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the Underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 23,693,838 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the condensed balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 13,000,000 shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for Redeemable Class A Common Stock in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted, for Redeemable Class A Common Stock is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to Redeemable Class A Common Stock, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable shares of common stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable common stock shares’ proportionate interest.
Recent Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our
financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), (iv) hold a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved and (v) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.