Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Consolidated Financial Statements." For our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our 2019 Form 10-K. Effective January 1, 2020, (i) the management fees from Miraval properties are reported in our Americas management and franchising segment; (ii) the operating results and financial position of underlying Miraval hotel results are reported in our owned and leased hotels segment; (iii) the license fees we receive from Hyatt Residence Club are reported in our Americas management and franchising segment. We do not consider these changes to be material and consolidated results were not impacted. Segment operating information for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 have been recast to reflect these segment changes; see Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements" for further information. In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, operations, and financial performance based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those discussed in "Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" included elsewhere in this annual report.
Overview
At December 31, 2020, our hotel portfolio consisted of 974 full and select service hotels (235,272 rooms), including:
•413 managed properties (128,598 rooms), all of which we operate under management and hotel services agreements with third-party property owners;
•489 franchised properties (81,354 rooms), all of which are owned by third parties that have franchise agreements with us and are operated by third parties;
•31 owned properties (13,374 rooms) (including 1 consolidated hospitality venture), 1 finance leased property (171 rooms), and 6 operating leased properties (2,086 rooms), all of which we manage;
•27 managed properties and 2 franchised properties owned or leased by unconsolidated hospitality ventures (8,674 rooms); and
•5 franchised properties (1,015 rooms) that are operated by an unconsolidated hospitality venture in connection with a master license agreement by Hyatt, 3 of these properties (669 rooms) are leased by the unconsolidated hospitality venture.
Our property portfolio also included:
•8 all-inclusive resorts (3,153 rooms), all of which are owned by a third party in which we hold common shares and which operates the resorts under franchise agreements with us;
•16 vacation ownership properties under the Hyatt Residence Club brand and operated by third parties;
•37 residential properties, which consist of branded residences and serviced apartments. We manage all of the serviced apartments and those branded residential units that participate in a rental program with an adjacent Hyatt-branded hotel; and
•36 condominium ownership properties for which we provide services for the rental programs and/or homeowner associations (including 1 unconsolidated hospitality venture).
Additionally, through strategic relationships, we provide certain reservation and/or loyalty program services to hotels that are unaffiliated with our hotel portfolio and which operate under other tradenames or marks owned by such hotel or licensed by third parties.
We believe our business model allows us to pursue more diversified revenue and income streams balancing both the advantages and risks associated with these lines of business. Our expertise and experience in each of these areas gives us the flexibility to evaluate growth opportunities across these lines of business. Growth in the number of management and franchise agreements and earnings therefrom typically results in higher overall returns on invested capital because the capital investment under a typical management or franchise agreement is not significant. The capital required to build and maintain hotels we manage or franchise for third-party owners and franchisees is typically provided by the owner of the respective property with minimal capital required by us as the manager or franchisor. In certain instances, Hyatt has provided funding to owners for the
acquisition and development of hotels that Hyatt will manage or franchise in the form of cash, debt repayment or performance guarantees, preferred equity, or mezzanine debt. During periods of increasing demand, we do not share fully in the incremental profits of hotel operations for hotels we manage for third-party owners as our fee arrangements generally include a base amount that is, typically, a percentage of revenue from the subject hotel and an incentive fee that is, typically, a percentage of hotel profits after satisfying certain financial return thresholds to be earned by the owner, depending on the structure and terms of the management agreement. We do not share in the benefits of increases in profits from franchised properties because franchisees pay us an initial application fee and ongoing royalty fees that are calculated as a percentage of gross room revenues, and also at times as a percentage of food and beverage revenues, with no fees based on profits. Disputes or disruptions may arise with third-party owners and franchisees of hotels we manage, franchise, or license to and these disputes can result in termination of the relevant agreement.
With respect to property ownership, we believe ownership of selected hotels in key markets enhances our ability to control our brand presence in these markets. Ownership of hotels allows us to capture the full benefit of increases in operating profits during periods of increasing demand and room rates. The cost structure of a typical hotel includes substantial fixed costs, so as demand and room rates increase over time, the rate of growth in operating profits typically is higher than the rate of growth of revenues. The profits realized from our owned and leased hotels are generally more significantly affected by economic downturns and declines in revenues than the management and franchise fees earned from our managed and franchised properties. This is because we absorb the full impact of declining profits for our owned and leased hotels whereas our management and franchise fees do not have the same level of downside exposure to declining hotel profitability. Hotel ownership is, however, more capital intensive than managing or franchising hotels for third-party owners and franchisees, as we are responsible for the costs and all capital expenditures for our owned and leased hotels. See also "-Principal Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations-Expenses." and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business-We are exposed to the risks resulting from significant investments in owned and leased real estate, which could increase our costs, reduce our profits, limit our ability to respond to market conditions, or restrict our growth strategy."
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, 83.7% and 82.5% of our revenues were derived from operations in the United States, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, 80.4% and 80.6% of our long-lived assets were located in the United States, respectively.
We report our consolidated operations in U.S. dollars. Amounts are reported in millions, unless otherwise noted. Percentages may not recompute due to rounding, and percentage changes that are not meaningful are presented as "NM." Constant currency disclosures throughout Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are non-GAAP measures. See "-Key Business Metrics Evaluated by Management-Constant Dollar Currency" below for further discussion of constant currency disclosures. We manage our business within four reportable segments, see Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Overview of the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences have significantly reduced global travel and demand for hotel rooms and have had a material detrimental impact on global commercial activity across the travel, lodging, and hospitality industries, all of which has had, and is expected to continue to have, a material impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition.
We do not expect a material improvement in results until business traveler and consumer confidence, with respect to the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, improves and various governmental and corporate restrictions on travel and freedom of movement, as well as social distancing and other precautionary requirements, are lifted. As such, we have suspended operations at certain hotels experiencing low levels of occupancy for different lengths of time across our portfolio. As restrictions are lifted, we have been able to reopen hotels where operations were previously suspended, but as cases of the COVID-19 pandemic increase, restrictions have been re-established in certain markets, which have created, and may continue to create, demand volatility and result in the subsequent re-suspension of operations at certain hotels. Even once all restrictions have been lifted and the pandemic subsides, there remains considerable uncertainty as to the pace of recovery of demand for lodging and travel-related experiences.
We are monitoring guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state, and local public health authorities, and we may be required or elect to take additional actions based on their recommendations. Under these circumstances, there may be developments that require us to further adapt our operations.
Across our portfolio of properties, we have experienced significant disruption during the year, with intermittent recovery within certain markets, and we expect varied levels of recovery to continue throughout 2021. The pace of recovery is difficult to predict at this time and is highly dependent on a variety of factors including group business and corporate travel demand,
consumer confidence regarding the safety of travel, and the global economic impact resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or any resurgence.
At our full service hotels in the Americas, including owned and leased hotels, we have seen significant group cancellations concentrated in near-term booking dates, and we have started to see a meaningful increase in cancellations for 2021, primarily for the first half of the year. As long as the COVID-19 pandemic, and any resurgence or variant, is ongoing and travel restrictions remain in place, we anticipate cancellation activity may continue to negatively impact our business, especially for larger corporate meetings. While we continue to see long-term group bookings production, booking volumes for dates into 2021 and beyond have been uneven and significantly lower than pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels.
Key Business Metrics Evaluated by Management
Revenues
We primarily derive our revenues from owned and leased hotel operations, management of hotels, and licensing of our portfolio of brands to franchisees. Management uses revenues to assess the overall performance of our business and to analyze trends such as consumer demand, brand preference, and competition. For a detailed discussion of our primary revenue sources, see "-Principal Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations-Revenues."
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Hyatt Hotels Corporation
Net income (loss) attributable to Hyatt Hotels Corporation represents the total earnings or profits generated by our business or total loss incurred. Management uses net income (loss) to analyze the performance of our business on a consolidated basis.
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest Expense, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization ("Adjusted EBITDA") and EBITDA
We use the terms Adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA throughout this annual report. Adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA, as we define them, are non-GAAP measures. We define consolidated Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) attributable to Hyatt Hotels Corporation plus our pro rata share of unconsolidated owned and leased hospitality ventures Adjusted EBITDA based on our ownership percentage of each owned and leased venture, adjusted to exclude the following items:
•interest expense;
•benefit (provision) for income taxes;
•depreciation and amortization;
•amortization of management and franchise agreement assets and performance cure payments, which constitute payments to customers ("Contra revenue");
•revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties;
•costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties that we intend to recover over the long term;
•equity earnings (losses) from unconsolidated hospitality ventures;
•stock-based compensation expense;
•gains (losses) on sales of real estate and other;
•asset impairments; and
•other income (loss), net
We calculate consolidated Adjusted EBITDA by adding the Adjusted EBITDA of each of our reportable segments and eliminations to corporate and other Adjusted EBITDA. See "-Segment Results."
Our board of directors and executive management team focus on Adjusted EBITDA as a key performance and compensation measure both on a segment and on a consolidated basis. Adjusted EBITDA assists us in comparing our performance over various reporting periods on a consistent basis because it removes from our operating results the impact of items that do not reflect our core operations both on a segment and on a consolidated basis. Our President and Chief Executive Officer, who is our CODM, also evaluates the performance of each of our reportable segments and determines how to allocate resources to those segments, in significant part, by assessing the Adjusted EBITDA of each segment. In addition, the
compensation committee of our board of directors determines the annual variable compensation for certain members of our management based in part on consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, segment Adjusted EBITDA, or some combination of both.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors because it provides investors the same information that we use internally for purposes of assessing our operating performance and making compensation decisions and facilitates our comparison of results with results from other companies within our industry.
Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain items that can vary widely across different industries and among companies within the same industry. For instance, interest expense and benefit (provision) for income taxes are dependent upon company specifics, including capital structure, credit ratings, tax policies, and jurisdictions in which they operate, and therefore, can vary significantly across companies. Depreciation and amortization are dependent on company policies including how the assets are utilized as well as the lives assigned to the assets, and Contra revenue is dependent on company policies and strategic decisions regarding payments to hotel owners. We exclude revenues for the reimbursement of costs and costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties which relate to the reimbursement of payroll costs and for system-wide services and programs that we operate for the benefit of our hotel owners as contractually we do not provide services or operate the related programs to generate a profit over the terms of the respective contracts. Over the long term, these programs and services are not designed to impact our economics, either positively or negatively. Therefore, we exclude the net impact when evaluating period-over-period changes in our operating results. Adjusted EBITDA includes costs incurred on behalf of our managed and franchised properties related to system-wide services and programs that we do not intend to recover from hotel owners. We exclude stock-based compensation expense to remove the variability amongst companies resulting from different compensation plans companies have adopted. Finally, we exclude other items that are not core to our operations, such as asset impairments and unrealized and realized gains and losses on marketable securities.
Adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA are not substitutes for net income (loss) attributable to Hyatt Hotels Corporation, net income (loss), or any other measure prescribed by GAAP. There are limitations to using non-GAAP measures such as Adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA. Although we believe that Adjusted EBITDA can make an evaluation of our operating performance more consistent because it removes items that do not reflect our core operations, other companies in our industry may define Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. As a result, it may be difficult to use Adjusted EBITDA or similarly named non-GAAP measures that other companies may use to compare the performance of those companies to our performance. Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of the income (loss) generated by our business. Our management compensates for these limitations by referencing our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA supplementally. See our consolidated statements of income (loss) in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report.
See below for a reconciliation of net income (loss) attributable to Hyatt Hotels Corporation to EBITDA and a reconciliation of EBITDA to consolidated Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Adjusted selling, general, and administrative expenses, as we define it, is a non-GAAP measure. Adjusted selling, general, and administrative expenses exclude the impact of deferred compensation plans funded through rabbi trusts and stock-based compensation expense. Adjusted selling, general, and administrative expenses assist us in comparing our performance over various reporting periods on a consistent basis because it removes from our operating results the impact of items that do not reflect our core operations, both on a segment and consolidated basis. See "-Results of Operations" for a reconciliation of selling, general, and administrative expenses to Adjusted selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Comparable Hotels
"Comparable system-wide hotels" represents all properties we manage or franchise (including owned and leased properties) and that are operated for the entirety of the periods being compared and that have not sustained substantial damage, business interruption, or undergone large scale renovations during the periods being compared or for which comparable results are not available. Hotels that have temporarily suspended operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic are included in our definition of comparable system-wide hotels. We may use variations of comparable system-wide hotels to specifically refer to comparable system-wide Americas full service or select service hotels for those properties that we manage or franchise within the Americas management and franchising segment, comparable system-wide ASPAC full service or select service hotels for those properties we manage or franchise within the ASPAC management and franchising segment, or comparable system-wide EAME/SW Asia full service or select service hotels for those properties that we manage or franchise within the EAME/SW Asia management and franchising segment. "Comparable owned and leased hotels" represents all properties we own or lease and that are operated and consolidated for the entirety of the periods being compared and have not sustained substantial damage, business interruption, or undergone large scale renovations during the periods being compared or for which comparable results are not available. Hotels that have temporarily suspended operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic are included in our definition of comparable owned and leased hotels. Comparable system-wide hotels and comparable owned and leased hotels are commonly used as a basis of measurement in our industry. "Non-comparable system-wide hotels" or "non-comparable owned and leased hotels" represent all hotels that do not meet the respective definition of "comparable" as defined above.
Constant Dollar Currency
We report the results of our operations both on an as-reported basis, as well as on a constant dollar basis. Constant dollar currency, which is a non-GAAP measure, excludes the effects of movements in foreign currency exchange rates between comparative periods. We believe constant dollar analysis provides valuable information regarding our results as it removes currency fluctuations from our operating results. We calculate constant dollar currency by restating prior-period local currency financial results at the current period's exchange rates. These restated amounts are then compared to our current period reported amounts to provide operationally driven variances in our results.
RevPAR
RevPAR is the product of the ADR and the average daily occupancy percentage. RevPAR does not include non-room revenues, which consist of ancillary revenues generated by a hotel property, such as food and beverage, parking, and other guest service revenues. Our management uses RevPAR to identify trend information with respect to room revenues from comparable properties and to evaluate hotel performance on a regional and segment basis. RevPAR is a commonly used performance measure in our industry.
RevPAR changes that are driven predominantly by changes in occupancy have different implications for overall revenue levels and incremental profitability than do changes that are driven predominantly by changes in average room rates. For example, increases in occupancy at a hotel would lead to increases in room revenues and additional variable operating costs (including housekeeping services, utilities, and room amenity costs), and could also result in increased ancillary revenues (including food and beverage). In contrast, changes in average room rates typically have a greater impact on margins and profitability as average room rate changes result in minimal impacts to variable operating costs.
Average Daily Rate
ADR represents hotel room revenues, divided by the total number of rooms sold in a given period. ADR measures average room price attained by a hotel, and ADR trends provide useful information concerning the pricing environment and the nature of the customer base of a hotel or group of hotels. ADR is a commonly used performance measure in our industry, and we use ADR to assess the pricing levels that we are able to generate by customer group, as changes in rates have a different effect on overall revenues and incremental profitability than changes in occupancy, as described above.
Occupancy
Occupancy represents the total number of rooms sold divided by the total number of rooms available at a hotel or group of hotels. Occupancy measures the utilization of a hotel's available capacity. We use occupancy to gauge demand at a specific hotel or group of hotels in a given period. Occupancy levels also help us determine achievable ADR levels as demand for hotel rooms increases or decreases.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
Our revenues, costs, and expenses are affected by a variety of factors. Revenues are principally affected by consumer demand, which is closely linked to economic conditions and is sensitive to business and personal discretionary spending levels. Expenses associated with our business, including personnel costs, interest, rent, property taxes, insurance, and utilities, are relatively fixed and may increase at a greater rate than our revenues and/or may not be able to be reduced at the same rate as declining revenues. The fixed-cost nature of these expenses limits our ability to offset reductions in revenue through cost-cutting measures, which could adversely affect our net cash flows and profits. This effect can be especially pronounced during periods of economic contraction or slow economic growth, and when demand rapidly and significantly decreases, as we experienced with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors-Risks Related to the Hospitality Industry," "Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business," and "Risk Factors-Risks Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic."
Revenues
We primarily derive our revenues from the following sources:
Revenues from hotel operations. Represents revenues derived from hotel operations, including room rentals and food and beverage sales and other ancillary revenues at our owned and leased properties. Revenues from the majority of our hotel operations depend heavily on demand from group and transient travelers, as discussed below. Revenues from our owned and leased hotels are primarily derived from hotel operations.
Revenues from room rentals and ancillary revenues are primarily derived from three categories of customers: transient, group, and contract. Transient guests are individual travelers who are traveling for business or leisure. Our group guests are traveling for group events that reserve a minimum of 10 rooms for meetings or social functions sponsored by associations, corporate, social, military, educational, religious, or other organizations. Group business usually includes a block of room accommodations as well as other ancillary services, such as catering and banquet services. Our contract guests are traveling under a contract negotiated for a block of rooms for more than 30 days in duration at agreed-upon rates. Airline crews are typical generators of contract demand for our hotels.
Management, franchise, and other fees. Represents revenues derived from fees earned from hotels and residential ownership units managed worldwide (usually under long-term management agreements), franchise fees received in connection with the franchising of our brands (usually under long-term franchise agreements), termination fees, and license fees received in connection with the licensing of the Hyatt brand names through our co-branded credit card program and vacation ownership properties. For a detailed discussion of our management and franchise fees, see Part I, Item 1, "Business-Management Agreements-Hotel Management Agreements Fees" and Part I, Item 1, "Business-Franchise Agreements-Fees."
Other revenues. Represents revenues primarily related to our residential management operations for our condominium ownership units, co-branded credit card program, and the Exhale spa and fitness business, which was sold during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties. Represents revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of third-party owners and franchisees. These reimbursed costs relate primarily to payroll at managed properties where we are the employer, as well as system-wide services and the loyalty program operated on behalf of owners. We recognize these revenues in "Revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties" and the corresponding costs in "Costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties" in our consolidated statements of income (loss).
Intersegment eliminations. Represents management fee revenues and expenses related to our owned and leased hotels and promotional award redemption revenues and expenses related to our co-branded credit card program at our owned and leased hotels, which are eliminated in consolidation.
RevPAR Statistics
(1) The number of comparable hotels presented above includes owned and leased hotels and hotels that have temporarily
suspended operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
System-wide RevPAR decreased 65.4% during 2020, compared to 2019, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on group and transient demand worldwide beginning in early 2020. Our hotel operations were suspended at various points throughout the year, with operations suspended at 25% of our system-wide hotels at March 31, 2020. During the latter half of the year, hotels across the portfolio resumed operations, and at December 31, 2020, 94% of our hotel portfolio was open. See "-Segment Results" for detailed discussion of RevPAR by segment.
As various parts of the world are experiencing a resurgence in positive COVID-19 cases and travel restrictions are evolving, there continues to be uncertainty surrounding the profile and pace of recovery. It is our expectation that business transient and group business could continue to be muted and may gradually improve beginning in the second half of 2021, and that leisure transient demand could sustain levels experienced in the third and fourth quarter of 2020 and gradually improve.
Competition. The hospitality industry is highly competitive. Increased supply can put significant pressure on ADR at our properties as well as those of our competitors. Increasingly, we also face competition from new channels of distribution in the travel industry, including large companies that offer travel services as part of their business model and peer-to-peer inventory sources, as well as industry consolidation. We believe our brand strength and ability to manage our operations in an efficient manner will help us to continue competing successfully within the hospitality industry.
Agreements with third-party owners and franchisees and relationships with developers. We depend on our long-term management and franchise agreements with third-party owners and franchisees for a significant portion of our management and franchising fee revenues. The viability of our management and franchising business depends on our ability to maintain good relationships with third-party property owners and franchisees. Our relationships with these third parties also generate new relationships with developers and opportunities for property development that can support our growth. We believe we have good relationships with our third-party owners, franchisees, and developers in all of our segments and are committed to the continued growth and development of these relationships. These relationships exist with a diverse group of owners, franchisees, and developers and are not heavily concentrated with any particular third party.
Access to capital. The hospitality industry is a capital-intensive business that requires significant amounts of capital expenditures to develop, maintain, and renovate properties. Third-party owners and franchisees are required to fund these capital expenditures for the properties they own in accordance with the terms of the applicable management or franchise agreement. Access to the capital that we or our third-party owners, franchisees, or development partners need to finance the construction of new properties or to maintain and renovate existing properties is critical to the continued growth of our business and our revenues. The availability of capital or the conditions under which we or our third-party owners, franchisees, or development partners can obtain capital can have a significant impact on the overall level, cost, and pace of future development and therefore the ability to grow our revenues.
Expenses
We primarily incur the following expenses:
Owned and leased hotels expenses. Reflects the expenses of our consolidated owned and leased hotels. Expenses to operate our hotels include rooms expenses, food and beverage costs, other support costs, and property expenses. Rooms expenses generally includes compensation costs for housekeeping, laundry, and front desk staff and supply costs for guest room amenities and laundry. Food and beverage costs include costs for wait and kitchen staff and food and beverage products. Other support expenses consist of costs associated with property-level management (including deferred compensation plans for certain employees that are funded through contributions to rabbi trusts), utilities, sales and marketing, hotel spa operations, parking and other guest recreation, entertainment, and services. Property expenses include property taxes, repairs and maintenance, rent, and insurance.
Depreciation and amortization expenses. These are non-cash expenses that primarily consist of depreciation of fixed assets such as buildings, furniture, fixtures, and equipment at our consolidated owned and leased hotels. Amortization expenses primarily consists of amortization of management and franchise agreement intangibles. Changes in depreciation and amortization expenses may be driven by renovations of existing properties, acquisition or development of new properties and/or businesses, or the disposition of existing properties through sale or closure.
Other direct costs. Represents expenses primarily related to our residential management operations for our condominium ownership units, co-branded credit card program, and the Exhale spa and fitness business, which was sold during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Consists primarily of compensation expenses, including deferred compensation plans for certain employees that are funded through contributions to rabbi trusts, for our corporate staff and personnel supporting our business segments (including regional offices that support our management and franchising segments), professional fees (including consulting, audit, and legal fees), travel and entertainment expenses, sales and marketing expenses, bad debt expenses, and office administrative and related expenses, including rent expenses.
Costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties. Represents costs incurred on behalf of third-party owners and franchisees. These reimbursed costs relate primarily to payroll at managed properties where we are the employer, as well as system-wide services and the loyalty program operated on behalf of owners.
Other Items
Asset impairments
We hold significant amounts of goodwill, intangible assets, property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use ("ROU") assets, and investments. We evaluate these assets on a quarterly basis for impairment as further discussed in "-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates." These evaluations have, in the past, resulted in impairment charges for certain of these assets based on the specific facts and circumstances surrounding those assets. We may be required to take additional impairment charges to reflect further declines in our asset and/or investment values.
Acquisitions, divestitures, and significant renovations
We routinely acquire, divest, or undertake large scale renovations of hotel properties. The results of operations derived from these properties do not, therefore, meet the definition of "comparable hotels" as defined in "-Key Business Metrics Evaluated by Management." The results of operations from these properties, however, may have a material effect on our results from period to period and are, therefore, addressed separately in our discussion on results of operations when material.
In 2020, we entered into the following key transactions:
•sold the shares of the entities which own Hyatt Regency Baku for approximately $11 million, net of $4 million of cash disposed, closing costs, and proration adjustments, and entered into a long-term management agreement for the property upon sale;
•sold the shares of the entity which owns the Exhale spa and fitness business for a nominal amount; and
•sold a 58% ownership interest in certain of our subsidiaries that developed Hyatt Centric City Center Philadelphia and adjacent parking and retail space for $72 million and recorded our 42% ownership interest as an equity method investment.
In 2019, we entered into the following key transactions:
•sold the shares of the entity which owns Grand Hyatt Seoul and adjacent land for approximately $481 million and entered into a long-term management agreement for the property upon sale;
•sold Hyatt Regency Atlanta for approximately $355 million and entered into a long-term management agreement for the property upon sale; and
•sold the property adjacent to Grand Hyatt San Francisco and assigned the related Apple store lease for approximately $120 million.
See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements" for further discussion on these key transactions.
Effect of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations
A significant portion of our operations are conducted in functional currencies other than our reporting currency, which is the U.S. dollar. As a result, we are required to translate those results from the functional currency into U.S. dollars at market based average exchange rates during the period reported. When comparing our results of operations between periods, there may be material portions of the changes in our revenues or expenses that are derived from fluctuations in exchange rates experienced between those periods. See Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors-Risks Related to the Hospitality Industry-Because we derive a portion of our revenues from operations outside the United States, the risks of doing business internationally, or in a particular country or region, could lower our revenues, increase our costs, reduce our profits, or disrupt our business."
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Discussion on Consolidated Results
For additional information regarding our consolidated results, refer to our consolidated statements of income (loss) included in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Consolidated Financial Statements." Consolidated results were impacted significantly by the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. See "-Segment Results" for further discussion.
The impact from our investments in marketable securities held to fund our deferred compensation plans through rabbi trusts was recognized on the various financial statement line items discussed below and had no impact on net income (loss). See "Net gains (losses) and interest income from marketable securities held to fund rabbi trusts" for the allocation of the impact to the various financial statement line items.
Owned and leased hotels revenues.
Owned and leased hotels revenues decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by decreased demand and suspended hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For the same period, non-comparable owned and leased hotels revenues primarily decreased due to dispositions. See "-Segment Results" for further discussion.
Management, franchise, and other fees revenues.
The decrease in management and franchise fees for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily driven by decreased demand and suspended hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in Contra revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily driven by amortization of management and franchise assets related to newly opened properties and a performance cure payment. See "-Segment Results" for further discussion.
Other revenues. Other revenues decreased $67 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our residential management and Exhale spa and fitness operations.
Revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties.
Excluding the impact of rabbi trust, revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated suspension of hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year as well as cost containment initiatives in 2020, both of which led to lower reimbursements for payroll and related costs and expenses related to system-wide services provided to managed and franchised properties.
Owned and leased hotels expenses.
The decrease in owned and leased hotels expenses, which included a $4 million net favorable currency impact, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by the aforementioned decreased demand and suspension of hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year. For the same period, non-comparable owned and leased hotels expenses decreased primarily due to dispositions in 2019. See "-Segment Results" for further discussion.
Depreciation and amortization expenses. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $19 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by dispositions in 2019.
Other direct costs. Other direct costs decreased $68 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our residential management and Exhale spa and fitness operations as well as decreases related to our co-branded credit card program from lower point transfers.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses.
See "-Key Business Metrics Evaluated by Management" for further discussion of Adjusted selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily due to significant decreases in expenses as a result of cost containment initiatives in 2020, primarily payroll and related costs, and $22 million of integration-related costs incurred in 2019 associated with the acquisition of Two Roads. This decrease is partially offset by $33 million of bad debt expense recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, which is an increase of $28 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties.
Costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated suspension of hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year as well as cost containment initiatives in 2020, both of which led to lower payroll and related costs and expenses related to system-wide services provided to managed and franchised properties.
Net gains (losses) and interest income from marketable securities held to fund rabbi trusts.
Net gains (losses) and interest income from marketable securities held to fund rabbi trusts decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the performance of the underlying invested assets.
Equity earnings (losses) from unconsolidated hospitality ventures.
(1) Foreign currency impact is driven by one of our unconsolidated hospitality ventures which holds loans denominated in a currency other than its functional currency.
The increase in Hyatt's share of unconsolidated hospitality ventures net losses, excluding foreign currency during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated suspension of hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased $53 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the issuances of the 2022 Notes, the 2025 Notes, and the 2030 Notes during the current year and issuance costs related to the bridge credit facility executed and terminated during 2020. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Gains (losses) on sales of real estate and other. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $30 million pre-tax loss, which included the reclassification of $24 million of currency translation losses from accumulated other comprehensive loss, related to the sale of our shares of the entities which own Hyatt Regency Baku, an $11 million pre-tax loss related to the sale of our shares of the entity which owns the Exhale spa and fitness business, and a $3 million pre-tax loss
related to the sale of land and construction in progress. The losses were partially offset by a $4 million pre-tax gain related to an unrelated third-party's investment in certain of our subsidiaries that developed Hyatt Centric City Center Philadelphia and adjacent parking and retail space and a $4 million pre-tax gain for the sale of a commercial building in Omaha, Nebraska.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a $349 million pre-tax gain related to the sale of our shares of the entity which owns Grand Hyatt Seoul and adjacent land, a $272 million pre-tax gain related to the sale of Hyatt Regency Atlanta, and a $101 million pre-tax gain related to the sale of the property adjacent to Grand Hyatt San Francisco and assignment of the Apple store lease.
See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Asset impairments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $38 million of goodwill impairment charges and $24 million of impairment charges related to property and equipment, operating lease ROU assets, and intangible assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $18 million of asset impairment charges related to intangible assets, primarily as a result of contract terminations.
See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Other income (loss), net. Other income (loss), net decreased $219 million from income of $127 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to a loss of $92 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Benefit (provision) for income taxes.
The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to net losses before income taxes. The increase in the effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, is primarily due to U.S. net operating losses that will be benefited at the 35% tax rate in accordance with the terms of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES") Act. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements" for further detail.
Segment Results
As described in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements," we evaluate segment operating performance using owned and leased hotels revenues, management, franchise, and other fees revenues, and Adjusted EBITDA, and amounts for the year ended December 31, 2019 have been recast for the segment changes effective January 1, 2020.
Owned and leased hotels segment.
Revenues, comparable RevPAR, and Adjusted EBITDA decreased significantly during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in March 2020 at our owned and leased properties, resulting in decreased group and transient demand. At March 31, 2020, 18% of our owned and leased hotels were open, and throughout the year, operations have largely resumed across the portfolio, with 82% of our owned and leased hotels open at December 31, 2020.
Owned and leased hotels segment revenues.
Comparable owned and leased hotels revenues decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by the significant impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic as described above.
The decrease in non-comparable owned and leased hotels revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, was primarily driven by the dispositions of Hyatt Regency Atlanta and Grand Hyatt Seoul in 2019.
The decline in RevPAR at our comparable owned and leased hotels during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was driven by the temporary suspension of operations at certain owned and leased hotels for varying lengths of time during the year as well as low demand, both due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we removed one property from the comparable owned and leased hotels results as the hotel was sold.
Owned and leased hotels segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Owned and leased hotels Adjusted EBITDA. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA at our comparable owned and leased hotels during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily driven by the aforementioned decreases in revenues due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Within Adjusted EBITDA, the decreases in revenues were partially offset by decreases in comparable owned and leased hotels expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by a reduction of payroll and related costs due to the temporary suspension of hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year. Adjusted EBITDA at our non-comparable owned and leased hotels decreased $40 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to
the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the dispositions of Hyatt Regency Atlanta and Grand Hyatt Seoul in 2019.
Pro rata share of unconsolidated hospitality ventures Adjusted EBITDA. Our pro rata share of Adjusted EBITDA from our unconsolidated hospitality ventures decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by decreased demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Americas management and franchising segment.
Revenues, full service and select service RevPAR, and Adjusted EBITDA decreased significantly during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in March 2020. At March 31, 2020, 51% of our Americas full service hotels and 91% of Americas select service hotels were open, and throughout the rest of the year, operations resumed across the portfolio, with 90% of our Americas full service hotels and 99% of Americas select service hotels open at December 31, 2020.
Americas management and franchising segment revenues.
The decreases in management, franchise, and other fees and other revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, were driven by hotels with suspended operations and depressed demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The decrease in revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, was driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated suspension of hotel operations at a number of hotels for varying lengths of time during the year as well as cost containment initiatives in 2020, both of which led to lower reimbursements for payroll and related costs and expenses related to system-wide services provided to managed and franchised properties.
The RevPAR decreases at our comparable system-wide full service and select service hotels during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, were due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, two properties left the chain and were removed from the comparable Americas full service system-wide hotel results, and three properties were removed from the comparable Americas select service system-wide hotel results as two properties left the chain and one property is undergoing a significant renovation.
Americas management and franchising segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the aforementioned decreases in revenues and by a $12 million increase in bad debt expense, partially offset
by reductions in selling, general, and administrative expenses as a result of cost containment initiatives in 2020, primarily payroll and related costs.
ASPAC management and franchising segment.
Revenues, full service and select service RevPAR, and Adjusted EBITDA decreased significantly during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in late January 2020. At March 31, 2020, 88% of our ASPAC full and select hotels were open. Operations have resumed across the portfolio throughout the rest of the year, with 98% of hotels in ASPAC open at December 31, 2020.
ASPAC management and franchising segment revenues.
Management, franchise, and other fees decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The decrease in revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by lower reimbursements for expenses related to system-wide services provided to managed and franchised properties due to cost containment initiatives in 2020.
Comparable system-wide hotels RevPAR decreased for year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, driven by decreased inbound travel and low transient demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, one property left the chain and was removed from the comparable ASPAC select service system-wide hotel results, and four properties were removed from the comparable ASPAC full service system-wide hotel results, as three properties left the chain and one property experienced a seasonal closure.
ASPAC management and franchising segment Adjusted EBITDA.
The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily driven by the aforementioned decrease in revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year, partially offset by a reduction in expenses as a result of cost containment initiatives in 2020, primarily payroll and related costs.
EAME/SW Asia management and franchising segment.
Revenues, full service and select service RevPAR, and Adjusted EBITDA decreased significantly during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in March 2020. At March 31, 2020, 52% of our EAME/SW Asia full and select service hotels were open. Operations have resumed across the portfolio throughout the rest of the year, with 84% of hotels in EAME/SW Asia open at December 31, 2020.
EAME/SW Asia management and franchising segment revenues.
The decrease in management, franchise, and other fees during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The increase in Contra revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by a performance cure payment.
The decrease in revenues for the reimbursement of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties during year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by lower reimbursements for expenses related to system-wide services provided to managed and franchised properties due to cost containment initiatives in 2020.
Comparable system-wide hotels RevPAR decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, three properties that left the chain were removed from the comparable EAME/SW Asia full service system-wide hotel results, and no properties were removed from the comparable EAME/SW Asia select service system-wide hotel results.
EAME/SW Asia management and franchising segment Adjusted EBITDA.
The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by the aforementioned decrease in revenues and an increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses driven by a $15 million increase in bad debt expense, partially offset by reductions in expenses as a result of cost containment initiatives in 2020, primarily payroll and related costs.
Corporate and other.
Revenues decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by decreases in Exhale spa and fitness operations impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as well as decreases in revenue from point transfers related to our co-branded credit card program.
Adjusted EBITDA increased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to reductions in expenses as a result of cost containment initiatives in 2020, primarily payroll and related costs, reductions in other direct costs at our Exhale spa and fitness operations due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as decreased expenses related to our co-branded credit card program driven by lower point transfers, and integration-related costs incurred in 2019 associated with the acquisition of Two Roads. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted EBITDA was negatively impacted by $45 million of costs incurred on behalf of managed and franchised properties that we do not intend to recover from hotel owners. The costs were associated with providing necessary system-wide services and programs, and during the year, we continued to provide these services despite the reduction in revenues for the reimbursement of these costs due to declines in hotel operations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-GAAP Measure Reconciliation
The table below provides a reconciliation of our net income (loss) attributable to Hyatt Hotels Corporation to EBITDA and a reconciliation of EBITDA to consolidated Adjusted EBITDA:
Inflation
We do not believe inflation had a material effect on our business in 2020 or 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We finance our business primarily with existing cash, short-term investments, and cash generated from our operations. As part of our long-term business strategy, we use net proceeds from dispositions to support our acquisitions and new investment opportunities as well as return capital to our shareholders when appropriate. If we deem necessary, we borrow cash under our revolving credit facility or from other third-party sources and may also raise funds by issuing debt or equity securities. We maintain a cash investment policy that emphasizes preservation of capital.
The COVID-19 pandemic and related travel restrictions and other containment efforts have had a significant impact on the travel and lodging and hospitality industries and, as a result, on our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition. Given the uncertainty and dynamic nature of the situation, we cannot currently estimate the ultimate financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and have therefore taken significant actions to manage operating expenses and cash flows consistent with business needs and demand levels. Those actions include the reduction of (i) capital expenditures; (ii) selling, general, and administrative expenses, including permanent reductions in staffing levels; (iii) a significant portion of owned and leased hotels expenses; and (iv) costs incurred on behalf of our third-party owners and franchisees. We also suspended our quarterly dividend and all share repurchases.
On August 26, 2020, we issued the 2022 Notes and on April 21, 2020, we entered into the Revolver Amendment and issued the 2025 Notes and the 2030 Notes. See our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on September 1, 2020, April 21, 2020, and April 24, 2020, respectively, all of which are incorporated in this annual report by reference, for more information related to our revolving credit facility amendment and notes offerings. Based on these actions, we believe that our cash position, short-term investments, and cash from operations, together with borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility and our access to the capital markets, will be adequate to meet all of our funding requirements and capital deployment objectives for the foreseeable future.
We may, from time to time, seek to retire or purchase additional amounts of our outstanding equity and/or debt securities through cash purchases and/or exchanges for other securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, or otherwise, including pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan or an accelerated share repurchase transaction. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Recent Transactions Affecting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, various transactions impacted our liquidity. See "-Sources and Uses of Cash."
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities decreased $1,007 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decline in performance across the portfolio as results were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the $61 million settlement of our interest rate locks upon issuance of the 2030 Notes. This decrease was partially offset by decreased tax payments in 2020.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
2020 Activity:
•We invested $601 million in net purchases of marketable securities and short-term investments.
•We invested $122 million in capital expenditures (see "-Capital Expenditures").
•We invested $65 million in unconsolidated hospitality ventures.
•We issued $32 million of financing receivables.
•We received $72 million of proceeds related to the disposition of 58% ownership interest in certain subsidiaries that developed Hyatt Centric City Center Philadelphia and adjacent parking and retail space.
•We sold the shares of the entities which own Hyatt Regency Baku for approximately $11 million, net of $4 million of cash disposed, closing costs, and proration adjustments.
•We received $6 million of proceeds, net of closing costs and proration adjustments, from the sale of a commercial building in Omaha, Nebraska.
2019 Activity:
•We sold the shares of the entity which owns Grand Hyatt Seoul and adjacent land to an unrelated third party for approximately $467 million, net of closing costs and proration adjustments.
•We sold Hyatt Regency Atlanta to an unrelated third party for approximately $346 million, net of closing costs and proration adjustments.
•We sold the property adjacent to Grand Hyatt San Francisco and assigned the related Apple store lease to an unrelated third party for approximately $115 million, net of closing costs and proration adjustments. Proceeds from the sale were held as restricted for use in a potential like-kind exchange.
•We collected $46 million of unsecured financing receivables related to the Hyatt Regency Mexico City transaction.
•We received $25 million of proceeds from sales activity related to certain equity method investments.
•We sold our contractual right to purchase Hyatt Regency Portland at the Oregon Convention Center to an unrelated third party for approximately $21 million, net of closing costs.
•We invested $369 million in capital expenditures (see "-Capital Expenditures").
Periodically, we enter into like-kind exchange agreements upon the disposition or acquisition of certain properties. Pursuant to the terms of these agreements, the proceeds from the sales are placed into an escrow account administered by a qualified intermediary and are unavailable for our use until released. The proceeds are recorded as restricted cash on our consolidated balance sheets and released (i) if they are utilized as part of a like-kind exchange agreement, (ii) if we do not identify a suitable replacement property within 45 days after the agreement date, or (iii) when a like-kind exchange agreement is not completed within the remaining allowable time period.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
2020 Activity:
•We issued the 2025 and the 2030 Notes and received approximately $890 million of net proceeds, after deducting $10 million of underwriting discounts and other offering expenses.
•We issued the 2022 Notes and received approximately $745 million of net proceeds, after deducting $5 million of underwriting discounts and other offering expenses.
•We repurchased 827,643 shares of Class A common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $69 million.
•We paid a first quarter $0.20 per share cash dividend on Class A and Class B common stock totaling $20 million.
•We borrowed and repaid $400 million on our revolving credit facility.
2019 Activity:
•We repurchased 5,621,281 shares of Class A and Class B common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $421 million.
•We paid four quarterly $0.19 per share cash dividends on Class A and Class B common stock totaling $80 million.
•We paid $24 million of contingent consideration as a result of the acquisition of Two Roads.
•We borrowed and repaid $400 million on our revolving credit facility.
We define net debt as total debt less the total of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. We consider net debt and its components to be an important indicator of liquidity and a guiding measure of capital structure strategy. Net debt is a non-GAAP measure and may not be computed the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies. The following table provides a summary of our debt to capital ratios:
(1) Excludes approximately $671 million and $572 million of our share of indebtedness of our unconsolidated hospitality ventures accounted for under the equity method at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, substantially all of which is non-recourse to us and a portion of which we guarantee pursuant to separate agreements.
Capital Expenditures
We routinely make capital expenditures to enhance our business. We classify our capital expenditures into maintenance and technology, enhancements to existing properties, and investment in new properties under development or recently opened. We have been, and will continue to be, disciplined with respect to our capital spending, taking into account our cash flow from operations.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact to our business, we have taken actions to reduce capital expenditures in 2020. We expect to maintain conservative levels of capital expenditures during 2021 due to a continuation of demand pressure resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in enhancements to existing properties is driven by a decrease in discretionary hotel renovations in 2020 as well as significant renovations completed in 2019 for a property in Phoenix and Grand Hyatt Seoul, which was sold during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in investment in new properties under development or recently opened is primarily driven by a decrease in renovation spend at two Miraval properties and the development of Hyatt Centric City Center Philadelphia and adjacent parking and retail space in 2019 that converted to an equity method investment in 2020. The decrease in maintenance and technology expenditures is driven by decreased spending spread across the owned and leased hotels portfolio.
Senior Notes
The table below sets forth the outstanding principal balance of our various series of senior unsecured notes (collectively, the "Senior Notes") at December 31, 2020, as described in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements." Interest on the Senior Notes is payable semi-annually or quarterly.
In the indenture that governs the Senior Notes, we agreed not to:
•create any liens on our principal properties, or on the capital stock or debt of our subsidiaries that own or lease principal properties, to secure debt without also effectively providing that the Senior Notes are secured equally and ratably with such debt for so long as such debt is so secured; or
•enter into any sale and leaseback transactions with respect to our principal properties.
These limitations are subject to significant exceptions.
The indenture also limits our ability to enter into mergers or consolidations or transfer all or substantially all of our assets unless certain conditions are satisfied.
If a change of control triggering event occurs, as defined in the indenture governing the Senior Notes, we will be required to offer to purchase the Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of purchase. With the exception of the 2022 Notes, we may also redeem some or all of the Senior Notes at any time prior to their maturity at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption plus a make-whole amount. The amount of any make-whole payment depends, in part, on the yield of U.S. Treasury securities with a comparable maturity to the Senior Notes at the date of redemption. The 2022 Notes will not be redeemable at our option at any time before the first anniversary of the issue date of the notes. At any time on or after the first anniversary of the issue date of the 2022 Notes, we may redeem some or all of the notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest.
We are in compliance with all applicable covenants under the indenture governing our Senior Notes at December 31, 2020.
On August 26, 2020, we issued the 2022 Notes. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements" and our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on September 1, 2020, which is incorporated in this annual report by reference, for more information related to the 2022 Notes.
On April 21, 2020, we issued the 2025 Notes and the 2030 Notes. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements" and our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 24, 2020, which is incorporated in this annual report by reference, for more information related to the 2025 Notes and 2030 Notes.
Revolving Credit Facility
On April 21, 2020, we entered into the Revolver Amendment. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements" and our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 21, 2020, which is incorporated in this annual report by reference, for more information related to the Revolver Amendment. Terms of the Revolver Amendment include, but are not limited to, waivers on certain covenants and modifications to negative covenants and other terms, including the interest rate. The terms of the Revolver Amendment also restrict our ability to repurchase shares and pay dividends through the first quarter of 2021.
The revolving credit facility is intended to provide financing for working capital and general corporate purposes, including commercial paper backup and permitted investments and acquisitions. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had no balance outstanding. We had $1 million outstanding undrawn letters of credit issued under our revolving credit facility (and reduced availability thereunder) at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, we had available borrowing capacity of $1,499 million under our revolving credit facility, net of outstanding undrawn letters of credit. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
All of our borrowings under our revolving credit facility are guaranteed by substantially all of our material domestic subsidiaries, as defined in the revolving credit facility. All guarantees are guarantees of payment and performance and not of collection. Hotel Investors I, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary, is an additional borrower under our revolving credit facility.
Interest rates on outstanding borrowings are either LIBOR-based or based on an alternate base rate, with margins in each case based on our credit rating or, in certain circumstances, our credit rating and leverage ratio. Interest rates under our revolving credit facility are subject to a LIBOR floor of 0.750%.
Borrowings under our revolving credit facility bear interest, at our option, at either one, two, three, or six month LIBOR (subject to the LIBOR floor) plus a margin of 1.550% per annum (plus any mandatory costs, if applicable) or the alternative base rate plus a margin of 0.550% per annum, in each case depending on our credit rating by either S&P or Moody's or, in certain circumstances, our credit rating and leverage ratio. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate for a one month LIBOR borrowing under our revolving credit facility would have been 2.300%, or LIBOR of 0.144% (but subject to a LIBOR floor of 0.750%) plus the margin. Borrowings under our swingline subfacility will bear interest at a per annum rate equal to the alternate base rate plus the applicable percentage for revolving loans that are alternate base rate loans. We are also required to pay letter of credit fees with respect to each letter of credit equal to the applicable margin for LIBOR on the face amount of each letter of credit. In addition, we must pay a fronting fee to the issuer of each letter of credit of 0.10% per annum on the face amount of such letter of credit.
The revolving credit facility also provides for a facility fee of 0.200% of the total commitment of the lenders under the revolving credit facility (depending on our credit rating by either S&P or Moody's). The facility fee is charged regardless of the level of borrowings.
In the event we no longer have a credit rating from either S&P or Moody's or our rating falls below BBB- or Baa3, with respect to borrowings under our revolving credit facility (a) such borrowings will bear interest at LIBOR (subject to the LIBOR floor) plus 2.000% per annum or the alternative base rate referenced above at 1.000% total per annum, in each case, depending on our leverage ratio and (b) the facility fee will be 0.250%.
Our revolving credit facility contains a number of affirmative and restrictive covenants including limitations on the ability to place liens on our direct or indirect subsidiaries' assets; to merge, consolidate, and dissolve; to sell assets; to engage in transactions with affiliates; to change our or our direct or indirect subsidiaries' fiscal year or organizational documents; and to make investments and restricted payments.
The revolving credit facility contains certain covenants, including financial covenants that limit our maximum leverage (consisting of the ratio of Consolidated Adjusted Funded Debt to Consolidated EBITDA, each as defined in the revolving credit facility) to not more than 4.5 to 1 (or 5.5 to 1 as of the two fiscal quarters following the end of the Covenant Waiver Period described below), and limit our Secured Funded Debt Ratio (consisting of the ratio of Secured Funded Debt to Property and Equipment, each as defined in the revolving credit facility), to not more than 0.30 to 1. These financial covenants are measured quarterly, except that the maximum leverage ratio covenant is not required to be measured through the first quarter of 2021 (the "Covenant Waiver Period"). Our revolving credit facility also includes a requirement to maintain Liquidity (as defined in the revolving credit facility) of at least $300 million during the Covenant Waiver Period. Our outstanding Senior Notes do not contain a corresponding financial covenant or a requirement that we maintain certain financial ratios.
Letters of Credit
We issue letters of credit either under the revolving credit facility as discussed above or directly with financial institutions. We had $234 million and $263 million in letters of credit issued directly with financial institutions outstanding at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, these letters of credit had weighted-average fees of approximately 142 basis points and maturity dates of less than one year.
Other Indebtedness and Future Debt Maturities
Excluding the $3,050 million of Senior Notes, all other third-party indebtedness was $194 million, net of $26 million of unamortized discounts and deferred financing fees, at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, $260 million of our outstanding debt will mature in the following 12 months. We believe we will have adequate liquidity, including our capacity to borrow under our revolving credit facility, and/or proceeds from recent issuances of debt to repay our current debt obligations.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
(1) Includes principal and interest payments; assumes constant foreign exchange rates for floating-rate debt at December 31, 2020.
(2) Primarily consists of deferred compensation plan liabilities; excludes $166 million in long-term taxes payable due to the uncertainty related to the timing of the reversal of those liabilities.
Guarantee Commitments
The following table summarizes our guarantee commitments at December 31, 2020:
(1) Consists of contractual agreements with third-party owners which require us to guarantee payments to the owners if specified levels of operating profit are not achieved by their hotels.
(2) Consists of debt repayment and other guarantees with respect to unconsolidated hospitality ventures and certain managed hotels. Certain of these underlying debt agreements have extension periods which are not reflected in the table above. With respect to certain of these guarantees, we have agreements with our unconsolidated hospitality venture partners or the respective hotel owners which reduce our maximum guarantee and are not reflected in the table above.
See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Investment Commitments
The following table summarizes our investment commitments, which represent our commitment, under certain conditions, to lend or provide certain consideration to, or invest in, various business ventures at December 31, 2020:
See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, our off-balance sheet arrangements included $235 million of letters of credit, $49 million of surety bonds, and $8 million of purchase obligations. These amounts are discussed in "-Sources and Uses of Cash-Revolving Credit Facility and -Letters of Credit," "-Contractual Obligations," and Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Preparing financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods, and the related disclosures in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
A number of our accounting policies, which are described in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements," are critical due to the fact they involve a higher degree of judgment and estimates. Those accounting policies and other critical estimates are included below. As a result, these accounting policies could materially affect our financial position and results of operations. While we have used our best estimates based on the facts and circumstances available to us at the time, different estimates reasonably could have been used in the current period. In addition, changes in the accounting estimates that we use are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, which may have a material impact on the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations. Although we believe our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of the board of directors.
Guarantees
We enter into performance guarantees related to certain hotels we manage. We also enter into debt repayment and other guarantees with respect to unconsolidated hospitality ventures and certain managed and franchised hotels. We record a liability for the fair value of these guarantees at their inception date. In order to estimate the fair value, we use a Monte Carlo simulation to model the probability of possible outcomes. The valuation methodology requires that we make certain assumptions and judgments in our determination of the fair value, which are based on our knowledge of the hospitality industry, market conditions, location of the property, and specific information available at the time of the valuation.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each year using balances at October 1 and at interim dates if indicators of impairment exist. The Company has five reporting units which have goodwill at December 31, 2020.
We are required to apply judgment when determining whether or not indications of impairment exist. The determination of the occurrence of a triggering event is based on our knowledge of the hospitality industry, historical experience, location of the property or properties, market conditions, and specific information available at the time of the assessment. We realize, however, that the results of our analysis could vary from period to period depending on how our judgment is applied and the facts and circumstances available at the time of the analysis. Judgment is also required in determining the assumptions and estimates used when calculating the fair value of the reporting unit or the indefinite-lived intangible asset.
Historically, changes in estimates used in the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets valuations have not resulted in material impairment charges in subsequent periods, and at December 31, 2020, excluding assets recently impaired, a 10% decline in the underlying cash flows or a 1% increase in the discount rates or terminal capitalization rates would not result in a material impairment of our goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets. However, future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and difficult to predict. The extent, duration, and magnitude of the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on factors such as the impact of the pandemic on global and regional economies, travel and lodging demand, and economic activity as well as actions taken by governments, businesses, and individuals in response to the COVID-19 pandemic or any resurgence. The future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our industry and our business may change the estimates and assumptions used in our valuations, which could result in future impairment charges that may be material to our earnings. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Acquisitions
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in acquisitions are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. We use judgment to determine the fair value of the assets or businesses acquired and to allocate the fair value to identifiable tangible
and intangible assets. Generally, tangible assets acquired include property and equipment, and intangible assets acquired may include management agreement intangibles, brand intangibles, advanced bookings, or goodwill in a business combination. Changes to the significant assumptions or factors used to determine fair value, in particular assumptions related to cash flow projections, inclusive of revenue projections, and the selection of discount rates, could affect the measurement and allocation of fair value. See Part IV, Item 15 "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Notes 7 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements."
Property and Equipment, Operating Lease ROU Assets, and Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
We evaluate property and equipment, operating lease ROU assets, and definite-lived intangible assets for impairment quarterly, and when events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable, we evaluate the net book value of the assets by comparing to the projected undiscounted cash flows of the assets. We use judgment to determine whether indications of impairment exist. The determination of the occurrence of an indicator of impairment is based on our knowledge of the hospitality industry, historical experience, location of the property, market conditions, termination of an underlying management agreement, and property-specific information available at the time of the assessment. We realize, however, that the results of our analysis could vary from period to period depending on how our judgment is applied and the facts and circumstances available at the time of the analysis. When an indicator of impairment exists, judgment is also required in determining the assumptions and estimates to use within the recoverability analysis and when calculating the fair value of the asset or asset group, if applicable.
Changes in economic and operating conditions impacting the judgments used could result in impairments to our long-lived assets in future periods. Historically, changes in estimates used in the property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets impairment assessment process have not resulted in material impairment charges in subsequent periods as a result of changes made to those estimates. However, as noted above, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and difficult to predict, and they may change the estimates and assumptions used in our cash flow projections, which could result in future impairment charges that may be material to our earnings.
As a result of the acquisition of Two Roads, we recorded management agreement intangibles for both operating and pipeline hotels. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we recognized $9 million and $13 million of impairment charges, respectively, related to management agreement intangibles for contracts that terminated. We may incur impairment charges in a future period if agreements terminate, the timing of which is unpredictable. See Part IV, Item 15 "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Notes 7 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements."
Equity Method Investments
We assess investments in unconsolidated hospitality ventures accounted for under the equity method for impairment quarterly. We use judgment to determine whether or not there is an indication that a loss in value has occurred and whether a decline is deemed to be other than temporary. The determination of whether a loss in value has occurred and whether such a decline is deemed to be other than temporary is based on our knowledge of the hospitality industry, historical experience, location of the underlying venture property, market conditions, and venture-specific information available at the time of the assessment. When there is an indication that a loss in value has occurred, judgment is also required in determining the assumptions and estimates to use when calculating the fair value.
Changes in economic and operating conditions impacting these estimates and judgments could result in impairments to our equity method investments in future periods. Historically, changes in estimates used in the impairment assessment process have not resulted in material impairment charges in subsequent periods as a result of changes made to those estimates. However, as noted above, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and difficult to predict, and they may change the estimates and assumptions used in our cash flow projections, which could result in future impairment charges that may be material to our earnings. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Income Taxes
Judgment is required in addressing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns (e.g., realization of deferred tax assets, changes in tax laws, or interpretations thereof). In addition, we are subject to examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other tax authorities. A change in the assessment of the outcomes of such matters could materially impact our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return to determine whether they are "more likely than not" of being sustained assuming that the tax reporting positions will be examined by taxing authorities with full knowledge of all relevant information prior to recording the related tax benefit in our consolidated financial statements. If a position drops
below the "more likely than not" standard, the benefit can no longer be recognized. Assumptions, judgment, and the use of estimates are required in determining if the "more likely than not" standard has been met when developing the provision for income taxes. A change in the assessment of the "more likely than not" standard with respect to a position could materially impact our consolidated financial statements. See Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements."
Loyalty Program Future Redemption Obligation and Revenue Recognition
We utilize an actuary to assist with the valuation of the deferred revenue liability related to the loyalty program. Changes in the estimates, including the anticipated timing and value of future point redemptions and an estimate of the breakage for points that will not be redeemed, could result in further material changes to our liability and the amount of revenue we recognize when redemptions occur. As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, over the course of 2020 we revised our estimate of the anticipated timing of our future point redemptions over the next 12 months. The current portion of our deferred revenue liability related to our loyalty program decreased by $109 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, in part due to changes in assumptions related to the timing of future redemptions. See Part IV, Item 15 "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements."
At December 31, 2020, our total deferred revenue liability related to the loyalty program was $733 million. A 10% decrease in the breakage assumption would result in an increase in the liability of approximately $36 million at December 31, 2020.
Incremental Borrowing Rate and Accounting for Leases
In determining the present value of our operating lease ROU assets and lease liabilities, we estimate an incremental borrowing rate ("IBR") by applying a portfolio approach based on lease terms. Certain of our leases have terms that exceed 30 years. Given the lack of publicly available data for longer-term borrowing rates, determining the IBR for certain of our longer-term leases requires additional judgment. Changes in these estimates could result in a material change to our lease liabilities. See Part IV, Item 15 "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedule-Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements."
At December 31, 2020, our operating lease liabilities are $406 million. A 1% decrease in our estimated IBR would increase our operating lease liabilities by approximately $39 million.