ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand the Company and its operations and is focused on our 2020 and 2019 financial results, including comparisons of year-over-year performance between these years. Discussion and analysis of our 2018 fiscal year, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2019 financial performance to 2018, is located in Part II, Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2020.
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections of future events. However, our actual results could differ materially from those discussed herein as a result of the risks that we face, including but not limited to those risks stated in the "Risk Factors" section of this report. In addition, the following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Due to the rapid and unprecedented spread of COVID-19, what began with our suspension of service to South Korea and Japan in late February 2020 accelerated in March 2020 when governments instituted requirements of self-isolation or quarantine for incoming travel. This was followed by the announcement in late March and early April 2020 of a 14-day mandatory quarantine for all travelers to, from and within the State of Hawai'i, respectively. On December 17, 2020, the mandatory self-quarantine period in the State of Hawai'i was reduced from 14 to 10 days. These restrictions, combined with the ongoing spread and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic globally, have continued to significantly suppress customer demand, which remains at historically low levels.
Restrictions on travel to and within the State of Hawai'i as well as travel to and from various international locations (including international locations within our network), remain in effect. Since October 15, 2020, the State of Hawai'i has allowed travelers coming to Hawai'i from the mainland U.S. to bypass the 10-day quarantine requirement with proof of a negative COVID-19 test from a state-approved testing partner (the pre-travel testing program), and the pre-travel testing program has since been expanded to include international travelers from Japan, South Korea and Canada. The State of Hawai`i and counties within the state continue to evaluate and update testing requirements for travel to and within the state, including the required timing of receipt of testing results and the expansion of the pre-travel testing program to travelers from other international locations.
Following the announcement and implementation of the pre-travel testing program, we saw an increase in bookings and have begun rebuilding our North America, Neighbor Island and International flight schedules commensurate with anticipated increases in demand. During the fourth quarter, we reinstated non-stop service from Honolulu to Las Vegas, Phoenix, San Jose, Oakland, New York and Boston, thereby restoring service to all of our pre-pandemic origin points on the U.S. mainland, as well as non-stop service from Honolulu to Tokyo-Haneda and Osaka, Japan, and Seoul, South Korea. While we doubled our capacity during the fourth quarter of 2020, as compared to the third quarter of 2020, our capacity was down approximately 72% compared to the same period in 2019. In December 2020, we announced the addition of three new U.S. mainland destinations: Austin, Texas, Orlando, Florida, and Ontario, California with service to and from Honolulu, Hawai'i beginning on April 21, March 11, and March 16, 2021, respectively. We also announced expanded service with a daily non-stop flight between Kahului, Hawai'i and Long Beach, California commencing in March 2021.
New bookings for travel from our mainland markets for January through March 2021) have moderated somewhat since the period immediately following the implementation of the State of Hawai'i's pre-travel testing program and, as of January 26, 2021, we were currently at about one-third of 2019 levels. We attribute this to recent changes in the State of Hawai'i's pre-travel testing program, the resurgence of COVID-19 infections in the United States and internationally, implementation of restrictions and quarantines in certain key origin points, and other factors affecting public sentiment.
While certain markets have reopened, others, particularly international markets, remain closed or continue to enforce extended quarantines, including as new strains of COVID-19 are identified. There can be no assurance whether, at some point, the State of Hawai'i or counties within the state may limit or suspend the pre-travel testing program should the prevalence of the COVID-19 pandemic worsen. For example, the County of Kaua'i suspended its participation in the statewide pre-travel testing program in late November and, effective January 5, 2021, resumed its participation in the pre-travel testing program for interisland travelers and instituted an Enhanced Movement Quarantine pre- and post-travel testing program for transpacific travelers. The U.S. government and international governments could also impose, extend or otherwise modify existing, travel
restrictions on international travel into the United States. For example, on January 21, 2021, President Biden issued an executive order promoting COVID-19 Safety in Domestic and International Travel that requires international travelers to produce proof of a recent negative COVID-19 test prior to entry into the United States and comply with other applicable guidelines issued by the CDC concerning international travel, including recommended periods of self-quarantine after entry into the United States. While the impact of such regulatory changes remains uncertain, pre-travel testing and quarantine requirements may decrease new bookings and increase cancellations of current bookings. As a result of all the above factors and our results to date, we expect bookings, revenue and results of operations to continue to be volatile with revenue trends experienced in the fourth quarter of 2020 to continue in the first quarter of 2021. These trends may result in decreases to existing or anticipated levels, which decreases could be material. We will continue to assess our routes and schedule in response to changes in demand, including those related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented enhanced safety protocols focusing on our employees and guests, while at the same time working to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on our financial position and operations.
Guest and Employee Experience. We have enhanced cleaning procedures and guest-facing protocols in an effort to minimize the risk of transmission of COVID-19. These procedures are in line with current recommendations from leading public health authorities and include:
•Performing enhanced aircraft cleaning between flights and during overnight parking, including recurring electrostatic spraying of all aircraft.
•Frequent cleaning and disinfecting of counters and self-service check-in kiosks in our airports.
•Ensuring hand sanitizers are readily available for guests at airports we serve.
•Requiring guests and guest facing employees to wear a face mask or covering, with guests required to keep them on from check-in to deplaning (except when eating or drinking on board).
•Modifying boarding and deplaning processes.
•Modifying in-flight service to minimize close interactions between crew members and guests.
•Eliminating change fees on all domestic and international flights in order to provide guests with travel flexibility across our network.
•Launching a program to offer guests pre-travel COVID-19 testing through mail-in kits and proprietary drive-through testing labs in an increasing number of our U.S. mainland gateways.
During the first quarter of 2021, we plan, in coordination with the State of Hawai'i, implement the Hawai'i Pre-Clear Program across our mainland network, which is intended to enhance the arrival process for our guests by validating the State's pre-travel testing requirement prior to departure.
Capacity Impacts. In response to reduced passenger demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we significantly reduced system capacity beginning late in the first quarter of 2020 to a level that maintained essential services and made adjustments to better align capacity with passenger demand throughout 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we reduced capacity by 63.3% compared to the prior year. As a result of such capacity reductions, approximately 16% of our fleet was temporarily grounded as of December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to adjust capacity throughout 2021 based upon expected passenger demand.
Expense Management. In response to the reduction in revenue we experienced in 2020, we have implemented, and will continue to implement as necessary, cost savings and liquidity measures, including:
•In 2020, we commenced various initiatives to reduce labor costs as follows:
◦During the first quarter, we instituted a temporary hiring freeze, except with respect to operationally critical and essential positions.
◦During the second quarter, we operationalized various temporary voluntary leave and vacation purchase programs to balance our workforce with our reduced levels of operations.
◦During the third quarter, we announced and completed voluntary separation and temporary leave programs across each of our labor groups. Additionally, we completed the majority of our involuntary separations, most of which were effective October 1, 2020. Combined, separation and temporary leave programs resulted in an approximately 32% reduction of our total workforce. All employees who were subject to an involuntary termination or involuntary furlough between October 1, 2020 and January 15, 2021 were recalled and offered an opportunity to return to employment pursuant to the PSP Extension Agreement (as defined below).
◦Our officers reduced their base salaries between 10% and 50% through September 30, 2020, and members of our Board of Directors also reduced their compensation through September 30, 2020.
•We reduced capital expenditures for 2020 and continue to vigorously evaluate non-essential, non-aircraft capital expenditures. During the year ended December 31, 2020, capital expenditures were approximately $105.3 million, a decrease of 73.5% compared to the same period in 2019.
•On October 26, 2020, we amended our purchase agreement with Boeing to, among other things, change the delivery schedule of our 787-9 aircraft from 2021 through 2025 to 2022 through 2026, with the first delivery now scheduled in September 2022. Refer to Note 14 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
We may implement further discretionary changes and other cost reduction and liquidity preservation measures as needed to address the volatile and rapidly changing dynamics of passenger demand and changes in revenue, regulatory and public health directives and prevailing government policy, and financial market conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These discretionary changes may include additional work force reductions. For example, on January 28, 2021, we issued WARN notices to approximately 900 U.S.-based employees that could be affected by fluctuating employment needs beyond our PSP Extension through March 31, 2021.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Management. Our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020 was $864.4 million as a result of various actions taken to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position during 2020, including, but not limited to:
•During the first quarter of 2020, we fully drew down our previously undrawn $235.0 million revolving credit facility. Refer to Note 8 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.On February 11, 2021, we repaid the $235.0 million outstanding amount drawn on our revolving credit facility.
•During the first quarter of 2020, we suspended our stock repurchase program and on April 22, 2020, we suspended dividend payments.
•During the second and third quarters of 2020, we received $240.6 million in grants and $60.3 million in loans pursuant to the PSP under the CARES Act as discussed further below.
•During the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a Loan Agreement with the Treasury pursuant to the ERP under the CARES Act to provide for a secured term loan that permits us to borrow up to $420.0 million. On October 23, 2020, we amended and restated our Loan Agreement (the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement) with the Treasury to increase the maximum amount available to be borrowed by us to $622 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowed $45.0 million under the ERP as discussed in further detail below. As discussed in more detail below, we repaid the outstanding loan under the ERP on February 4, 2021.
•During the third quarter of 2020, we completed $376.0 million in aircraft financings, including the issuance of enhanced equipment trust certificates and two sale and lease back transactions. Refer to Note 8 and Note 9 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more discussion of our financing activities.
•In December 2020, we entered into the Equity Distribution Agreement in connection with our ATM Program relating to the issuance and sale, from time to time, of up to five million shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we have raised approximately $41.2 million through the sale of approximately 2.1 million shares at an average price of $19.79 per share. Refer to Note 14 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Equity Distribution Agreement. We paused our ATM Program between December 24, 2020 and January 31, 2020 and recommenced sales under our ATM Program on February 1, 2021.
In February 2021, we issued $1.2 billion in senior secured notes as part of our Notes Offering, as discussed in further detail below. We will continue to explore and pursue options to raise additional financing as opportunities arise.
Our cash burn, which is defined as net sales, operating cash outflows, debt service, interest payments, capital expenditures, tax refunds and severance payments, for the fourth quarter of 2020, was $1.7 million per day, an approximate 35% improvement from the third quarter of 2020 of $2.6 million per day, and more favorable than our previously disclosed expectation of $2.2 million per day. We forecast our cash burn for the first quarter of 2021 to be between $2.3 million per day and $2.7 million per day. As we continue to rebuild our operations to meet expected demand, we expect to incur additional operating expenses in the first quarter of 2021 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. Our cash burn for the first quarter of 2021 will be highly dependent on bookings during the quarter, which may continue to be volatile and may be negatively impacted by any changes in the pre-travel testing program implemented by the State of Hawai'i, the recent resurgence of COVID-19 infections in the United States and internationally, the identification of new, more infectious strains of the COVID-19 virus, the implementation
or extension of travel-related restrictions and quarantines in some key origin points, and other factors affecting public sentiment.
Load Factor. Our flown load factor for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 40%.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted, which provided an estimated $2.2 trillion to fight the COVID-19 pandemic and stimulate the U.S. economy. The assistance included tax relief and government loans, grants and investments for entities in affected industries. The CARES Act provided passenger air carriers with, among other things: (a) financial relief for direct payroll support, (b) financial relief in the form of loans and loan guarantees available for operations, (c) temporary suspension of certain aviation taxes, (d) temporary deferral of certain employer payroll taxes, and (e) additional corporate tax benefits that are further discussed in Note 10 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The CARES Act also provided for deferred payment of the employer portion of social security taxes through the end of 2020, with 50% of the deferred amount due December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% due December 31, 2022. Lastly, the CARES Act provided for the carryback of additional NOLs to 2016 and 2017, which will result in tax benefits for those years.
Payroll Support Program
On April 22, 2020, we entered into a Payroll Support Program agreement (the PSP Agreement) with the Treasury under the CARES Act. In connection with the PSP Agreement, we entered into a Warrant Agreement (the PSP Warrant Agreement) with the Treasury, and we issued a promissory note to the Treasury (the Note). Pursuant to the PSP Agreement, the Treasury provided us with financial assistance, paid in installments, totaling approximately $300.9 million, to be used exclusively for the purpose of continuing to pay employee salaries, wages and benefits. Under the PSP Agreement, we agreed to (i) refrain from conducting involuntary furloughs or reducing employee rates of pay or benefits through September 30, 2020, (ii) limit executive compensation through March 24, 2022 and (iii) suspend payment of dividends and stock repurchases through September 30, 2021. The PSP Agreement also imposes certain Treasury-mandated reporting obligations on us. Finally, we are required to continue to provide air service to markets served prior to March 1, 2020 until March 1, 2022, to the extent determined reasonable and practicable by the DOT and subject to exemptions granted by the DOT to us given the absence of demand for certain of such services.
The Note was in the total principal amount of approximately $60.3 million. The Note has a 10-year term and bears interest at a rate per annum equal to 1.00% until the fifth anniversary of April 22, 2020 (the PSP Closing Date), and thereafter bears interest at a rate equal to the secured overnight financing rate plus 2.00% until the tenth anniversary of the PSP Closing Date, which interest is payable semi-annually beginning on September 30, 2020. The Note may be prepaid at any time, without penalty, and is subject to customary change of control acceleration provisions and events of default.
As compensation to the U.S. government for providing financial relief under the PSP Agreement, and pursuant to the PSP Warrant Agreement, we issued to the Treasury a total of 509,964 warrants to purchase shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $11.82 per share (the PSP Warrants). The PSP Warrants are non-voting, freely transferable, may be settled as net shares or in cash at our option, expire five years from the date of issuance, and contain registration rights and customary anti-dilution provisions. Refer to Note 8 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
Economic Relief Program
On September 25, 2020 (ERP Closing Date), we entered into the Loan Agreement. The Loan Agreement provides for a secured term loan facility which permits us to borrow up to $420.0 million (the Facility). On the ERP Closing Date, we borrowed $45.0 million and may, at our option, borrow additional amounts in up to two subsequent borrowings until May 26, 2021, so long as, after giving effect to any further borrowing, the collateral coverage ratio is no less than 2.0 to 1.0. The proceeds from the Facility will be used for certain general corporate purposes and operating expenses. As a condition to the drawing under the Facility, we are required to comply with all applicable provisions of the CARES Act.
Borrowings under the Facility will initially bear interest at a variable rate per annum equal to (a) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined in the Loan Agreement) plus (b) 2.50% accrued interest on the loans is payable in arrears on the first business day following the 14th day of each March, June, September and December (beginning with September 15, 2021), and on June 30, 2024. The applicable interest rate for the $45.0 million loan drawn on the ERP Closing Date under the Facility is 2.73% per annum for the period from the ERP Closing Date through September 15, 2021 at which time the interest rate will reset in
accordance with the foregoing formula. All advances under the Facility will be in the form of term loans, all of which will mature and be due and payable in a single installment on June 30, 2024.
The Facility is secured by (i) our frequent flyer loyalty program, HawaiianMiles, including but not limited to loyalty program partner participation agreements (including rights to receive cash flows thereunder), documents, deposit accounts, securities accounts, books and records and intellectual property primarily used in connection with the loyalty program and (ii) 14 Boeing 717-200 airframes and the related 28 Rolls Royce BR715-A1-30 engines, together with their related accessories, aircraft documents and parts (collectively, the Collateral). The Facility is also subject to various financial covenants, including a minimum collateral coverage ratio of 2.0 to 1.0 and a minimum debt service coverage ratio of 1.75 to 1.00.
In connection with our entry into the Loan Agreement, we also entered into a warrant agreement (the ERP Warrant Agreement), with the Treasury under the ERP. Pursuant to the ERP Warrant Agreement, we agreed to issue warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 3,553,299 shares of our common stock (the ERP Warrants) at an exercise price of $11.82 per share (the Exercise Price). Pursuant to the ERP Warrant Agreement, (a) on the ERP Closing Date, we issued to the Treasury an ERP Warrant to purchase up to 380,711 shares of our common stock and (b) on the date of each borrowing under the Loan Agreement, we will issue to the Treasury an additional ERP Warrant for a number of shares of our common stock equal to 10% of such borrowing, divided by the Exercise Price. The ERP Warrants are non-voting, are freely transferable, may be settled as net shares or in cash at our option, expire five years from the date of issuance, and contain registration rights and customary anti-dilution provisions.
On October 23, 2020, we entered into the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement with the Treasury providing for an increase in borrowings available under the Loan Agreement from $420 million to $622 million and correspondingly increased the aggregate number of ERP Warrants available to be issued to the Treasury up to 5,262,267.
On February 4, 2021, immediately prior to the closing of the Offering (as defined below), Hawaiian repaid in full the $45.0 million loan, and in connection with such repayment, terminated the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement. We have ongoing obligations to the Treasury under the ERP Warrants, CARES Act and the CAA 2021 (discussed below).
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021
On December 27, 2020, CAA 2021 was enacted, which included $900 billion for various COVID-19 relief programs, including $15.0 billion for airline workers under an extension of the CARES Act PSP.
On January 15, 2021 (the PSP Extension Closing Date), we entered into an extension to the PSP Agreement (the PSP Extension Agreement), and in connection with the PSP Extension Agreement, entered into a warrant agreement (the Warrant Extension Agreement) with the Treasury, and issued a promissory note to the Treasury (the Extension Note). Pursuant to the PSP Extension Agreement, the Treasury will provide us with financial assistance to be paid in installments expected to total in the aggregate approximately $167.5 million, to be used exclusively for the purpose of continuing to pay employee salaries, wages and benefits, including the payment of lost wages, salaries and benefits to certain returning employees, as defined in the PSP Extension Agreement. The first installment, in the amount of $83.8 million (representing 50% of the expected total payment), was received on January 15, 2021. The remaining installments are anticipated to be paid as follows: (i) 50% of the current expected total payment, which is expected to be paid in the first quarter of 2021 and (ii) a possible final payment based on any upward adjustments by Treasury to the initial expected total payment.
Under the PSP Extension Agreement, we agreed to (i) refrain from conducting involuntary furloughs or reducing employee rates of pay or benefits from December 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021, (ii) recall any employees who were subject to an involuntary termination or furlough between October 1, 2020 and the date of the PSP Extension Agreement and who elected to return to employment pursuant to a recall notice and to compensate these employees for lost salary, wages and benefits, (iii) limit executive compensation through October 1, 2022, and (iv) suspend payment of dividends and stock repurchases through March 31, 2022. Finally, we are required to continue to provide air service to markets served prior to March 1, 2020 until March 1, 2022, to the extent determined reasonable and practicable by the DOT.
The Extension Note will increase to a total principal sum of approximately $20.3 million as Hawaiian receives installments from the Treasury under the PSP Extension Agreement. The Extension Note has a ten year term and bears interest at a rate per annum equal to 1.00% until the fifth anniversary of the PSP Extension Closing Date, and thereafter bears interest at a rate equal to the secured overnight financing rate plus 2.00% until the tenth anniversary of the PSP Extension Closing Date, which interest is payable semi-annually beginning on March 31, 2021. The Extension Note may be prepaid at any time, without penalty and is subject to customary change of control acceleration provisions and events of default.
As compensation to the U.S. government for providing financial relief under the PSP Extension Agreement, and pursuant to the Warrant Extension Agreement, we agreed to issue to the Treasury up to a total of 113,940 warrants to purchase shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $17.78 per share (the PSP Extension Warrants). The PSP Extension Warrants are non-voting, freely transferable, may be settled as net shares or in cash at our option, expire five years from the date of issuance, and contain registration rights and customary anti-dilution provisions.
Loyalty Program and Intellectual Property Financing
On February 4, 2021, Hawaiian, a direct wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, completed the private offering (the Notes Offering) by Hawaiian Brand Intellectual Property, Ltd., an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Hawaiian (the Brand Issuer), and HawaiianMiles Loyalty, Ltd., an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Hawaiian (the “Loyalty Issuer” and, together with the Brand Issuer, the Issuers) of an aggregate of $1.2 billion principal amount of their 5.750% senior secured notes due 2026 (the Notes).
The Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by (i) Hawaiian Finance 1 Ltd., a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Hawaiian (HoldCo 1), (ii) Hawaiian Finance 2 Ltd., a direct subsidiary of HoldCo 1 and indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Hawaiian (HoldCo 2 and, together with HoldCo 1, the “Cayman Guarantors”), (iii) Hawaiian and (iv) Holdings (Holdings, together with Hawaiian, the “Parent Guarantors” and the Parent Guarantors, together with the Cayman Guarantors, the Guarantors). The Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture, dated as of February 4, 2021 (the Indenture), among the Issuers, the Guarantors and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee, collateral agent and collateral custodian. The Notes will mature on January 20, 2026 and bear interest at a rate of 5.750% per year, payable quarterly in arrears on July 20, October 20, January 20 and April 20 of each year, beginning on July 20, 2021.
In connection with the issuance of the Notes, Hawaiian contributed to the Brand Issuer, which is a newly-formed subsidiary structured to be bankruptcy remote, all worldwide rights, owned or purported to be owned, or later developed or acquired and owned or purported to be owned, by Hawaiian or any of its subsidiaries, in and to all intellectual property, including all trademarks, service marks, brand names, designs, and logos that include the word “Hawaiian” or any successor brand and the “hawaiianairlines.com” domain name and similar domain names or any successor domain names (the Brand IP). The Brand Issuer indirectly granted to Hawaiian an exclusive, worldwide, perpetual and royalty-bearing sublicense to use the Brand IP (the Brand IP Sublicense). Further, Hawaiian contributed to the Loyalty Issuer its rights to certain other collateral owned by Hawaiian, including, to the extent permitted by such agreements or otherwise by operation of law, any of Hawaiian’s rights under the HawaiianMiles Agreements and the IP Agreements (each as defined in the Indenture), together with HawaiianMiles program (HawaiianMiles) customer data and certain other intellectual property owned or purported to be owned, or later developed or acquired and owned or purported to be owned, by Hawaiian or any of its subsidiaries (including the Issuers) and required or necessary to operate HawaiianMiles (the Loyalty Program IP) (all such collateral being, the Loyalty Program Collateral). The Loyalty Issuer indirectly granted Hawaiian an exclusive, worldwide, perpetual and royalty-free sub-license to use the Loyalty Program IP (the Loyalty Program IP Sublicense).
The Notes are secured on a senior basis by first-priority security interests in substantially all of the assets of the Issuers, other than Excluded Property (as defined in the Indenture) and subject to certain permitted liens (collectively, the Issuer Collateral). The note guarantees of Hawaiian are secured by (i) a first-priority security interest in 100% of the equity (other than the special share issued to the Special Shareholder (as defined in the Indenture)) of HoldCo 1 and (ii) the Brand IP and the Loyalty Program Collateral (collectively, the Hawaiian Collateral). The note guarantees of the Cayman Guarantors are secured by first-priority security interests in substantially all of the assets of the Cayman Guarantors, including pledges of the equity of their respective subsidiaries (other than the special share issued to the Special Shareholder (as defined in the Indenture)) (collectively, the Subsidiary Collateral and, together with the Issuer Collateral and the Hawaiian Collateral, the Collateral). The note guarantee of Holdings is unsecured.
The Notes are redeemable at the option of the Issuers, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time, after January 20, 2024 at the redemption prices set forth in the Indenture. In addition, the Notes are redeemable, at the option of the Issuers, at any time and from time to time, in whole or in part, prior to January 20, 2024 at a price equal to 100% of their principal amount plus the “make-whole” premium described in the Indenture and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to, but excluding, the redemption date. Additionally, from time to time on or prior to January 20, 2024, the Issuers may also redeem up to 40% of the original outstanding principal amount of the Notes with proceeds from any one or more equity offerings of Hawaiian at a redemption price equal to 105.75% of the principal amount of Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to, but excluding, the redemption date. Upon the occurrence of certain mandatory prepayment events and mandatory repurchase offer events, the Issuers will be required to make a prepayment on the Notes, or offer to repurchase the Notes, pro rata, to the extent of any net cash proceeds received in connection with such events, at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount to be prepaid, plus, in some cases, an applicable premium. In addition, upon a change of control of Hawaiian, the Issuers may be required to make an offer to prepay the Notes at a price equal to 101% of the respective principal amounts thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the purchase date.
The Indenture contains certain covenants that limit the ability of the Issuers, the Cayman Guarantors and, in certain circumstances, Hawaiian to, among other things: (i) make Restricted Payments (as defined in the Indenture), (ii) incur additional indebtedness, (iii) create certain liens on the Collateral, (iv) sell or otherwise dispose of the Collateral and (v) consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the Issuers’ assets. The Indenture also requires the Issuers and, in certain circumstances, Hawaiian, to comply with certain affirmative covenants, including depositing the Transaction Revenues (as defined in the Indenture) in collection accounts, with amounts to be distributed for the payment of fees, principal and interest on the Notes pursuant to a payment waterfall described in the Indenture, and certain financial reporting requirements. In addition, the Indenture requires Hawaiian to maintain minimum liquidity at the end of any business day of at least $300.0 million.
Selected Consolidated Statistical Data
Below are the operating statistics we use to measure our operating performance.
(a)Includes the operations of our contract carrier under a CPA. Total Operations includes both scheduled and chartered operations.
(b)Represents adjusted unit costs, a non-GAAP measure. We believe this is a useful measure because it better reflects our controllable costs. See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below for our reconciliation of non-GAAP measures.
(c)Includes applicable taxes and fees.
Operating Revenue
Our revenue is derived primarily from transporting passengers on our aircraft. We record passenger revenue when the transportation is provided or when scheduled flight for tickets are expected to expire unused. We measure capacity in terms of available seat miles, which represent the number of seats available for passengers multiplied by the number of miles the seats are flown. Yield, or the average amount one passenger pays to fly one mile, is calculated by dividing passenger revenue by RPMs. Typically, we strive to increase passenger revenue primarily by increasing our yield per flight or by filling a higher proportion of available seats, which produces higher operating revenue per available seat mile; however, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, many of our operating measures in 2020 are not meaningful for purposes of comparative analysis against prior years. Other revenue primarily consists of cargo revenue, incidental services revenue, marketing component related to the sale of frequent flyer miles, contract services and charter services revenue.
Operating revenue was $0.84 billion, $2.83 billion and $2.84 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in operating revenue in 2020 from 2019 was driven by decreased passengers and other revenue primarily related to the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and is discussed further below:
2020 vs. 2019
Passenger Revenue
Passenger revenue decreased by $1,933.0 million, or 74.4%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. Details of this change are described in the table below:
Domestic revenue decreased $1.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 largely due to a capacity reduction of 57.6%, as measured in ASM as compared to same period in 2019. The decline was driven by the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
International passenger revenue decreased $529.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, largely due to a capacity reduction of 75.8%, as measured in ASM, as compared to the same period in 2019. In late March 2020, we suspended all international flights in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We began recommencing scheduled international passenger flights, on a limited basis, in the fourth quarter.
Despite the evolution of travel restrictions in recent months in the United States, restrictions for travel to and within the State of Hawai'i as well as travel to and from various international locations, including those in the Hawaiian network, remain in effect. On October 15, 2020, the State of Hawai'i began its pre-travel testing program allowing travelers coming to Hawai'i from the mainland United States to bypass the quarantine requirement with proof of a negative COVID-19 test from a state-approved testing partner (the pre-travel testing program). The State of Hawai'i and counties within the state continue to evaluate and update testing requirements for travel to and within the state, including the required timing of testing results and the expansion of the pre-travel testing program to travelers from international locations, specifically travelers from Canada, Japan and Korea. Additionally, on January 21, 2021, President Biden issued an executive order that requires international travelers to produce proof of a recent negative COVID-19 test prior to entry into the United States and comply with applicable CDC guidelines concerning international travel, including recommended periods of self-quarantine after entry into the United States.
We expect this significantly lower demand environment to continue through at least the first half of 2021, with improvement in the international markets expected to lag behind domestic demand recovery, once government travel restrictions begin to lift and customer demand starts to return.
In December 2020, we announced the addition of three new U.S. mainland cities; Austin, Texas, Ontario, California, and Orlando, Florida, with service to and from Honolulu, Hawai`i, beginning in the first and second quarters of 2020. Additionally, we expanded service with daily non-stop flight between Kahului, Hawai`i and Long Beach, California commencing in March 2021.
Other Operating Revenue
Other operating revenue decreased by $54.4 million, or 23.2%, in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to reductions in cargo and loyalty program revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cargo revenue decreased $20.9 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year due to reduced volumes as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Loyalty revenue, primarily comprised of brand and marketing performance obligations, decreased $20.1 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, as a result of reduced credit card spend and new cardholder acquisitions. Other components in Other operating revenue include, but are not limited to, ground handling and other freight services which collectively, declined during the
twelve months ended December 31, 2020 by approximately $13.3 million as compared to the prior year, as a result of our reduced operations.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total operating expense decreased $1.0 billion or 40.4% to $1.5 billion as compared to the same period in 2019. The largest components of our operating expenses are wages and benefits provided to our employees and aircraft fuel (including taxes and delivery). Increases (decreases) in operating expenses are detailed below.
Aircraft fuel
The price and availability of aircraft fuel is volatile due to global economic and geopolitical factors that we can neither control nor accurately predict. The decrease in aircraft fuel expense is illustrated in the following table:
We believe economic fuel expense is the best measure of the effect of fuel prices on our business as it most closely approximates the net cash outflow associated with the purchase of fuel for our operations and is consistent with how management manages our business and assesses our operating performance. We define economic fuel expense as GAAP fuel expense plus (gains)/losses realized through actual cash (receipts)/payments received from or paid to hedge counterparties for fuel hedge derivative contracts settled in the period inclusive of costs related to hedging premiums.
Economic fuel expense is calculated as follows:
See Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk, for additional discussion of our jet fuel costs and related derivative program.
Wages and benefits
Wages and benefits expense decreased by $335.7 million, or 46.4%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributed to the recognition of $240.6 million in contra-expense related to the grant portion of PSP funding during the year ended December 31, 2020 and was recorded in proportion to estimated wage and benefits expense over the period it covered. Additionally, in March 2020, we instituted a temporary hiring freeze, reduced officer salaries between 10% and 50% through September 2020, and instituted various voluntary and involuntary leave programs.
During the third quarter of 2020, we announced and completed voluntary separation program offerings across all of our labor groups. Additionally, we announced involuntary workforce reductions, the majority of which were effective October 1, 2020. Combined with our voluntary leave programs, our separation programs together represented an approximately 32% reduction of our total workforce.
On January 15, 2021, we entered into the PSP Extension for financial assistance to be released in installments totaling approximately $167.5 million, of which $147.3 million will be in the form of a grant and will be recognized as a reduction to wages and benefits in the first quarter of 2021.
As a result of workforce reductions, continued lower levels of operations, and the recognition of PSP Extension funds, we expect salaries and related costs to decline in the first quarter of 2021 in comparison with the prior comparable period.
Aircraft rent
Aircraft rent decreased $15.0 million or 12.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributed to lease extensions entered into for certain of our A330-200 and Boeing 717-200 aircraft in the second half of 2019, resulting in more favorable lease rates extended over periods ranging between two to eight years. These decreases were partially offset by increased rent expense as generated from the completion of two sale-leaseback transactions in July 2020. The transactions qualified as a sale, generating an immaterial loss, and the associated assets were removed from our unaudited Consolidated Balance Sheets within property and equipment, net, and recorded as operating lease right-of-use assets. Refer to Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our finance and operating leases.
Maintenance materials and repairs
Maintenance materials and repairs decreased $128.2 million, or 51.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. The decrease is primarily attributed to reductions in variable-related maintenance costs commensurate with capacity reductions during the periods in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect maintenance, materials and repairs expense to decline in the first quarter of 2021 versus the comparable prior year period due to the capacity reductions discussed above, with incremental increases as we rebuild operational capacity in 2021.
Aircraft and passenger servicing
Aircraft and passenger servicing expense decreased by $106.3 million, or 64.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decline is primarily due to the capacity reductions discussed above. We expect aircraft and passenger servicing expense to decline in the first quarter of 2021 versus the comparable prior year period due to the capacity reductions discussed above, with incremental increases as we build our operational capacity in 2021.
Commissions and other selling expenses
Commissions and other selling expenses decreased by $83.9 million, or 64.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease in commissions and other selling expense was primarily related to the significant reduction in demand for travel due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect commissions and other selling expense to decline in the first quarter of 2021 versus the comparable prior year period due to the capacity reductions discussed above, with incremental increases as we build our operational capacity in 2021.
Other rentals and landing fees
Other rentals and landing fees decreased by $55.8 million, or 43.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. A portion of our other rentals and landing fees are variable in nature and are dependent on factors such as the number of departures and passengers. The decrease in landing fees and other rents is due to the reduction in capacity and number of flights operated during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect other rentals and landing fees expense to decline in the first quarter of 2021 versus the comparable prior year period due to the capacity reductions discussed above, with incremental increases as we build our operational capacity in 2021.
Purchased services
Purchased services decreased by $32.5 million, or 24.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease in purchased services expense is primarily related to the significant reduction in demand for travel due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect purchased services expense to decline in the first quarter of 2021 versus the comparable prior year period due to the capacity reductions discussed above, with incremental increases as we build our operational capacity in 2021.
Special items
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $184.1 million of special items, comprised of the following:
•In March 2020, we reached an agreement in principle with our flight attendants, represented by the AFA, on a new five-year contract that runs through April 2025. On April 3, 2020, we received notification from the AFA that a collective bargaining agreement (the CBA) was ratified by its members. The ratified CBA provides for, among other things, a ratification payment to be paid over a one-year term, increased medical cost sharing, improved pay scales, and a one-time medical savings contribution to eligible flight attendants upon retirement. During the first quarter of 2020, we recorded a $23.5 million ratification bonus, of which $20.2 million was related to service prior to January 1, 2020, and recognized this as a special item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The remaining $3.3 million was recorded as a component of wages and benefits in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
•During the first quarter of 2020, the adverse economic impact and declining passenger demand attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic drove our stock price to 52-week lows and significantly reduced future cash flow projections. We qualitatively assessed that an impairment loss may have been incurred as of March 31, 2020 and performed an interim test of the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. We determined that the estimated fair value of our one reporting unit was less than its carrying value and that the deficit between fair value and the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded the amount of goodwill on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, leading to the recognition of a goodwill impairment charge of $106.7 million in the first quarter of 2020.
•During the second quarter of 2020, we recorded special items of $34.0 million comprised of: (a) an impairment charge of $27.5 million to mark down our ATR-42 and ATR-72 fleets to fair value; (b) an impairment charge of $3.4 million to mark down our commercial real estate assets to fair value; and (c) an approximately $3.1 million write-off for discontinued software-related projects as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•During the third quarter of 2020, we announced and completed voluntary separation programs across each of our labor groups providing for one-time severance payments, the establishment of health reimbursement accounts and other benefits. Additionally, we announced involuntary separation and temporary leave programs, the majority of which were effective October 1, 2020. We recorded $17.5 million in severance and benefits as an operating special item and $5.7 million related to special termination benefits and curtailment loss as a nonoperating special item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
•During the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded long-lived asset impairment of approximately $5.4 million, comprised of an additional write-down of our ATR-42 and ATR-72 fleet of approximately $4.9 million as a result of ongoing market uncertainty attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also wrote off of approximately $0.5 million in capitalized software projects that were permanently suspended in response to the continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we recorded $0.3 million in additional costs for the finalization of the voluntary and involuntary separation programs discussed above.
Other expense
The decrease in other expense is primarily driven by lower volume-related costs resulting from the decreased capacity during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. We expect other expense to decline in the first quarter of 2021 versus the comparable prior year period due to the capacity reductions discussed above, with incremental increases as we build our operational capacity in 2021.
Nonoperating expense, net
Net nonoperating expense increased by $30.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to the movement of realized and unrealized gains and losses associated with our fuel and foreign currency derivative instruments, which are not designated for hedge accounting under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and the movement of unrealized gains and losses on our debt instruments denominated in foreign currency.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective tax rate was 27.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 26.6% for the prior year. The effective tax rate represents a blend of federal and state taxes and includes the impact of certain nondeductible items. The effective tax rate for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 includes the impact of a nondeductible goodwill impairment, a tax benefit resulting from the rate differential of NOL carryforwards generated in recent periods which were carried back to prior years, and a $7.1 million valuation allowance reserve recorded against state deferred tax assets. Refer to Note 10 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaled $864.4 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $618.7 million as of December 31, 2019. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken, and are continuing to take, actions to increase liquidity and augment our financial position, which include:
•On March 16, 2020, we drew down fully from our previously undrawn $235.0 million revolving credit facility. On February 11, 2021, we repaid the $235.0 million outstanding amount drawn on our revolving credit facility. We have the ability to draw down on the revolving credit facility in the future, should the need arise.;
•We suspended dividend payments, and our stock repurchase program;
•We received $240.6 million in grants and $60.3 million in loans pursuant to the PSP under the CARES Act;
•In September 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with the Treasury to borrow up to $420.0 million in secured term loans pursuant to the ERP under the CARES Act. On October 23, 2020, we amended and restated our Loan Agreement with the Treasury to increase the maximum amount available to be borrowed by us to $622 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowed $45.0 million under the ERP. As discussed above, we repaid the outstanding loan under the ERP on February 4, 2021;
•During the third quarter of 2020, we completed $376.0 million in financings secured by aircraft, including the issuance of enhanced equipment trust certificates and two sale-leaseback transactions. See Note 2 and Note 8 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our financing activities; and
•In December 2020, we commenced our ATM Program. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 2.1 million shares were sold in the ATM Program at an average price of $19.79 per share, with net proceeds of approximately $41.2 million.
As discussed above, on February 4, 2021, we completed a our Notes Offering for an aggregate of $1.2 billion principal amount of 5.750% senior secured notes due 2026. Immediately prior to the closing of the offering, we repaid in full the $45.0 million loan from the Treasury under the ERP. We continue to explore and pursue options to raise additional financing as opportunities may arise.
We cannot assure you that the assumptions used to estimate our liquidity requirements will be correct because we have never experienced such an unprecedented event impacting global travel, and as a consequence, our ability to predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain. In addition, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain. However, based on our assumptions and estimates with respect to the temporary suspension of nearly the entirety of our operations, and our financial condition, we believe that the liquidity described in the preceding paragraphs will be sufficient to fund our liquidity requirements over at least the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities was $310.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $485.1 million in the prior year. Operating cash flows are primarily derived from providing air transportation to customers. The vast majority of tickets are purchased in advance of when travel is provided, and in some cases, several months before the anticipated travel date. The significant decline in operating cash flows during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was largely driven by the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results.
Cash used in investing activities was $98.8 million and $405.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Investing activities included capital expenditures, primarily related to aircraft and other equipment, the sale and leaseback of two A321-200neo aircraft, and the purchases and sales of short-term investments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, capital expenditures were approximately $105.3 million, the majority of which relate to predelivery payments for our Boeing 787-9 aircraft deliveries and the purchase of our last A321neo aircraft in May 2020 as compared with $397.4 million in capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction in capital expenditures was primarily driven by the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in the suspension of non-essential projects as well as the deferral of Boeing 787-9 aircraft deliveries and thus, pre-delivery payments. Refer to Note 14 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the amendment of our B787 purchase agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our purchases and sales of short-term investments resulted in net cash outflow of $107.5 million as compared to net cash outflow of $11.1 million during the prior year. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into two sale and leaseback transactions generating total proceeds of $114.0 million. We did not execute any sale and leaseback transactions during the prior year. Refer to Note 9 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on our sale and leaseback transactions.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $546.1 million and $24.5 million for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As discussed above, cash from financing activities is primarily driven from financings and equity offerings completed by us during 2020 to increase liquidity in response to the adverse financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is in comparison to $227.9 million in financings entered into in the prior year. Refer to Note 8 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our debt obligations and Note 13 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our equity offering. During the year ended December 31, 2020, and prior to the suspension of our dividend and share repurchase programs pursuant to the CARES Act and the CAA 2021, we returned $13.0 million to our shareholders through a combination of share repurchases and dividend payments, as compared to $91.5 million during the prior year.
Credit Card Holdbacks
Under our bank-issued credit card processing agreements, proceeds from advance ticket sales may be held back to serve as collateral to cover any possible chargebacks or other disputed charges that may occur. These holdbacks, are reported as restricted cash in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no holdbacks held with our credit card processors.
In the event of a material adverse change in our business, the holdback could increase to an amount up to 100% of the applicable credit card activity for all unflown tickets, which would also result in an increase in the required level of restricted cash. If we are unable to obtain a waiver of, or otherwise mitigate the increase in the restriction of cash, it could have a material adverse impact on our operations.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plan Funding
As of December 31, 2020, the excess of the projected benefit obligations over the fair value of plan assets was approximately $224.7 million. We contributed $4.1 million and $3.8 million to our disability plan in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were not required to, and did not make, contributions to our defined benefit pension plan. In 2018, we contributed $50.0 million to our defined benefit pension plans (excluding one-time settlement payments). Future funding requirements for our defined benefit and other postretirement plans are dependent upon many factors such as interest rates, funded status, applicable regulatory requirements and the level and timing of asset returns. Given available funding credits in the defined benefit plan, we do not anticipate making any cash contributions to our defined benefit plan during 2021.
Stock Repurchase Program and Dividends
In November 2018, our Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program pursuant to which we may repurchase up to $100 million of our outstanding common stock over a two-year period through December 2020. On March 18, 2020, we indefinitely suspended all repurchases under the approved repurchase plan in connection with our receipt of financial assistance under the CARES Act and the CAA 2021, which restricts us from repurchasing shares and making dividend payments until March 31, 2022. We spent $7.5 million and $68.8 million to repurchase and retire approximately 0.3 million shares and 2.5 million shares of our common stock in open market transactions during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table displays information with respect to our stock repurchase programs as of December 31, 2020:
We declared and paid cash dividends of $5.5 million, $22.8 million, and $24.2 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Our receipt of financial assistance under the CARES Act and the CAA 2021 precludes us from making any further dividend payments until March 31, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
An off-balance sheet arrangement is any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement involving an unconsolidated entity under which a company has (i) made guarantees, (ii) retained a contingent interest in transferred assets, (iii) an obligation under derivative instruments classified as equity or (iv) any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the company, or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development arrangements with the company. We have no arrangements of the types described in the first three categories that we believe may have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. We do have obligations arising out of variable interests in unconsolidated entities related to certain aircraft leases. To the extent our leases and related guarantees are with a separate legal entity other than a governmental entity, we are not the primary beneficiary because the lease terms are consistent with market terms at the inception of the lease, and the lease does not include a residual value guarantee, fixed price purchase option, or similar feature.
Contractual Obligations
Our estimated contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table:
(1)Represents scheduled principal and estimated interest payments under our long-term debt based on interest rates specified in the applicable debt agreements. Principal and interest payments for debt denominated in Japanese Yen is estimated using the spot rate as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Refer to Note 9 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding finance and operating leases.
(3)Amounts include our firm commitments for aircraft and aircraft related equipment. On October 26, 2020, we entered into an amendment to our 787-9 purchase agreement with Boeing, providing for a change in our aircraft delivery schedule to between 2022 through 2026. The committed expenditures under the amended agreement is reflected in the table above.
(4)Amounts include commitments for services provided by third parties for aircraft maintenance, IT, capacity purchases, and reservations. Total contractual obligations do not include long-term contracts where the commitment is variable in nature (with no minimum guarantee), such as aircraft maintenance deposits due under operating leases and fees due under certain other agreements such as aircraft maintenance power-by-the-hour, computer reservation systems and credit card processing agreements, or when the agreements contain short-term cancellation provisions.
(5)Amounts include our estimated minimum contributions to our pension plans (based on actuarially determined estimates) and contributions to our pilots’ disability plan. Amounts are subject to change based on numerous factors, including interest rate levels, the amount and timing of asset returns and the impact of future legislation
Capital Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following capital commitments consisting of firm aircraft and engine orders and purchase rights:
Committed expenditures for these aircraft, engines, and related flight equipment are approximately $8 million in 2021, $343 million in 2022, $158 million in 2023, $505 million in 2024, $408 million in 2025, and $232 million thereafter.
In order to complete the purchase of these aircraft and fund related costs, we may need to secure additional financing. We are also currently exploring various financing alternatives, and while we believe that such financing will be available to us, there can be no assurance that financing will be available when required, or on acceptable terms, or at all. The inability to secure such financing could have an impact on our ability to fulfill our existing purchase commitments and a material adverse effect on our operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe the disclosure of non-GAAP financial measures is useful information to readers of our financial statements because:
•We believe it is the basis by which we are evaluated by industry analysts and investors;
•These measures are often used in management and board of directors' decision making analysis;
•It improves a reader's ability to compare our results to those of other airlines; and
•It is consistent with how we present information in our quarterly earnings press releases.
See table below for reconciliation between GAAP consolidated net income to adjusted consolidated net income, including per share amounts (in thousands unless otherwise indicated). The adjustments are described below:
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective tax rate included a tax benefit of $45.4 million resulting from the rate differential between the prevailing tax rate of 21% during the years that generated the NOLs and the previous tax rate of 35% that was in effect during the years to which NOLs were carried back as a result of the enactment of the CARES Act. This benefit is attributed to the enactment of the CARES Act and we believe that exclusion of this tax benefit provides investors comparability of results between periods.
•During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $240.6 million in contra-expense related to grant proceeds from the PSP. The grant proceeds were recognized in proportion to estimated wages and benefits expense over the period the PSP covers. We utilized all proceeds under the PSP as of September 30, 2020.
•Changes in fair value of derivative contracts, net of tax, are based on market prices for open contracts as of the end of the reporting period. This adjustment includes the unrealized gains and losses on fuel and interest rate derivatives (not designated as hedges) that will settle in future periods and the reversal of prior period unrealized amounts. Excluding the impact of these derivative adjustments allows investors to analyze our core operational performance and compare our results to other airlines in the periods presented below.
•Changes in fair value of foreign currency derivative contracts, net of tax, are based on market prices for open contracts as of the end of the reporting period. This adjustment includes the unrealized amounts of foreign currency derivatives (not designated as hedges) that will settle in future periods and the reversal of prior period unrealized amounts. We believe that excluding the impact of these derivative adjustments helps investors analyze our operational performance and compare our results to other airlines in the periods presented below.
•Change in unrealized losses on foreign debt are based on fluctuations in foreign exchanges rates related to foreign-denominated debt agreements. We believe that excluding the impact of these amounts helps investors analyze our operational performance and compare our results to other airlines in the periods presented below.
•Loss (gain) on sale of aircraft is the result of adjustments to the final purchase price for three of our Boeing 767-300 aircraft included in a forward sale agreement we entered into in January 2018 and described below. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded a loss of $0.3 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a gain on disposal of Boeing 767-300 aircraft equipment of $1.9 million in conjunction with the retirement of our Boeing 767-300 fleet.
2020 Special Items
•During the first quarter of 2020, we recognized $126.9 million of special items in the Consolidated Statements of Operation, comprised of the following:
◦On April 3, 2020, we received notification from the AFA that the CBA was ratified by its members. The ratified CBA provided for, among other things, a ratification payment, payable over twelve months. We recorded a $23.5 million ratification bonus, of which $20.2 million related to service prior to January 1, 2020, and was recorded as a special item.
◦We recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $106.7 million. Refer to Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
•During the second quarter of 2020, we recognized a charge of $34.0 million associated with the impairment of certain of our long-lived assets. Refer to Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion.
•During the third quarter of 2020, we announced and completed voluntary separation programs across each of our labor groups providing for one-time severance payments, the establishment of health reimbursement accounts and other benefits. Additionally, we announced involuntary separation programs, the majority of which were effective October 1, 2020. We recorded $17.5 million in severance and benefits as an operating special item and $5.7 million related to special termination benefits and curtailment loss as a nonoperating special item in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
•During the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded long-lived asset impairment of approximately $5.4 million, comprised of an additional write-down of our ATR-42 and ATR-72 fleet of approximately $4.9 million as a result of ongoing market uncertainty attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also wrote off of approximately $0.5 million in capitalized software projects that were permanently suspended in response to the continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we recorded $0.3 million in additional costs for the finalization of the voluntary and involuntary separation programs discussed above.
2018 Contract Terminations Expense
•During the year ended December 31, 2018, we terminated two contracts which incurred a total of $35.3 million in contract terminations expense. The transactions are described below:
◦In January 2018, we entered into a transaction with our lessor to early terminate and purchase three Boeing 767-300 aircraft leases and concurrently entered into a forward sale agreement for the same three Boeing 767-300 aircraft, including two Pratt & Whitney 4060 engines for each aircraft. These aircraft were previously accounted for as operating leases. In order to exit the lease and purchase the aircraft, we agreed to pay a total of $67.1 million (net of all deposits) of which a portion was expensed immediately and recognized as a contract termination fee. The expensed amount represents the total purchase price amount over fair value of the aircraft purchased as of the date of the transaction.
◦In February 2018, we exercised our right to terminate our aircraft purchase agreement with Airbus for six Airbus A330-800neo aircraft and the purchase rights for an additional six Airbus A330-800neo aircraft. To terminate the purchase agreement, we were obligated to repay Airbus for concessions received relating to a prior firm order, training credits, as well as forfeit the pre-delivery progress payments made towards the flight equipment. We recorded a contract terminations expense to reflect the termination penalty in our consolidated statements of operations.
We believe that excluding such special items helps investors analyze our operational performance and compare our results to other airlines in the periods presented below.
Operating Costs per Available Seat Mile (CASM)
We have separately listed in the table below our fuel costs per ASM and non-GAAP unit costs, excluding fuel and special items. These amounts are included in CASM, but for internal purposes we consistently use cost metrics that exclude fuel and special items (if applicable) to measure and monitor its costs.
CASM and CASM, excluding fuel, loss (gain) on sale of aircraft, contract terminations expense, and special items, are summarized in the table below:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are defined as those accounting policies and accounting estimates that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties, and that potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. Our most critical accounting policies and estimates are described below. See the summary of significant accounting policies included in Note 1 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of the application of these estimates and other accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Passenger revenue. We record direct passenger ticket sales and tickets sold by other airlines for use on Hawaiian as passenger revenue when the transportation is provided or when scheduled flights for tickets are expected to expire unused. The value of unused passenger tickets is included in current liabilities as Air traffic liability. Prior to the second quarter of 2020, non-refundable tickets sold and credits issued generally expired 13 months from the date of issuance or flight, as applicable. In April 2020, we announced the waiver of certain change fees and extended ticket validity for up to 24 months. We assessed the impact of this change and believe that the classification of Air Traffic Liability as a current liability continues to remain appropriate. We record an estimate of breakage revenue on the scheduled flight date for tickets that will expire unused. These estimates are based on the evaluation of actual historical results and forecasted trends. Given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on actual results and its continued impact on demand, we have monitored, and will continue to monitor customers' travel behavior and may adjust our estimates in the future. Ticket change fees are recorded in Air traffic liability and recognized when the related transportation is provided.
Frequent flyer revenue. HawaiianMiles, Hawaiian's frequent flyer travel award program, provides a variety of awards to program members based on accumulated mileage. ASC 606 requires us to account for miles earned by passengers in the HawaiianMiles program through flight activity as a component of the passenger revenue ticket transaction at the estimated selling price of the miles. Ticket consideration received is allocated between the performance obligations, primarily travel and miles earned by passengers. The allocated value of the miles is deferred until the free travel or other award is used by the passenger, at which time it is included in passenger revenue. The value of the ticket used in the determination of the estimated selling price is based on the historical value of equivalent flights to those provided for loyalty awards and the related miles redeemed to obtain that award adjusted for breakage or fulfillment. The equivalent ticket value (ETV) includes a fulfillment discount (breakage) to reflect the value of the award ticket over the number of miles that, based on historical experience, will be needed to obtain the award. On a quarterly basis, we calculate the ETV by analyzing the fares of similar tickets for the prior 12 months, considering cabin class and geographic region.
We also sell mileage credits to companies participating in our frequent flyer program. These contracts generally include multiple performance obligations, including the transportation that will ultimately be provided when the mileage credits are redeemed and marketing and brand related activities.
During the first quarter of 2018, we amended our partnership with Barclaycard US, Hawaiian's co-branded credit card partner. Management determined that the amendment should be accounted for as a termination of the existing contract and the creation of a new contract under ASC 606 and the relative selling price was determined for each performance obligation of the new agreement. The new agreement continues through 2024 and includes improved economics and enhanced product offerings for our Barclay's co-branded cardholders. The amended agreement did not change, and includes the following performance obligations; (i) transportation that will ultimately be provided when mileage credits are redeemed (transportation), (ii) the Hawaiian Airlines brand and access to its members lists (collectively, brand performance), (iii) marketing, and (iv) airline benefits to cardholders, including discounts and anniversary travel benefits, baggage waivers and inflight purchase credits. We determined the relative fair value of each performance obligation by estimating the selling prices of the deliverables by considering discounted cash flows using multiple inputs and assumptions, including: (1) the expected number of miles to be awarded and redeemed; (2) the estimated weighted average equivalent ticket value, adjusted by a fulfillment discount; (3) the estimated total annual cardholder spend; (4) an estimated royalty rate for the Hawaiian portfolio; and (5) the expected use of each of the airline benefits. The overall consideration received is allocated to the performance obligations based on their relative selling prices.
The transportation performance obligation is deferred and recognized as passenger revenue when the transportation is provided. The value to the financial institution is provided each time a new cardholder chooses the Hawaiian branded credit card and each
time a cardholder chooses to use the co-branded credit card. Therefore, we recognize revenue for the brand performance obligation as members use their co-brand credit card and the resulting mileage credits are issued to them, which best correlates with our performance toward satisfying the obligation.
Accounting for frequent flyer revenue involves the use of various techniques to estimate revenue. To determine the total estimated transaction price, we forecast future credit card activity based on historical data. The relative selling price is determined using management’s estimated standalone selling price of each performance obligation. The objective of using the estimated selling price based methodology is to determine the price at which we would transact a sale if the product or service were sold on a standalone basis. Accordingly, we determine our best estimate of selling price by considering multiple inputs and methods including, but not limited to, discounted cash flows, brand value, number of miles awarded and number of miles redeemed. We estimate the selling price of miles using an ETV adjusted for a fulfillment discount as described above.
Miles expire after 18 months of member account inactivity. We review our breakage estimates annually based upon the latest available information regarding redemption and expiration patterns (e.g., credit card and non-credit card holders). Our estimate of the expected expiration of miles requires significant management judgment. Current and future changes to expiration assumptions or to the expiration policy, or to program rules and program could affect the estimated value of a mile. Due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including changes to our ticket validity and exchange policies, management continues to monitor customers' travel behavior and may adjust its estimates in the future as additional information becomes available.
Pension and Other Postretirement and Postemployment Benefits
The calculation of pension and other postretirement and postemployment benefit expenses and its corresponding liabilities require the use of significant assumptions, including the assumed discount rate, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, expected mortality rates of the plan participants, and the expected health care cost trend rate. Changes in these assumptions will impact the expense and liability amounts, and future actual experience may differ from these assumptions.
The significant assumptions as of December 31, 2020 are as follows:
N/A Not Applicable
^ Expected return on plan assets used to determine the net periodic benefit expense for 2021 is 6.29% for the pension plans and 4.28% for the disability plan.
The expected long-term rate of return assumption is developed by evaluating input from the trustee managing the plans' assets, including the trustee's review of asset class return expectations by several consultants and economists, as well as long-term inflation assumptions. Our expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based on a target allocation of assets, which is based on our goal of earning the highest rate of return while maintaining risk at acceptable levels. The Retirement Plan for Pilots of Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. and the Pilot's Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association Disability and Survivor's Benefit Plan strive to have assets sufficiently diversified so that adverse or unexpected results from any one security class will not have an unduly detrimental impact on the entire portfolio. We believe that our long-term asset allocation on average will approximate the targeted allocation. We periodically review our actual asset allocation and rebalance the pension plan's investments to our targeted allocation when considered appropriate. Pension expense increases as the expected rate of return on plan assets decreases. Lowering the expected long-term rate of return by 100 basis points will have the following effects on our estimated
2021 pension and disability benefit expense recorded in wages and benefits and nonoperating expense:
We determine the appropriate discount rate for each of our plans based on current rates on high quality corporate bonds that would generate the cash flow necessary to pay plan benefits when due. The pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and future expense both increase as the discount rate is reduced. Lowering the discount rate by 100 basis points would have the following effects:
The health care cost trend rate is based upon an evaluation of our historical trends and experience taking into account current and expected market conditions. Changes in the assumed current health care cost trend rate by year by 100 basis points would have the following annual effects:
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized. We assess the carrying value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis and, if certain events or circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred, on an interim basis. We assess the value of its goodwill and indefinite-lived assets under either a qualitative or quantitative approach. When we evaluate goodwill for impairment using a quantitative approach, we estimate the fair value of the reporting unit by considering its market capitalization. If the reporting unit's fair value exceeds its carrying value, no further testing is required. If, however, the reporting unit's carrying value exceeds its fair value, we then determine the amount of the impairment charge, if any. We recognize an impairment charge if the carrying value of the reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its estimated fair value.
During the first quarter of 2020, the adverse economic impact and declining passenger demand attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic drove our stock price to 52-week lows and significantly reduced future cash flow projections. We qualitatively assessed that an impairment loss may have been incurred as of March 31, 2020 and performed an interim test of the recoverability of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. We determined that the estimated fair value of our one reporting unit was less than its carrying value and that the deficit between fair value and the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded the amount of goodwill on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, leading to the recognition of a goodwill impairment charge of $106.7 million. Fair value was determined using a combination of an income approach, which estimates fair value based upon projections of future revenues, expenses, and cash flows discounted to its present value, and a market approach. The valuation methodology and underlying financial information included in our determination of fair value required significant judgments by management. The principal assumptions used in our discounted cash flow analysis consisted of (a) the long-term projections of future financial performance and (b) the weighted-average cost of capital of market participants, adjusted for the risk attributable to the industry in which we operate. Under the market approach, the principal assumption included an estimate for a control premium.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $13.5 million in indefinite-lived intangible assets subject to impairment. We determined that the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets exceeded its carrying value and was not impaired.
Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets used in operations, consisting principally of aircraft and other non-aircraft equipment, are classified as property and equipment, net on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and have a carrying value of approximately $2.1 billion at December 31, 2020. We review long-lived assets used in operations for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate, in management's judgment, that the assets might be impaired and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying value. To determine whether impairment exists for aircraft used in operations, assets are grouped at the fleet-type level (the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows) and future cash flows are estimated based on projections of capacity, passenger mile yield, fuel costs, labor costs and other relevant factors. If, at any time, management determines the net carrying value of an asset is not recoverable, the amount is reduced to its fair value during the period in which such determination is made. Any changes in the estimated useful lives of these assets will be accounted for prospectively.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including capacity reductions, the temporary grounding of the majority of our fleet, as well as reduced future cash flow projections, we previously identified, and continue to identify, indicators of impairment of our long-lived assets. During the second quarter of 2020, it was determined that the net carrying values of our ATR-42 and ATR-72 fleets and assets held under our commercial real estate subsidiary were not recoverable through the generation of future undiscounted cash flows as of June 30, 2020. We estimated the fair value of our ATR-42 and ATR-72 fleets using a third-party valuation, which takes into consideration market pricing information, among other factors, and resulted in a $27.5 million impairment charge. We estimated the fair value of our commercial real-estate entity using a combination of a market and income-based approach, which estimates fair value based upon projections of future revenues, expenses, and cash flows discounted to its present value, which resulted in a $3.4 million impairment charge. The principal assumptions used in our discounted cash flow analysis consisted of (a) the long-term projections of future financial performance and (b) the weighted-average cost of capital of market participants, adjusted for the risk attributable to us and the industry in which we operate.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded long-lived asset impairment of approximately $5.4 million, comprised of an additional write-down of our ATR-42 and ATR-72 fleet of $4.9 million as a result of ongoing market uncertainty attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also wrote off of approximately $0.5 million in capitalized software projects that were permanently suspended in response to the continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Given the substantial reduction in our active aircraft and diminished projections of future cash flows in the near and medium term, we evaluated the remainder of our fleet and determined that only the fleet types discussed above were impaired as the forecasted future cash flows from operation of the fleet through the respective retirement dates continue to exceed their carrying values. We will continue to monitor the duration and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and will continue to evaluate our current fleet and other long-lived assets for impairment accordingly.
Income Tax Valuation Allowance
We periodically assess whether it is more likely than not that we will generate sufficient taxable income to realize our deferred income tax assets and establish valuation allowances if it is not likely we will realize our deferred income tax assets. In making this determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence and make certain assumptions. We consider, among other things, our deferred tax liabilities, the overall business environment, our historical financial results, our industry's historically cyclical financial results and potential current and future tax planning strategies. We cannot presently determine when we will be able to generate sufficient taxable income to realize all of our state deferred tax assets. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, we recorded a valuation allowance of $9.6 million against our deferred tax assets. If we determine that it is more likely than not that we will generate sufficient taxable income to realize the remainder of our deferred income tax assets, we will reverse our valuation allowance (in full or in part), resulting in an income tax benefit in the period such a determination is made.