Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ substantially from those referred to herein due to a number of factors, including but not limited to risks described in the Part I, Item 1A, Risks Factors, and elsewhere in this Annual Report. References to “Notes” are Notes included in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Overview
Halozyme Therapeutics, Inc. is a biopharma technology platform company that provides innovative and disruptive solutions with the goal of improving patient experience and outcomes. Our proprietary enzyme, rHuPH20, is used to facilitate the delivery of injected drugs and fluids. We license our technology to biopharmaceutical companies to collaboratively develop products that combine our ENHANZE® drug delivery technology with the collaborators’ proprietary compounds.
Our approved product and our collaborators’ approved products and product candidates are based on rHuPH20, our patented recombinant human hyaluronidase enzyme. rHuPH20 is the active ingredient in our first commercially approved product, Hylenex® recombinant, and it works by breaking down hyaluronan (or HA), a naturally occurring carbohydrate that is a major component of the extracellular matrix in tissues throughout the body such as skin and cartilage. This temporarily increases dispersion and absorption allowing for improved subcutaneous delivery of injectable biologics, such as monoclonal antibodies and other large therapeutic molecules, as well as small molecules and fluids. We refer to the application of rHuPH20 to facilitate the delivery of other drugs or fluids as our ENHANZE® drug delivery technology (“ENHANZE”). We license the ENHANZE technology to form collaborations with biopharmaceutical companies that develop or market drugs requiring or benefiting from injection via the subcutaneous route of administration. In the development of proprietary intravenous (IV) drugs combined with our ENHANZE technology, data have been generated supporting the potential for ENHANZE to reduce treatment burden, as a result of shorter duration of subcutaneous (SC) administration. ENHANZE may enable fixed-dose SC dosing compared to weight-based dosing required for IV administration, and potentially allow for lower rates of infusion related reactions. ENHANZE may enable more flexible treatment options such as home administration by a healthcare professional or potentially the patient. Lastly, certain proprietary drugs co-formulated with ENHANZE have been granted additional exclusivity, extending the patent life of the product beyond the one of the proprietary IV drug.
We currently have ENHANZE collaborations with F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Ltd. and Hoffmann-La Roche, Inc. (Roche), Baxalta US Inc. and Baxalta GmbH (now members of the Takeda group of companies, following the acquisition of Shire plc by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited in January 2019) (Baxalta), Pfizer Inc. (Pfizer), Janssen Biotech, Inc. (Janssen), AbbVie, Inc. (AbbVie), Eli Lilly and Company (Lilly), Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (BMS), Alexion Pharma Holding (Alexion), ARGENX BVBA (argenx) and Horizon Therapeutics plc. (Horizon). We receive royalties from three of these collaborations, including royalties from sales of one product from the Baxalta collaboration, three products from the Roche collaboration and one product from Janssen collaboration. Future potential revenues from royalties and fees from ENHANZE collaborations and the sales and/or royalties of our approved products will depend on the ability of Halozyme and our collaborators to develop, manufacture, secure and maintain regulatory approvals for approved products and product candidates and commercialize product candidates.
Our 2020 and recent key events are as follows:
Janssen
•In January 2021, we announced that Janssen received accelerated approval from the FDA for DARZALEX FASPRO in combination with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone (D-VCd) for the treatment of adult patients with newly diagnosed light chain (AL) amyloidosis. AL amyloidosis is a rare and potentially fatal disease that develops when plasma cells in the bone marrow generate abnormal light chains, which form amyloid deposits in vital organs and lead to organ deterioration. There were no approved therapies for these patients prior to Darzalex FASPRO.
•In December 2020, Janssen achieved the first sales milestone for Darzalex FASPRO/Darxalex SC, triggering a payment of $15.0 million.
•In November 2020, Janssen initiated a Phase 1 study of amivantamab using ENHANZE technology.
•In November 2020, we announced that Janssen submitted regulatory applications to the FDA and EMA seeking approval of the DARZALEX FASPRO in the U.S. and as DARZALEX SC in the European Union (EU) in combination with pomalidomide and dexamethasone (D-Pd) for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who have received at least one prior line of therapy.
•In November 2020, Janssen announced it submitted a Type II variation application to the EMA seeking European approval for the DARZALEX SC to be used in the treatment of patients with AL amyloidosis.
•In August 2020, Janssen announced that Health Canada approved DARZALEX SC in four regimens across five indications in patients with multiple myeloma, most notably newly diagnosed, transplant-ineligible patients as well as relapsed or refractory patients.
•In June 2020, we announced that Janssen received European marketing authorization and launched the commercial sale of DARZALEX SC in the European Union, triggering a $10.0 million milestone payment. The approval applies to all current daratumumab indications in frontline and relapsed/refractory settings.
•In May 2020, we announced that Janssen received US FDA approval of DARZALEX FASPRO in four of six regimens approved for the intravenous form in multiple myeloma patients, including newly diagnosed, transplant-ineligible patients as well as relapsed or refractory patients and launched the commercial sale, triggering a $15 million milestone payment.
•In April 2020, we announced the submission of a New Drug Application (NDA) to Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) by Janssen seeking approval of a new SC formulation of daratumumab, an intravenous (IV) treatment approved for patients with multiple myeloma.
Argenx
•In January 2021, argenx initiated a Phase 3 study of ARGX-113 utilizing ENHANZE in pemphigus vulgaris (PV), a rare autoimmune disease that causes painful blisters on the skin and mucous membranes.
•In December 2020, argenx initiated a Phase 3 study of ARGX-113 using ENHANZE technology for patients with immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), an immune disorder in which the blood does not clot normally, triggering a $15.0 million payment.
•In October 2020, we announced that argenx expanded the existing global collaboration and license agreement that was signed in February 2019. Under the newly announced expansion, argenx gained the ability to exclusively access our ENHANZE technology for three additional targets upon nomination, for a total of up to six targets. To date, argenx has nominated two targets including the human neonatal Fc receptor FcRn and complement component C2.
Roche
•In December 2020, Roche initiated a Phase 3 study in patients with non-small cell lung cancer for Tecentriq using ENHANZE technology, triggering a $17.0 million payment.
•In December 2020, we announced that the European Commission approved Roche's Phesgo, a fixed-dose combination of Perjeta (pertuzumab) and Herceptin (trastuzumab) with ENHANZE technology, administered by subcutaneous injection for the treatment of patients with early and metastatic HER2-positive breast cancer. This is the first time the European Commission has approved a product combining two monoclonal antibodies that can be administered by a single subcutaneous injection utilizing ENHANZE technology.
•In June 2020, we announced that Roche received FDA approval of Phesgo utilizing ENHANZE technology for the treatment of patients with HER2-positive breast cancer.
Horizon
•In November 2020, we announced a global collaboration and license agreement that gives Horizon exclusive access to ENHANZE technology for SC formulation of medicines targeting IGF-1R. Horizon intends to use ENHANZE to develop a SC formulation of TEPEZZA (teprotumumab-trbw), indicated for the treatment of thyroid eye disease, a serious, progressive and vision-threatening rare autoimmune disease, potentially shortening drug administration time, reducing healthcare practitioner time and offering additional flexibility and convenience for patients.
Baxalta
•In September 2020, Takeda announced that the EMA approved a label update for HYQVIA broadening its use and making it the first and only facilitated subcutaneous immunoglobulin replacement therapy in adults, adolescents and children with an expanded range of secondary immunodeficiencies (SID).
BMS
•In June 2020, BMS selected 3 targets on an exclusive basis and exercised their option to convert a co-exclusive license to an exclusive license, triggering a $5.0 million payment. BMS has selected eight targets on an exclusive basis to date.
Corporate
•In March 2020, Hylenex, which was approved in an NDA, was deemed to be an approved Biologics License Application (BLA) under section 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act (PHS Act). A portion of our competition comes from compounding pharmacies, which are prohibited from compounding biologic products per the Drug Quality & Security Act (DQSA). As hyaluronidase is now considered a biologic, this change may benefit sales of Hylenex.
•During 2020 we repurchased 6.5 million shares of common stock in open market and accelerated share repurchases for $150.0 million at an average price per share of $23.05. Since the inception of our capital return program in November 2019 to repurchase up to $550.0 million of outstanding common stock over a three-year period, we have repurchased a total of 17.6 million shares for $350.0 million at an average price per share of $19.88 as of December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Royalties - Royalty revenue was $88.6 million in 2020 compared to $69.9 million in 2019. The increase was mainly driven by sales of DARZALEX FASPRO in the U.S and EU by Janssen due to the product launch in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by slightly lower sales of Herceptin SC and MabThera SC by Roche. In general, we expect royalty revenue to grow as a result of our recent ENHANZE partner product launches, offsetting the ongoing impact from biosimilars in Europe related to our mature ENHANZE partner products.
Product Sales, Net - Product sales, net were as follows (in thousands):
Product sales, net was lower by $10.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to lower sales of rHuPH20 as a result of a one-off large partner order in 2019. We expect that product sales of bulk rHuPH20 and ENHANZE drug product will fluctuate in future periods based on the needs of our collaborators. In March 2020, the Surgeon General advised hospitals to cancel elective surgeries due to COVID-19. Hylenex is used in cataract surgery and other ophthalmologic surgeries, and therefore the advisory resulted in a decrease in sales of Hylenex in the second quarter of 2020. Most states resumed elective surgeries in April and May of 2020 which supported an increase in sales in the second half of 2020.
Revenues Under Collaborative Agreements - Revenues under collaborative agreements were as follows (in thousands):
Revenue from license fees increased $63.3 million in 2020, compared to 2019 mainly due to the recognition of $121.3 million related to the Janssen, Horizon, Roche, argenx and BMS collaborations in the current year, as compared to $55.0 million recognized in connection with argenx and Roche collaboration in 2019. Revenue from upfront licenses fees, license fees for the election of additional targets, license maintenance fees and other license fees and event-based payments vary from period to period based on our ENHANZE collaboration activity. We expect these revenues to continue to fluctuate in future periods based on our collaborators’ ability to meet various clinical and regulatory milestones set forth in such agreements and
our ability to obtain new collaborative agreements. To date, based on current partner communications, we have not identified any COVID-19 related delays that will materially impact our ENHANZE milestone revenue. We will continue to monitor the ENHANZE development activities of our partners and the impact of their plans on our milestone revenue, as there may be potential for COVID-19 related delays.
Cost of Product Sales -Cost of product sales were $43.4 million in 2020 compared to $45.5 million in 2019. The decrease of $2.1 million in cost of product sales was mainly due to a decrease in sales of bulk rHuPH20 to Janssen, partially offset by an increase in sales of bulk rHuPH20 to Baxalta and Roche.
Research and Development - Research and development expenses consist of external costs, salaries and benefits and allocation of facilities and other overhead expenses related to research manufacturing, clinical trials, preclinical and regulatory activities. Research and development expenses incurred were as follows (in thousands):
Research and development expenses relating to our PEGPH20 programs for 2020 decreased by 93%, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to decreased clinical trial activities. On November 4, 2019, we announced that the HALO-301 clinical study failed to reach the primary endpoint of overall survival. As a result, we halted development activities for PEGPH20, closed our oncology operations and began the close out process for all our clinical trials. We implemented an organizational restructuring to focus our operations solely on ENHANZE, which was completed in the second quarter of 2020 and resulted in a reduction in research and development expenses.
Research and development expenses relating to our ENHANZE collaborations and our rHuPH20 platform for 2020 increased by 38%, compared to 2019, primarily due to increased costs to support additional ENHANZE targets and a higher allocation of overhead costs. The rHuPH20 platform includes research and development expenses related to our proprietary rHuPH20 enzyme that were not designated to a specific program at the time the expenses were incurred.
Selling, General and Administrative - Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses were $45.7 million in 2020 compared to $77.3 million in 2019. The decrease of $31.6 million, or 41%, was primarily due to a decrease in compensation expense, one time restructuring cost in the prior year and discontinuation of commercial expenses related to market research and educational activities as we prepared for a potential commercial launch of PEGPH20. The discontinuation of our development activities for PEGPH20 and closure of our oncology operations resulted in a reduction in commercialization activities and compensation expense.
Interest Expense - Interest expense was $20.4 million in 2020 compared to $11.6 million in 2019. The increase of $8.8 million was primarily due to interest expense related to the Convertible Notes, offset by a discontinuation in interest expense for the Royalty-backed Loan and the Oxford and SVB Loan following the repayment of those obligations. We expect interest expense related to the Convertible Notes to decrease by approximately $12.0 million in 2021 as the non-cash interest expense associated with the amortization of the equity component of Convertible Notes will be eliminated upon the adoption of ASU 2020-06.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and the results of operations for fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018, refer to Part II - Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 24, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale marketable securities. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $368.0 million. We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. We expect to fund our operations going forward with existing cash resources, anticipated revenues from our existing collaborations and cash that we may raise through future transactions. We may raise cash through any one of the following financing vehicles: (i) new collaborative agreements; (ii) expansions or revisions to existing collaborative relationships; (iii) private financings; (iv) other equity or debt financings; (v) monetizing assets; and/or (vi) the public offering of securities.
We may, in the future, offer and sell additional equity, debt securities and warrants to purchase any of such securities, either individually or in units to raise capital to raise funds for additional working capital, capital expenditures, share repurchases, acquisitions or for other general corporate purposes.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operations was $55.5 million in 2020 compared to cash used in by operation $85.4 million in 2019. The $140.9 million increase in cash provided by operations was mainly due to an increase in cash received related to collaboration partner license of $119.0 million during the current year, offset by $55.0 million owed from argenx and Roche for license fees in the prior year, and an increase in working capital spend for 2020 compared to the prior year.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $78.4 million in 2020 compared to net cash used in by investing activities $5.5 million in 2019. The increase in net cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to the increase in proceeds from maturities of marketable securities for 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $106.3 million in 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $153.2 million in 2019, mainly due to a decrease in cash proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, offset by a decrease of $49.9 million in repurchase of common stock, a $49.2 million increase in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under equity incentive plans and a decrease in the amount of repayments of long-term debt of $88.5 million in 2020.
Share Repurchases
The Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program, pursuant to which we may repurchase our issued and outstanding shares of common stock from time to time. The Company retired the repurchased shares. See Note 8. Stockholders’ Equity, within the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our share repurchases.
Debt
Convertible Notes
In November 2019, we completed the sale of $460.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.25% Convertible Senior Notes due in 2024 (Convertible Notes) in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers. We received net proceeds from the offering of approximately $447.4 million. We used $200.0 million of the net proceeds from the offering to repurchase shares of our common stock, including approximately $143.1 million to repurchase approximately 8.1 million shares of common stock concurrently with the offering in privately negotiated transactions, $6.9 million in open market purchases and $50.0 million to repurchase approximately 2.6 million shares of common stock through an accelerated share repurchase agreement.
We used approximately $26.1 million of the net proceeds from the offering to repay all outstanding amounts under our loan agreement with Oxford Finance and Silicon Valley Bank and intend to use the remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including additional share repurchases subsequent to the offering, and working capital.
The Convertible Notes will pay interest semi-annually in arrears on June 1st and December 1st of each year, beginning on June 1, 2020, at an annual rate of 1.25% and will be convertible into cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election, based on the applicable conversion rate at such time. The Convertible Notes are general unsecured obligations and will rank senior in right of payment to all indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Convertible Notes, will rank equally in right of payment with all existing and future liabilities that are not so subordinated, will be effectively junior to any secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness and will be structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of our current or future subsidiaries.
Holders may convert their Convertible Notes at their option only in the following circumstances: (1) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on March 31, 2020, if the last reported sale price per share of common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price for each of at least 20 trading days during the 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter; (2) during the five consecutive business days immediately after any five consecutive trading day period (such five consecutive trading day period, the “measurement period”) in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price per share of Company’s common stock on such trading day and the conversion rate on such trading day; (3) upon the occurrence of certain corporate events or distributions on Company’s common stock, as described in the offering memorandum; (4) if we call such notes for redemption; and (5) at any time from, and including, June 1, 2024 until the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date of December 1, 2024. The Convertible Notes will be convertible, regardless of the foregoing circumstances, at any time from, and including, June 1, 2024 until the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date.
In January 2021, we notified the note holders that we will settle the principal of the Convertible Notes in cash. Therefore, upon conversion, the principal value of the Convertible Notes will be paid in cash and depending on our stock price, any additional amount over principal amount will be settled in shares of common stock. The initial conversion rate for the Convertible Notes will be 41.9208 shares of common stock per $1,000 in principal amount of Convertible Notes, equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $23.85 per share of our common stock. The conversion rate is subject to adjustment as described in the Indenture.
Upon the occurrence of certain circumstances, holders of the Convertible Notes may require us to purchase all or portion of their notes for cash, which may require the use of a substantial amount of cash. As of December 31, 2020, the conditional conversion feature was triggered and our notes are classified as a current liability. At December 31, 2020, we had a working capital position of $133.4 million, which includes the Convertible Notes that are currently redeemable as of December 31, 2020 but excludes another $65.6 million that is classified as equity. The debt may change from current to non-current period over period, primarily as a result of changes in our stock price. We believe that it is remote that holders of the notes would choose to convert their notes early because the fair value of the security that a note holder can currently realize in an active market is greater than the conversion value the note holder would realize upon early conversion. In the unlikely event that all the debt was converted, we will have two business days following a forty trading day observation period from the conversion date to pay the
principal in cash. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have positive operating income and positive cash flow from operations and, accordingly, while there can be no assurance, we believe we have the ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations or to raise additional capital through a variety of financing arrangements to satisfy early conversion of the Convertible Notes.
Royalty-backed Loan
In January 2016, through our wholly-owned subsidiary Halozyme Royalty LLC (Halozyme Royalty), we received a $150 million loan (the Royalty-backed Loan) pursuant to a credit agreement (the Credit Agreement) with BioPharma Credit Investments IV Sub, LP and Athyrium Opportunities II Acquisition LP (the Royalty-backed Lenders). Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, Halozyme Therapeutics, Inc. transferred to Halozyme Royalty the right to receive royalty payments from the commercial sales of ENHANZE products owed under the Roche Collaboration and Baxalta Collaboration (Collaboration Agreements). The royalty payments from the Collaboration Agreements were used to repay the principal and interest on the loan (the Royalty Payments). The Royalty-backed Loan bore interest at a per annum rate of 8.75% plus the three-month LIBOR rate. The three-month LIBOR rate was subject to a floor of 0.7% and a cap of 1.5%. In June 2020, we paid the full remaining balance and final payment of $2.93 million thereby satisfying and discharging all obligations under, and terminating, the Royalty-backed Loan.
Oxford and SVB Loan and Security Agreement
In June 2016, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the Loan Agreement) with Oxford Finance LLC (Oxford) and Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) (collectively, the Lenders), providing a senior secured loan facility of up to an aggregate principal amount of $70.0 million, comprising a $55.0 million draw in June 2016 and an additional $15.0 million tranche, which we had the option to draw during the second quarter of 2017 and did not exercise. The proceeds were partially used to pay the outstanding principal and final payment owed on a previous loan agreement with the Lenders. The remaining proceeds were used for working capital and general business requirements. The Loan Agreement repayment schedule provided for interest only payments for the first 18 months, followed by consecutive equal monthly payments of principal and interest in arrears through the maturity date of January 1, 2021. The Loan Agreement provided for a final payment equal to 5.50% of the initial $55 million principal amount. The final payment was due when the Loan Agreement becomes due or upon the prepayment of the facility. We had the option to prepay the outstanding balance of the Loan Agreement in full and exercised this option in November 2019, at which point we paid the full remaining balance and final payment of $26.1 million, thereby satisfying and discharging all obligations under, and terminating, the Loan Agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we did not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. As such, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, future minimum payments due under our contractual obligations are as follows (in thousands):
_______________
(1).Short-term debt consists of the Convertible Notes.
(2).Interest on short-term debt includes semi-annual interest payments on the Convertible Note. The Convertible Note bears interest at an annual rate of 1.25%.
(3).Includes minimum lease payments related to leases of our office and research facilities and certain autos under non-cancelable operating leases.
(4).We have contracted with third-party manufacturers for the supply of bulk rHuPH20 and fill/finish of Hylenex recombinant. Under these agreements, we are required to purchase certain quantities each year during the terms of the agreements. The amounts presented represent our estimates of the minimum required payments under these agreements.
Contractual obligations for purchases of goods or services include agreements that are enforceable and legally binding to us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. For obligations with cancellation provisions, the amounts included in the preceding table were limited to the non-cancelable portion of the agreement terms or the minimum cancellation fee.
For certain restricted stock units and performance stock units granted, the number of shares issued on the date the restricted stock units vest is net of the minimum statutory withholding requirements that we pay in cash to the appropriate taxing authorities on behalf of our employees. The obligation to pay the relevant taxing authority is not included in the preceding table, as the amount is contingent upon continued employment. In addition, the amount of the obligation is unknown, as it is based in part on the market price of our common stock when the awards vest.
The expected timing of payments of the obligations above is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different, depending on the time of receipt of goods or services, or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Our future capital uses and requirements depend on numerous forward-looking factors. These factors may include, but are not limited to, the following:
•the rate of progress and cost of research and development activities;
•the number and scope of our research and development activities;
•the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•our ability to establish and maintain product discovery and development collaborations, including scale-up manufacturing costs for our collaborators’ product candidates;
•the amount of royalties and milestones from our collaborators;
•the amount of product sales for Hylenex recombinant;
•the costs of obtaining and validating additional manufacturers of rHuPH20;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments;
•the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish; and
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license new products, technologies or businesses.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We review our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
For collaborative agreements, we are entitled to receive event-based payments subject to the collaboration partner's achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones. We recognize revenue when it is deemed probable that these milestones will be achieved, which could be in a period prior to its actual occurrence. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such milestones, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Revenue is recognized when we determine it is probable a milestone will be achieved. This assessment is based on our past experience with our collaboration partners, market insight and partner communication. A revenue reversal will be required in the event it is determined that achievement of a milestone, previously deemed probable, will not occur. This reversal may be material.
For collaborative agreements, royalty revenue is recognized in the period the underlying sales occur, but we do not receive final royalty reports from our collaboration partners until after we complete our financial statements for a prior quarter. Therefore, we recognize revenue based on estimates of the royalty earned, which are based on preliminary reports provided by our collaboration partners. The amount of royalty revenue recognized for the quarter is estimated using our knowledge of past royalty payments, market insight and an estimate made by our collaboration partners provided in a preliminary report. A final royalty report and associated royalty payment is received approximately 60 days after quarter-end. If necessary, a true-up is recorded at that time if there is a difference from the initial estimated royalty revenue recorded. To date, the true-up entries have not been material.
For collaborative arrangements, when necessary, we perform an allocation of the upfront amount based on relative stand-alone selling prices (SSP) of licenses for individual targets. We determine
license SSP using an income-based valuation approach utilizing risk-adjusted discounted cash flow projections. The inputs used in the valuation model to determine SSP are based on estimates utilizing market data and information provided by our collaboration partners. Differences in the allocation of the transaction price between delivered and undelivered performance obligations can impact the timing of revenue recognition but do not change the total revenue recognized under any agreement.
Share-Based Payments
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We maintain a Stock Incentive Plan, which provides for share-based payment awards, including stock options, restricted stock and performance awards. We determine the fair value of our stock option awards and performance awards at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes model. We determine the fair value of our restricted stock awards at the date of grant using the closing market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Option-pricing models and generally accepted valuation techniques require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the future volatility of our stock price, expected dividend yield and future employee stock option exercise behaviors. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Our performance awards require management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving long-term Company goals.
We do not currently believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in estimates or assumptions we use to determine stock-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in share-based compensation expense that could be material.
If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions used, the share-based compensation expense reported in our financial statements may not be representative of the actual economic cost of the share-based compensation. A 10% change in our share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $1.7 million in 2020.
Valuation Allowance
A valuation allowance has been established to offset the net deferred tax assets as realization of such assets is uncertain. We intend to continue maintaining a full valuation allowance on our DTAs until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances
We have considered future taxable income and tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. Both future taxable income and tax planning strategies include a number of estimates. Given our current earnings and anticipated future earnings, we believe that there is a reasonable possibility that within the next 12 months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain DTAs and a decrease to income tax expense for the period the release is recorded.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their effect, if any, on us.