Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements. In addition, the section of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage immunotherapy company developing a novel class of T cell engagers that harness the power of the body’s immune system to treat patients suffering from cancer and other diseases. T cell engagers are engineered proteins that direct a patient’s own T cells to kill target cells that express specific proteins, or antigens, carried by the target cells. Using our proprietary TriTAC platform, we are developing a pipeline of novel T cell engagers, or TriTACs, initially focused on the treatment of solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. We have also nominated our first clinical candidate using our proprietary ProTriTAC platform, a prodrug version of our TriTAC platform, designed to expand the target space for T cell engagers and bring the TriTAC benefits to a broader number of patients.
We currently have four TriTAC product candidates in clinical development. HPN424 is currently in a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for the treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, or mCRPC. HPN536 is currently in a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for the treatment of ovarian cancer and other mesothelin-, or MSLN-, expressing solid tumors. HPN217 is currently in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial targeting B-cell maturation antigen, or BCMA, for the treatment of multiple myeloma. HPN328, a TriTAC product candidate targeting Delta-like canonical Notch ligand 3, or DLL3, for the treatment of SCLC and other DLL3-expressing tumors.
TriTAC Pipeline Update
HPN424: In December 2020, we provided a clinical update on our ongoing Phase 1/2a clinical trial, at the time of the data cutoff, 69 patients had been dosed across 14 cohorts at fixed doses of 1.3 to 160ng/kg and in step dosing cohorts up to 300ng/kg administered as a weekly intravenous infusion. Enrolled patients had a median of 6 prior systemic therapies, and 76% of patients had prior chemotherapy in the metastatic castration-resistant setting. Ten of 44 patients (23%) with treatment start dates at least 6 months ago remained on study treatment for more than 24 weeks.
At the highest fixed dose tested to date, 160ng/kg, one patient out of 7 has experienced a confirmed partial response with tumor lesion reduction of 43%. 3 of 7 patients have had serum PSA declines from baseline, one of which was a PSA reduction of 50%.
HPN424 was generally well tolerated and cytokine-related adverse events have been manageable. Reported Grade 3 or higher adverse events have included cytokine release syndrome (CRS) (10%), ALT increase (11%) and AST increase (11%). CRS events and transaminitis have been transient and have not resulted in treatment discontinuation. Dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) have been observed and have not limited escalation. A maximum tolerated dose (MTD) has not been identified. Presentation of Phase 1 data and initiation of an expansion cohort is planned for the first half of 2021. Interim data from this expansion cohort is anticipated by the end of 2021.
HPN536: HPN536 is a MSLN-targeting T cell engager, and we are currently enrolling patients in a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for ovarian, pancreatic and other MSLN-expressing solid tumors. The study is collecting data to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and activity of HPN536. In December 2020, we provided a clinical update on our ongoing Phase 1/2a clinical trial, at the time of the data cutoff, dosing had occurred across 9 fixed-dose cohorts of 6 to 280ng/kg and 1 step dose cohort up to 600ng/kg. Tumor types treated included late-stage ovarian and pancreatic cancers and peritoneal mesothelioma. Enrolled patients had a median of four prior systemic therapies, and 66% of patients had progressive disease as best response to their most recent prior therapy. Pharmacokinetic analysis shows median half-life of more than 70 hours. Among the relapsed/refractory ovarian cancer patients with at least one post-baseline scan, 8 of 12 (67%) patients showed stability of target lesions.
HPN536 appears to be well tolerated. One CRS grade 3 occurred in the absence of dexamethasone premedication treatment. The CRS resolved, and the patient continued on study with dexamethasone premedication. As of December 1, 2020, no DLTs had been observed. Initiation of an expansion cohort is anticipated in the second half of 2021, with a presentation of Phase 1 data by year end 2021.
HPN217: In April 2020, we announced that the first patient was dosed with HPN217 in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial focused on relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma, or RRMM. In December 2020, we provided a clinical update on our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial, at the time of the data cutoff, relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma patients had been treated across 6 single-patient fixed dose cohorts of 5 to 810µg, reflecting a more than 100-fold increase in dose in 8 months. HPN217 had been well-tolerated, and no DLTs had been observed as of the December 1, 2020 cutoff date. In January 2021, HPN217 received orphan drug designation for the treatment of multiple myeloma. A presentation of interim data is anticipated in 2021, with initiation of a dose expansion cohort in the second half of 2021.
HPN217 is covered by a global development and option agreement with AbbVie Inc., or AbbVie, and treatment of the first patient in the clinical trial triggered a $50 million milestone payment, which we received in June 2020. HPN217 targets B-cell maturation antigen, or BCMA, a well-validated target expressed on multiple myeloma cells. Harpoon is responsible for conducting the Phase 1/2 clinical trial, and we are actively enrolling patients in the dose escalation portion of the multi-country trial. Under the agreement with AbbVie, we are eligible to receive future payments totaling up to $430 million upon AbbVie’s exercise of an exclusive license option and achievement of certain development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, in addition to royalties on commercial sales.
HPN328: In December 2020, we announced that the first patient was dosed with HPN328 in a Phase 1/2 trial as an investigational treatment of SCLC and other tumors associated with DLL3 expression. We have presented preclinical data on HPN328 showing that the drug was well tolerated in cynomolgus monkeys at 1 and 10 mg/kg, and pharmacokinetic data supported the potential for once weekly dosing. When administered to mice bearing human SCLC xenografts and human T cells, HPN328 eradicated the tumors. Presentation of initial data is planned for the second half of 2021.We plan to initiate a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in the fourth quarter of 2020.
ProTriTAC
In May 2020, as a part of our pipeline update, we also presented advancements in our second platform, ProTriTAC, which was designed to expand the universe of addressable targets and indications for T cell engagers. We have nominated the first ProTriTAC clinical candidate, HPN601, with Investigational New Drug Application, or IND enabling studies underway, and we expect to provide additional development updates later this year. Our ProTriTAC platform applies a prodrug concept to create a therapeutic T cell engager that remains inactive until it reaches the tumor. ProTriTACs therefore have the potential for additional tumor specificity and enhanced safety profiles because they are designed to have limited interaction with their molecular targets in healthy tissue, allowing us to target tumor-associated antigens that may be more broadly expressed. When a ProTriTAC penetrates a tumor, tumor-associated proteases cleave off the blocking domain of the ProTriTAC, thereby enabling the engagement of T cells to subsequently kill tumor cells. This activation process also diminishes the half-life of the resulting T cell engager. If active molecules leave the tumor tissue, they are rapidly eliminated from the body, therefore further limiting the potential side effects in normal tissues.
HPN601: We are developing HPN601, our first ProTriTAC candidate which targets epithelial cell adhesion molecule, or EpCAM, and is applicable to a wide array of solid tumors.
Business Operations
Since commencing operations in 2015, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to performing research and development and manufacturing activities in support of our product development efforts, hiring personnel, raising capital to support and expand such activities and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations to date primarily from proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock and warrants, the sale of common stock, and payments received under our discovery collaboration agreement with AbbVie.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant net operating losses. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates and programs. Our net losses were $49.9 million, 55.6 million, and $27.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $168.1 million. Our primary use of cash is to fund net losses, operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of our planned clinical trials and expenditures on other research and development activities. We expect our expenses will increase substantially over time as we:
•
continue the research and development of HPN424, HPN536, HPN217, HPN328 and HPN601 as well as our other product candidates;
•
initiate preclinical studies and clinical trials for any additional product candidates that we may pursue in the future;
•
seek marketing approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•
establish a sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•
continue to invest in our technology platforms, including TriTAC and ProTriTAC;
•
maintain, protect and expand our portfolio of intellectual property rights, including patents, trade secrets and know-how;
•
implement operational, financial and management systems; and
•
attract, hire and retain additional administrative, clinical, regulatory and scientific personnel.
Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
In February 2019, we closed the IPO of our common stock, in which we issued and sold an aggregate of 5,769,201 shares of our common stock at a price of $14.00 per share for net proceeds of approximately $70.7 million (inclusive of a partial exercise of the underwriters’ option), after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs payable by us.
In January 2021, we closed a follow on public offering of 6,764,704 shares of our common stock, including 882,352 shares sold pursuant to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their overallotment option at $17.00 per share. The net proceeds to us were approximately $108.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs payable by us.
In October and November 2020, pursuant to our Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald, we received approximately $3.0 million in net proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock.
COVID-19 Update
In December 2019, there was an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or mitigate its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. Our assessment to date continues to support that we have not experienced any material delays or significant financial impacts directly related to the pandemic other than some minor disruptions to clinical operations, including patient enrollment in some of our clinical trials. We will continue to monitor the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, assets and operations, including our personnel, programs, expected timelines, expenses, third-party contract manufacturing, contract research organizations and clinical trials.
While we are currently continuing our clinical trials we have underway in sites in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Europe, we expect that COVID-19 precautions may directly or indirectly impact the timeline for some of our clinical trials, as a result of potential delays or difficulties in enrolling or assessing patients in our clinical trials, clinical site initiation, diversion of healthcare resources away from the conduct of clinical trials, interruption of key clinical trial activities, among other factors. While our third-party contract manufacturers continue to operate at or near normal levels and while we currently do not anticipate any interruptions to our contract manufacturers’ processes, it is possible that the pandemic and response efforts may have an impact in the future on our third-party contract manufacturers’ ability to produce quantities of our product candidates for preclinical testing and clinical trials. In addition, we rely on contract research organizations or other third parties to assist us with clinical trials, and we cannot guarantee that they will continue to perform their contractual duties in a timely and satisfactory manner as a result of the pandemic. Certain of our clinical trial sites have experienced, and others may experience in the future, delays in collecting, receiving and analyzing data from patients enrolled in our clinical trials for due to limited staff at such sites, limitation or suspension of on-site visits by patients, or patients’ reluctance to visit the clinical trial sites during the pandemic. We and our contract research organizations may also need to make certain adjustments to the operation of our clinical trials in an effort to ensure the monitoring and safety of patients and minimize risk to trial integrity during the pandemic and generally. We could also see an impact on our ability to interact with regulators, ethics committees or other important agencies due to limitations in regulatory authority, personnel resources or otherwise.
In addition, in response to the ongoing spread of COVID-19, we have established testing protocols for personnel access to our headquarter offices and laboratory, although substantially all of our employees and contractors that continue to telecommute. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely impact our business, assets, operations and clinical trials, particularly if the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time. See “Risk factors-Our business could be adversely affected by the effects of health epidemics, including the recent outbreak of the novel coronavirus. A COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing in many parts of the world and may result in significant disruptions which could materially affect our operations, including at our headquarters in the San Francisco Bay Area and at our clinical trial sites.” for more information regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations. We continue to actively monitor this situation and the possible effects on our business and operations.
Collaborations with AbbVie
Development and Option Agreement
On November 20, 2019, we entered into a Development and Option Agreement, which we refer to, as amended, as the Development and Option Agreement, with AbbVie in connection with our HPN217 program, which targets B cell maturation antigen, or BCMA. Pursuant to such agreement, we granted to AbbVie an option to a worldwide, exclusive license to our patents and know-how applicable to the HPN217 program to develop, manufacture, and commercialize products arising from the HPN217 program and targeting BCMA, or HPN217 Products. Under the Development and Option Agreement, we filed an IND for HPN217 and are responsible for conducting clinical development activities pursuant to a mutually agreed upon development plan, including conducting a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of HPN217, in order for AbbVie to determine whether it wishes to exercise its option to a worldwide, exclusive license to such HPN217 program. We initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in April 2020.
Under the Development and Option Agreement, AbbVie may exercise its license option at any time during a period commencing on the effective date of the agreement and expiring after a specified period following delivery by us of a specified data package arising from the first Phase 1/2 trial for the HPN217 Products. Following AbbVie’s exercise of its option, and except for completion of certain development activities by us under the development plan, AbbVie will be solely responsible, at its cost, for the development, manufacture and commercialization of HPN217 and any other HPN217 Products. AbbVie is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and obtain regulatory approval for one HPN217 Product, for at least one indication, for use in each Major Market (as defined in the Development and Option Agreement).
AbbVie paid an upfront payment of $30.0 million and, in June 2020, a development milestone payment of $50.0 million, as we dosed our first patient in the Phase 1/2 clinical trial of HPN217 in April 2020. If AbbVie exercises its option, AbbVie will pay us an option exercise fee of $200.0 million. Following option exercise, AbbVie will be required to make further payments to us of up to $230.0 million in the aggregate for the achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial sales milestones for HPN217 Products. We will also receive tiered royalties on net sales by AbbVie, its affiliates and sublicensees of HPN217 Products at percentages ranging from the high single digits to the very low double digits, subject to specified offsets and reductions. Royalties will be payable under the Development and Option Agreement on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis commencing on the date of first commercial sale of HPN217 and other HPN217 Products, and ending on the later of expiration of all valid claims of specified licensed patents in such country, expiration of regulatory exclusivity in such country, or ten years following first commercial sale of such HPN217 Product in such country.
We will recognize revenue under the Development and Option Agreement as the initial development activities are performed using an input method, according to the costs incurred as related to the estimated costs for the development and regulatory activities to be performed through the completion of a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of HPN217. Accordingly, of the $30.0 million upfront payment received in 2019 and $50.0 million development milestone received in 2020, $13.8 million and $1.7 million of revenue was recognized for the year ended 2020 and 2019, respectively, and as of December 31, 2020, we had $ 64.5 million of deferred revenue under the Development and Option Agreement.
Amended and Restated Discovery Collaboration Agreement
On November 20, 2019, we entered into an Amended and Restated Discovery Collaboration and License Agreement, or the Restated Collaboration Agreement, with AbbVie, which agreement amends and restates the Discovery Collaboration and License Agreement entered into between us and AbbVie, dated October 10, 2017 and amended April 3, 2019, or the Original Collaboration Agreement. Pursuant to the Original Collaboration Agreement, we granted to AbbVie worldwide exclusive rights to develop and commercialize products that incorporate our proprietary TriTAC technology together with soluble TCRs provided by AbbVie that bind to targets accepted by the parties. Under the terms of the Original Collaboration Agreement, AbbVie was allowed to designate up to two targets, which it selected in 2017 and 2019, respectively. Pursuant to the Restated Collaboration Agreement, the worldwide, exclusive license granted to AbbVie under the Collaboration Agreement to develop and commercialize products that incorporate our proprietary Tri-specific T-cell Activating Construct, or TriTAC, platform technology together with soluble T cell receptors, or TCRs,
provided by AbbVie has been expanded to cover products that incorporate antibodies provided by AbbVie or by us. The expansion of the collaboration also allows AbbVie to designate up to six additional targets, selected during a specified period following the effective date, to be the subject of activities under the collaboration. During a period of up to four years following the date of AbbVie’s designation of each target for the products, and confirmation of target availability, we and AbbVie will conduct certain research and discovery activities under a mutually agreed discovery and research plan in connection with the creation and evaluation of constructs comprising our proprietary TriTAC technology, in conjunction with the soluble TCR or antibody sequences directed at the agreed upon targets of interest. We may not, including through any third party, develop or commercialize any competing product that binds to any of the included targets. As was the case under the Original Collaboration Agreement, following the discovery phase, AbbVie will be solely responsible, at its cost, for the development, manufacture and commercialization of the products that arise from the activities under the discovery plan. AbbVie is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize one such product directed to each target for which the discovery activities were completed in each Major Market (as defined in the Restated Collaboration Agreement).
In addition to the upfront payment of $17.0 million already paid under the Original Collaboration Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $20.0 million under the Restated Collaboration Agreement for AbbVie’s right to select two additional targets and an option to select up to four further targets. AbbVie will be required to make payments to us, upon target selection, of $10.0 million for each target, up to four further targets selected by AbbVie. For each of the up to eight targets selected, we will receive up to $300.0 million in the aggregate for the achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial sales milestones for licensed products indicated for human therapeutic or prophylactic use, totaling up to $2.4 billion in the aggregate, if such licensed products are successfully progressed against all-included targets and indications. We will also be eligible to receive tiered royalties on net sales by AbbVie, its affiliates and sublicensees of licensed products at percentages in the mid-single digits, subject to specified offsets and reductions. Royalties will be payable under the Restated Collaboration Agreement on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis commencing on the date of first commercial sale of each product, and ending on the later of expiration of all valid claims of specified licensed patents in such country, expiration of regulatory exclusivity in such country or ten years following first commercial sale of such product in such country. If licensed products are developed and commercialized for diagnostic or veterinary use, or certain screening or monitoring uses, the parties have agreed to negotiate an appropriate reduction in the economic terms applicable to such non-therapeutic and prophylactic applications.
We recognized revenue under the Original Collaboration Agreement over a period in which related research and development activities occur. Accordingly, of the $17.0 million upfront payment received in 2017, $3.7 million and $4.0 million of revenue was recognized during the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively, and, as of December 31, 2020, we had $4.3 million of deferred revenue under the Original Collaboration Agreement.
We will recognize revenue under the Restated Collaboration Agreement over a period in which related research and development activities occur. Accordingly, of the $20.0 million upfront payment received in 2019, no revenue was recognized for the year ended 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had $20.0 million of deferred revenue under the Restated Collaboration Agreement.
The Restated Collaboration Agreement will terminate upon the date of the expiration of all AbbVie’s royalty payment obligations in all countries. The Restated Collaboration Agreement may be terminated by either party immediately for the insolvency of the other party or on 90 days’ written notice for an uncured material breach of such agreement by the other party. AbbVie may also terminate the Restated Collaboration Agreement in its entirety or on a target-by-target or country-by-country basis for any reason on 30 days’ written notice to the Company. In addition, AbbVie may terminate the Restated Collaboration Agreement immediately in its entirety or on a target-by-target basis if AbbVie considers in good faith that there has been a failure of the discovery or development efforts with respect to such target, or that further development or commercialization of products directed to such target is not advisable as a result of a serious safety issue.
License Agreement with Werewolf Therapeutics, Inc.
In March 2018, we entered into an assignment and license agreement, or the Werewolf Agreement, with Werewolf Therapeutics, Inc., or Werewolf, a portfolio company of MPM Capital, Inc., a holder of more than 5% of our capital stock. Dr. Luke Evnin, a member of our Board until June 2020, is the Chairman of the board of directors of Werewolf. Under the Werewolf Agreement, we assigned certain patents that relate to certain inducible polypeptides (and binding moiety for conditional activation of certain polypeptides) to Werewolf and granted to Werewolf a non-exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicenseable license under certain other patents owned by us and relating to certain proteins, to make, use and commercialize products that are covered by such patents in the field of molecules comprising a certain polypeptide. Werewolf assigned certain patents to us relating to adoptive cell therapies and binding moieties for conditional activation of immunoglobulin and non-immunoglobulin molecules. Under the Werewolf Agreement, Werewolf paid us an upfront fee of $0.5 million. If Werewolf commercializes products covered by the licensed patents, then beginning on the first sale of such products, Werewolf will be obligated to pay to us a royalty on net sales of such products by Werewolf, its affiliates and licensees at a percentage in the low single digits, subject to an obligation to make a minimum annual royalty payment at an amount in the low hundreds of thousands of dollars.
In December 2019, we and Werewolf amended the Werewolf Agreement by entering into a Second Amended and Restated Assignment and License Agreement, or the Amended Werewolf Agreement, to include the grant to Werewolf of an exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicensable license under certain patents owned by us and relating to certain proteins, to make, use, and commercialize products that are covered by such patents in the field of molecules comprising a certain protein. If Werewolf commercializes products covered by these licensed patents, then beginning on the first sale of such products, Werewolf will be obligated to pay to us a royalty on net sales of such products by Werewolf, its affiliates and licensees at a percentage in the low single digits, and this royalty cannot be added to any other royalty owed to us under the Amended Werewolf Agreement. In addition, each party granted to the other a non-exclusive, royalty-free, sublicensable, perpetual license under certain other patents relating to a certain binding domain of a certain protein, to make, use and commercialize products that are covered by such patents in a field defined by a certain type of molecule for each party.
Royalties on net sales will be recognized when the underlying sales occur. No royalty revenue was recognized under the Werewolf Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our collaboration and license revenue to date is related to work performed by us under the Restated Collaboration Agreement and Development and Option Agreement, and is recognized when designated research and development services are performed. To date, we have not received any milestone or royalty payments under the Original Collaboration Agreement or the Restated Collaboration Agreement. We expect that any collaboration and license revenue we generate from the Restated Collaboration Agreement and the Development and Option Agreement and any future collaboration partners will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing and amount of milestones and other payments. Additionally, for research and development services that we recognize over time, we measure our progress using an input method. The input methods we use are based on the effort we expend or costs we incur toward the satisfaction of our performance obligation. We estimate the amount of effort we expend, including the time we estimate it will take us to complete the activities, or costs we incur in a given period, relative to the estimated total effort or costs to satisfy the performance obligation. This results in a percentage that we multiply by the transaction price to determine the amount of revenue we recognize each period. This approach requires us to make numerous estimates and use significant judgement. If our estimates or judgements change over the course of the collaboration, they may affect the timing and amount of revenue that we recognize in the current and future periods.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred in performing research, development and manufacturing activities in support of our own product development efforts and those of our collaborators, and include salaries, employee benefits, stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, outsourced research and development expenses, professional services and allocated facilities-related costs. We expense both internal and external research and development expenses as they are incurred. We do not allocate our costs by product candidates, as our research and development expenses include internal costs, such as payroll and other personnel expenses, and external costs, neither of which are tracked by product candidate. In particular, with respect to internal costs, several of our departments support multiple product candidate research and development programs. Non-refundable advance payments for services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and recognized as expenses as the related services are performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase substantially in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials, pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates and expand our pipeline of product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary preclinical and clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors, including the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical programs, the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed product candidates, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, allocated facilities costs and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resource, audit and accounting services. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. We expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, Nasdaq and any other securities exchange on which our securities are traded, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our administrative staff and functions to support the growth of our business and the requirements of a public company.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net is primarily comprised of foreign currency transaction gains or losses related to certain transactions with European third-party vendors.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Collaboration and license revenue increased by $11.7 million, or 202%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $12.1 million increase in revenue recognized related to the Development and Option Agreement which was entered into in November 2019, for research and development services performed, partially offset by a decrease of $0.4 million revenue recognized for research and development services performed under the Restated Collaboration Agreement.
Research and Development
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the respective periods:
Research and development expenses increased by $11.0 million, or 26%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $6.5 million increase in personnel-related expenses due to an increase in headcount, $3.8 million increase in product and clinical development expense and pharmacology services due to development of four identified product candidates, which includes conducting preclinical and clinical studies to support ongoing clinical development, a $1.0 million increase in consulting expenses primarily due to preparation of our HPN424, HPN536, HPN217 and HPN328 clinical trials, which was offset by a $0.3 million decrease in facility and other allocated expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $6.2 million, or 28%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $8.4 million decrease in legal fees and related expenses associated with the Maverick Therapeutics, Inc., or Maverick, litigation incurred in 2019, offset by a $2.2 million increase in personnel-related expenses due to an increase in headcount.
Interest Income, net
Interest income decreased by $1.2 million, or 46%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest yields on our cash, money-market and marketable securities balances and higher amortization of premiums associated marketable securities purchases.
Other Expense, net
Other expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower losses from foreign currency fluctuation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Since our inception and through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock and warrants, the sale of common stock, and upfront payments received by us from our collaboration and license agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $150.0 million in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, an accumulated deficit of $168.1 million and working capital of $81.8 million.
In January 2021, we sold an aggregate 6,764,704 shares of our common stock for $108.1 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
In October and November 2020, pursuant to our Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald, we received approximately $3.0 million in net proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock. We expect to continue to incur substantial costs in order to conduct research and development activities necessary to develop and commercialize our product candidates. Additional capital will be needed to undertake these activities and commercialization efforts, and, therefore, we intend to raise such capital through the issuance of additional equity, borrowings, and potentially strategic alliances with other companies. However, if such financing is not available at adequate levels or on acceptable terms, we could be required to significantly reduce operating expenses and delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate some of the development programs or commercialization efforts, out-license intellectual property rights to our product candidates and sell unsecured assets, or a combination of the above, any of which may have a material adverse effect on the our business, results of operations, financial condition and/or out ability to fund our scheduled obligations on a timely basis or at all.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant national and global economic disruption and may adversely affect our business. Uncertainty exists concerning the magnitude of the impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, we are uncertain as to what effect the pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. We are actively monitoring this situation and the possible effects on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and personnel. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and the response to curb its spread, currently we are not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic to our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity. If the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic persists and deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our results of operations.
Capital Resources
Our primary uses of cash are to fund net losses and operating expenses, which consist primarily of funding our clinical and preclinical trials, research and development expenditures and related personnel costs. Cash used to fund operating expenses is
impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. The timing and amount of our future funding requirements depends on many factors, including the following:
•
the scope, rate of progress, results and cost of our preclinical studies, clinical trials and other related activities;
•
the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies, and establishing commercial supplies, of our product candidates and any products that we may develop;
•
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•
the cost, timing and outcomes of regulatory approvals;
•
the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
•
the terms and timing of any other collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the timing, receipt and amount of sales, profit sharing or royalties, if any, from our potential products;
•
the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights
•
the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions;
•
the compliance and administrative costs associated with being a public company; and
•
the cost of attracting, hiring and retaining additional administrative, clinical, regulatory and scientific personnel.
In March 2020, we entered into a Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion through Cantor Fitzgerald, as our sales agent, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million. Cantor Fitzgerald may sell the common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including sales made directly on or through Nasdaq or on any other existing trading market for our common stock. Any shares of our common stock sold will be issued pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237175). We will pay Cantor Fitzgerald a commission up to 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of any shares of our common stock sold through Cantor Fitzgerald under the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 192,069 shares of our common stock pursuant to our Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald, for net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million.
Based on our current business plans, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, funding from our collaborations and partners and most recently, net proceeds from our January 2021 underwritten follow on public offering and sales of our common stock under the Sales Agreement in October 2020 and November 2020, will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least the next 12 months from the issuance date of these audited financial statements. However, we will require additional capital in order to complete development of our product candidates and commercialize our products, if approved. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other marketing and distribution arrangements. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our preclinical studies and clinical trials, research and development programs or commercialization efforts. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates and the extent to which we may enter into additional collaborations with third parties to participate in their development and commercialization, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated preclinical studies and clinical trials. To the extent that we raise additional capital through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity or convertible debt offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, operating and capital leases, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Please see the section entitled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements and the challenges we may face in raising capital.
Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In 2020, cash used in operating activities was $8.6 million, which consisted of a net loss of $49.9 million and a net change of $33.4 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by $7.9 million in non-cash charges. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation of $4.9 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.1 million, amortization operating right-of-use lease asset of $0.4 million and net amortization of premiums and discounts on marketable securities of $0.5 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in deferred revenue of $31.5 million resulting from the upfront payments of $50 million cash milestone received from AbbVie related to the Development Option Agreement in June 2020 and an increase in accrued liabilities of $6.1 million primarily related to timing for ongoing research and development activities, which was offset by a decrease of $1.5 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, a decrease of $1.2 million in accounts payable resulting from the timing of payments made for operating costs and a decrease of $1.4 million in operating lease obligations.
In 2019, cash used in operating activities was $2.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $55.6 million and a net change of $49.0 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by $3.6 million in non-cash charges. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.9 million, amortization operating right-of-use lease asset of $1.2 million and net amortization of premiums and discounts on marketable securities of $0.5 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in deferred revenue of $45.3 million resulting from the upfront payments of $30 million from the Development and Option Agreement and $20 million from the Restated Collaboration Agreement, a net increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $2.5 million related to legal fees associated with Maverick litigation and timing of research and development activities, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.8 million resulting from the timing of payments made for operating costs to support our operations as a public company and timing for ongoing research and development activities and a decrease in other assets of $3.0 million resulting from the recognition of deferred IPO costs.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
In 2020, cash used in investing activities of $63.6 million primarily related to purchases of marketable securities and property and equipment consisting primarily of laboratory equipment offset by the maturity and sale of marketable securities.
In 2019, cash used in investing activities of $69.3 million primarily related to purchases of marketable securities and property and equipment consisting primarily of laboratory equipment offset by the maturity and sale of marketable securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $4.7 million was primarily related to proceeds received from the sale of our common stock pursuant to our Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald in October 2020 and November 2020, or net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million. In addition, we received $1.7 million cash from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases under the employee stock purchase plan.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $71.4 million was primarily related to the proceeds received from our IPO in February 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The obligations noted above represent operating lease obligations related to our currently occupied premises at 131 Oyster Point Blvd in South San Francisco, California that commenced in July 2019 and expires in June 2027. The initial annual base rent is approximately $2.2 million, and such amount will increase by 3.5% annually on each anniversary of the commencement date, equaling approximately $20.0 million over the eight-year lease term. In connection with the lease, we will maintain a letter of credit for the benefit of the landlord in the amount of $0.5 million. Under the lease agreement, we have an option to extend the lease for an additional period of eight years. As of December 31, 2020, we have not determined whether we will exercise our option to extend the lease term.
In December 2016, we entered into a royalty transfer agreement with MPM Oncology Charitable Foundation, Inc. and UBS Optimus Foundation pursuant to which we will pay 0.5% of our annual global net sales to each of the counterparties for products that incorporate or utilize intellectual property that was discovered or developed by us prior to our initial public offering.
In October 2015, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with AGC Biologics, Inc. (formerly known as CMC ICOS Biologics, Inc.), or AGC, for certain manufacturing-related technology, and in July 2016, we entered into a development and manufacturing agreement with AGC. Pursuant to these agreements, so long as AGC is our exclusive manufacturer, we will not owe AGC any milestone or royalty payments for the use of their manufacturing technology. However, if AGC is no longer our exclusive manufacturer, and we still use such technology, we will owe AGC specified milestones of up to $350,000 per specified product and a royalty on net sales of these products of less than 1%. We have an option to buy out these royalty obligations by making a one-time payment to AGC in a dollar amount in the mid-single digit millions. See “Business-Collaboration and License Agreements-Agreements with AGC Biologics, Inc.”
In addition, we enter into agreements in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for clinical trials and with vendors for preclinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes, which are generally cancelable upon written notice. These payments are not included in this table of contractual obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2017, we early adopted on a full retrospective basis Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or Topic 606. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. In accordance with ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of Topic 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)
identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods and services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract that falls under the scope of Topic 606, determine those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied.
We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. The stand-alone selling price may be, but is not presumed to be, the contract price. In determining the allocation, we maximize the use of observable inputs. When the stand-alone selling price of a good or service is not directly observable, we estimate the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation using assumptions that require judgment. Acceptable estimation methods include, but are not limited to: (i) the adjusted market assessment approach, (ii) the expected cost plus margin approach, and (iii) the residual approach (when the stand-alone selling price is not directly observable and is either highly variable or uncertain). In order for the residual approach to be used, we must demonstrate that (a) there are observable stand-alone selling prices for one or more of the performance obligations and (b) one of the two criteria in ASC 606-10- 32-34(c)(1) and (2) is met. The residual approach cannot be used if it would result in a stand-alone selling price of zero for a performance obligation, as a performance obligation, by definition, has value on a stand-alone basis.
An option in a contract to acquire additional goods or services gives rise to a performance obligation only if the option provides a material right to the customer that it would not receive without entering into that contract. Factors that we consider in evaluating whether an option represents a material right include, but are not limited to: (i) the overall objective of the arrangement, (ii) the benefit the collaborator might obtain from the arrangement without exercising the option, (iii) the cost to exercise the option (e.g. priced at a significant and incremental discount) and (iv) the likelihood that the option will be exercised. With respect to options determined to be performance obligations, we recognize revenue when those future goods or services are transferred or when the options expire.
We enter into corporate collaborations under which we may obtain upfront license fees, research and development funding, and development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments and royalty payments. Our performance obligations under these arrangements may include licenses of intellectual property, distribution rights, research and development services, delivery of manufactured product and/or participation on joint steering committees.
•
Licenses of Intellectual Property. If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgement to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring proportional performance for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees. We evaluate the measure of proportional performance each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. We recognize collaboration revenue by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an input measure. In order to recognize revenue over the research and development period, we measure actual costs incurred to date compared to the overall total expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation. Revenues are recognized as the program costs are incurred. We will re-evaluate the estimate of expected costs to satisfy the performance obligation each reporting period and make adjustments for any significant changes.
•
Milestone Payments. At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price. Topic 606 suggests two alternatives to use when estimating the amount of variable consideration: the expected value method and the most likely amount method. Under the expected value method, an entity considers the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. Under the most likely amount method, an entity considers the single most likely amount in a range of possible consideration amounts. Whichever method is used, it should be consistently applied throughout the life of the contract; however, it is not necessary for us to use the same approach for all contracts. We expect to use the most likely amount method for development and regulatory milestone payments. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. We recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability or achievement of each such milestone and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimates of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
•
Commercial Milestones and Royalties. For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and in which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue when the related sales occur. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from our collaboration arrangements.
Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts payable to us are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional.
See Note 7, “Collaboration and License Agreements” for additional details regarding our collaboration arrangements with AbbVie.
Research and Development Expenses and Accrued Research and Development Costs
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of personnel costs for our research and product development employees. Also included are non-personnel costs such as professional fees payable to third parties for preclinical and preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services, production of materials for clinical trials, laboratory supplies and equipment maintenance and depreciation, intellectual property licenses and other consulting costs. We estimate preclinical and clinical study and research expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions that conduct and manage preclinical studies, clinical trials and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with management and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in development expenses. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service provides under the service agreements. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire exclusive license to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternate future use are expensed as incurred.
Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered. Such payments are evaluated for current or long-term classification based on when such services are expected to be received.
Stock-Based-Compensation
We maintain a stock-based compensation plan as a long-term incentive for employees, consultants and members of our board of directors. The plan allows for the issuance of non-statutory options, or NSOs, and incentive stock options to employees and NSOs to nonemployees.
Share-based payments are measured using fair-value-based measurements and recognized as compensation expense over the service period in which the awards are expected to vest. Our fair-value-based measurements of awards to employees and directors as of the grant date utilize the single-option award-valuation approach, and we use the straight-line method for expense attribution. The valuation model used for calculating the estimated fair value of stock awards is the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculations, including the expected term (weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the expected volatility of our common stock, the related risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend. We have elected to recognize forfeitures of share-based payment awards as they occur.
Effective January 1, 2018, we early adopted ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”). The new guidance requires equity-classified share-based payment awards issued to nonemployees to be measured on the grant date, instead of being measured through the performance completion date under the pre-existing guidance. For stock-based awards issued to non-employees, we record expense related to stock options based on the fair value of the options calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model based on the measured grant date. For stock-based awards issued to non-employees prior to January 1, 2018, we recorded expense related to stock options based on the fair value of the options calculated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, remeasured at each reporting period until the options vest over the service performance period.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to our employees on the grant date, and rights to acquire stock granted under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan ("ESPP"), and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•
Expected term. The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•
Expected volatility. Since we have a limited trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
•
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
•
Expected dividend. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO in February 2019, the fair values of the shares of common stock underlying our share-based awards were estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock prior to our February 2019 IPO, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including our stage of development; our actual operating results and financial performance; progress of our research and development efforts; conditions in the industry and economy in general; the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our common stock, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions; equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; the lack of marketability of our common stock and the results of independent third-party valuations. Valuations of our common stock were prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
For our valuations performed prior to December 31, 2018, we used the Option Pricing Model (OPM) Backsolve method to estimate the fair value of our common stock. In an option pricing method, or OPM, framework, the backsolve method for inferring the equity value implied by a recent financing transaction involves making assumptions for the expected time to liquidity, volatility and risk-free rate and then solving for the value of equity such that value for the most recent financing equals the amount paid. Furthermore, as of each of the valuation dates prior to December 31, 2018, we were at an early stage of development and future liquidity events were difficult to forecast. We applied a discount for lack of marketability to account for a lack of access to an active public market.
Subsequent to the completion of our IPO in February 2019, our board of directors determines the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report for more information.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, these financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We early adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606), ASU 2016-09, Stock Compensation-Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, and ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, ASU No. 2016-02, (Topic 842), Leases, as the JOBS Act does not preclude an emerging growth company from early adopting a new or revised accounting standard earlier than the time that such standard applies to private companies. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the prior June 30th and (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.