Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K. Refer to ‘Item 7 -- Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations’ on our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 for a discussion of our results for the year ended December 31, 2018 and a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Overview
We invest in climate solutions developed by the leading companies in the energy efficiency, renewable energy and other sustainable infrastructure markets. We believe we are one of the first U.S. public companies solely dedicated to such climate change investments. Our goal is to generate attractive returns from a diversified portfolio of projects with long-term, predictable cash flows from proven technologies that reduce carbon emissions or increase resilience to climate change.
We are internally managed, and our management team has extensive relevant industry knowledge and experience, dating back more than 30 years. We have long-standing relationships with the leading energy service companies (“ESCOs”), manufacturers, project developers, utilities, owners and operators. Our origination strategy is to use these relationships to generate recurring, programmatic investment and fee-generating opportunities. Additionally, we have relationships with leading banks, investment banks, and institutional investors from which we are referred additional investment and fee generating opportunities.
We completed approximately $1.9 billion of transactions during 2020, compared to approximately $1.3 billion during 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $2.9 billion of transactions on our balance sheet, which we refer to as our “Portfolio.” For those transactions that we choose not to hold on our balance sheet, we transfer all or a portion of the economics of the transaction, typically using securitization trusts, to institutional investors in exchange for cash and in certain cases, residual interests in the assets and ongoing fees. As of December 31, 2020, we managed approximately $4.3 billion in these trusts or vehicles that are not consolidated on our balance sheet. When combined with our Portfolio, as of December 31, 2020, we manage approximately $7.2 billion of assets, which we refer to as our “Managed Assets”.
Our investments have taken many forms, including equity, joint ventures, land ownership, lending, or other financing transactions. We also generate ongoing fees through off-balance sheet securitization transactions, services, and asset management. We use borrowings as part of our strategy to increase potential returns to our stockholders and have available a broad range of financing sources including non-recourse or recourse debt, equity and off-balance sheet securitization structures.
See Item 1. Business for a further discussion of our business, investing strategy, and financing strategy.
Market Conditions
As a result of increasing global awareness of and aversion to climate change impacts, we believe the sustainable infrastructure markets in which we invest, and investment in climate solutions more broadly, will continue to grow as the
- 51 -
impact of climate change increases. In January 2021, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”) reported that 2020 was the second warmest year on record, with all seven of the warmest years on record having occurred since 2014.
Further, communities across the globe are increasingly experiencing the destructive economic impacts of climate change, which are only expected to increase in frequency and severity. According to the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”), there were 22 natural disaster events in the United States in 2020, with an estimated individual cost of greater than $1 billion and an aggregate cost of approximately $95 billion. NOAA reports, that since 1980, the U.S. has sustained 285 separate billion-dollar weather events and climate disasters with cumulative costs exceeding $1.9 trillion dollars. In its Weather, Climate & Catastrophe Insight: 2020 Annual Report, Aon reports that there were 416 natural catastrophe events globally in 2020, resulting in economic losses of $268 billion representing increased losses of 8% compared to the century average
BloombergNEF (“BNEF”) reported in January 2021, that carbon solutions investment exceeded $500 billion annually with $85 billion being invested in the United States. In its Energy Efficiency 2020 report, the International Energy Agency (“IEA”) estimates global spending on energy efficiency at approximately $250 billion. Given that many projects are often self-financed (especially energy efficiency), we believe our total addressable market is likely a subset of these overall industry estimates. However, we believe these estimates are reliable indicators of market trends.
These positive industry trends coupled with the increasing environmental and economic imperative to reduce carbon emissions are expected to further broaden our investable universe. Investments in energy efficiency as a service allow organizations to avoid the upfront costs of efficiency investments by paying for efficiency-enabled cost savings as operating rather than capital expenses. In its Annual Energy Outlook 2021, the U.S. Energy Information Administration (“EIA”) estimates that decreasing energy intensity resulting from energy efficiency improvements will keep U.S. energy consumption for residential and commercial buildings growing at a level far below that of the U.S. economy. In addition, Lazard’s 2020 Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis shows that renewables continue to outperform traditional generation sources on a new-built cost basis with certain renewable technologies achieving competitiveness with existing conventional generation technologies on a marginal basis, making renewables even more attractive investment targets. Further, in its New Energy Outlook 2020, BNEF expects wind and solar generation to provide 56% of the world’s electricity by 2050, with renewables attracting $11 trillion of aggregate investment over this time period.
We expect the federal government to take, and they have taken, certain actions which are supportive of the industry for climate solutions. In December 2020, Congress extended the end date to December 2022 for qualifying property being eligible for the 26% investment tax credit for photovoltaic solar projects. The new presidential administration has taken immediate steps at the federal level which we believe signify support for climate solutions, including, but not limited to, rejoining the Paris Climate Accords and re-establishing a social price on carbon used in cost/benefit analysis for policy making. We expect the new administration, combined with a closely divided Congress, will result in additional regulations supportive of the markets in which we invest.
State governmental agencies are responding to climate change risks through the implementation of renewable portfolio standards (“RPS”) as well as energy reduction targets such as energy efficiency resource standards. According to the UCLA Luskin Center of Innovation one in three Americans lives in a city or state that has committed to, or already achieved, 100% clean electricity. Corporates are also responding to climate change risks - in part through renewable energy sourcing commitments. In its 2020 Annual Report, the RE 100, a global corporate leadership initiative bringing together influential businesses committed to 100% renewable electricity, reported that over 260 multinational companies have pledged to achieve 100% renewable energy with an average target date of 2028, with three quarters of those companies planning to reach 100% renewable energy by 2030.
Federal Energy Savings Performance Contracts (“ESPCs”) are an example of a public-private partnership that eliminate the need for a federal agency to find appropriated funds to replace, operate, and maintain energy-intensive equipment while also providing multiple ancillary benefits, including saving taxpayer dollars currently spent on energy consumption, improving conditions for federal workers and service men and women, and creating private sector jobs. Support for ESPCs remain bipartisan, and the new presidential administration is expected to continue to support the program. DOE announced that fiscal year 2020 was the most successful year in the history of the ESPC program, with over $842 million invested in qualifying projects, the third consecutive record year in the history of the program.
While we believe that the long-term growth prospects for our business remain positive, volatility in financial markets and commodity prices along with interest rate movements could impact the markets we serve. Further, the current interest rate environment of low yields coupled with increasing investor acceptance of our markets has increased competitive pressure. In 2020, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors lowered the rate at which banks lend to one another (known as the federal funds rate) to a range of 0 to 25 basis points. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors has indicated that their plan is to keep rates at this level for some time, until labor market conditions recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and their inflation target of 2
- 52 -
percent is met. See “