Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Please refer to page 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a cautionary statement regarding forward-looking information.
Overview of Business
The Company is one of the world’s largest producers of high-performance nickel- and cobalt-based alloys in flat product form, such as sheet, coil and plate. The Company is focused on developing, manufacturing, marketing and distributing technologically advanced, high-performance alloys, which are used primarily in the aerospace, chemical processing and industrial gas turbine industries. The global specialty alloy market includes stainless steel, titanium alloys, general-purpose nickel alloys and high-performance nickel- and cobalt-based alloys. The Company competes primarily in the high-performance nickel- and cobalt-based alloy sector, which includes high-temperature resistant alloys, or HTA products, and corrosion-resistant alloys, or CRA products. The Company believes it is one of the principal producers of high-performance alloy flat products in sheet, coil and plate forms. The Company also produces its products as seamless and welded tubulars and in bar, billet and wire forms.
The Company has manufacturing facilities in Kokomo, Indiana; Arcadia, Louisiana; and Mountain Home, North Carolina. The Kokomo facility specializes in flat products, the Arcadia facility specializes in tubular products and the Mountain Home facility specializes in wire and small-diameter bar products. The Company distributes its products primarily through its direct sales organization, which includes 11 service and/or sales centers in the United States, Europe and Asia. All of these centers are Company-operated.
Overview of Markets
The following table includes a breakdown of net revenues, shipments and average selling prices to the markets served by the Company for the periods shown.
(1) Other revenue consists of toll conversion, royalty income, scrap sales and revenue recognized from the TIMET agreement (see Note 16 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Other revenue does not include associated shipment pounds.
(2) Total product price per pound excludes “Other Revenue”.
Aerospace demand was moderately impacted in fiscal 2017 due to delays in the transition to new engine platforms combined with some softness in demand driven by lower oil and fuel costs. Underpinning demand for new engines is a desire for more fuel-efficiency and lower emissions, which had been tempered as a result of previous decreases in fuel prices. The slight pull-back was temporary, and in fiscal 2018, aerospace volume hit record levels, and revenue in that market increased 17.9% in that timeframe. Growth continued in fiscal 2019, with continued traction of the new generation engine platforms in spite of the grounding of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft. One of the Company’s core focus initiatives was to increase prices, which contributed to the revenue increase. Fiscal 2019 sales into the aerospace market represented a record year in both volume and revenue. Sales in the first half of fiscal 2020 were reduced with the continued grounding and subsequent production halt of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft. Sales in the second half of fiscal 2020 were further severely impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic causing significant reductions in air travel, which impacted both new plane builds and aftermarket sales. Sales into the aerospace market have also been impacted by high inventory levels of metal in the supply chain, which take time to work through the inventory and slows order volume to the Company. Volume shipped into the aerospace market declined 30.1% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year. Volumes continued to decline in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, then began to increase by the end of fiscal 2021. Sales into the aerospace market in fiscal year 2021 were 50% of the fiscal year 2019 levels. Continued growth is expected as the number of people flying has improved and announced aircraft build rates have significantly increased. Single-aisle aircraft build rates announced in the industry show significant growth in 2022 and back to 2019 levels in 2023.
Chemical processing revenue in fiscal 2018 increased 12.3% due to recovery in the base business, as well as a moderate increase in specialty application projects. This growth continued in fiscal 2019 with net revenues into the chemical processing market increasing 13.2%. The main driver of demand in this market is capital spending in the chemical processing sector, driven by end-user demand for housing, automotive, energy and agricultural products. The chemical processing market is sensitive to oil prices, currency fluctuations and fiscal policies as well as world economic conditions and GDP growth. Additional drivers of demand in this market include the increase in North American production of natural gas liquids and the further downstream processing of chemicals that may utilize equipment that requires high-performance alloys. Increased sales to the chemical processing industry in fiscal 2018 and 2019 were related to improvement in global spending in the chemical processing sector combined with the Company’s focus initiatives aimed at improving volumes. Fiscal 2020 and 2021 volume and sales were significantly impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Volume shipped into the chemical processing industry market declined 34.9% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year and generally remained at that level across fiscal year 2021. Demand in this market is expected to rise with the economic impact of the COVID decreasing (subject to continuing fluctuations) and higher oil prices fueling additional capital expenditures in the chemical industry.
Sales to the industrial gas turbine market declined in years leading up to fiscal 2018, and fiscal 2018 volumes represented less than half the volume of fiscal 2012 peak levels. Reported significant overcapacity in large-frame turbines primarily used for electrical power generation combined with growth in renewable energy facilities have taken a toll on demand for large-frame gas turbines. Two of the large OEM producers of large-frame turbines have restructured their power generation businesses due to weak demand. Sales and volume began to recover in fiscal 2019 and the first half of fiscal 2020. The recovery included a market share gain which began to gain traction in fiscal 2020. Industrial gas turbines are beneficial in electricity generating facilities due to low capital cost at installation, fewer emissions than traditional fossil fuel-fired facilities and favorable natural gas prices provided by availability of non-conventional (shale) gas supplies. The global COVID-19 pandemic impacted this market, however sales declines were mitigated by the Company’s market share gains as well as restocking beginning to occur in the supply chain. Sales declined only 4.7% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year, then increased 18.0% in fiscal 2021 as the market share gain showed its full impact. The Company continues its push for additional market share going forward.
The industries in the other markets category focus on upgrading overall product quality, improving product performance through increased efficiency, prolonging product life and lowering long-term costs. Companies in these industries are looking to achieve these goals through the use of “advanced materials” which support the increased use of high-performance alloys in an expanding number of applications. Sales into the other markets category improved in both fiscal 2018 and 2019. Sales in fiscal 2020 were significantly impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Sales in fiscal year 2021 increased 28.8% as the Company strategically sought increased mill volumes especially in the flue-gas desulphurization industry to help improve fixed costs absorption challenges in the overall low volume environment in early fiscal year 2021. Going forward, in addition to supporting and expanding the traditional businesses of oil and gas, flue-gas desulfurization, automotive and heat treating, the Company expects increased levels of activity in non-traditional markets such as fuel cells and alternative energy applications in the long term, post pandemic.
Other revenue consists primarily of toll conversion, but also includes royalty income, scrap sales and revenue recognized from the TIMET agreement. The demand for toll conversion includes TIMET conversion demand completed on the Company’s four-high Steckel hot rolling mill in Kokomo, Indiana, as well as conversion work completed through LaPorte Custom Metal Products. Other revenue demand levels vary year-to-year based upon demand drivers in the respective markets of the Company’s tolling customers. The global COVID-19 pandemic impacted tolling revenue, particularly revenue from those tolling customers that sell into the aerospace market. In fiscal 2021, other revenue represented 6.4% of net sales. Other revenue does not include associated shipment pounds because the metal is not owned by the Company.
COVID-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 related disruptions negatively impacted the Company’s financial and operating results in the second half of fiscal 2020 and throughout fiscal 2021 and could continue to materially affect the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the pandemic negatively impacted the aerospace supply chain. The Company has, during this time period, accepted, with select aerospace customers, requests to delay the shipment of orders and in some
cases cancellations. Markets other than aerospace have also been depressed with uncertainty and tight cash management impacting customer ordering patterns. The Company has taken significant actions to position itself to manage through the current market disruption caused by COVID-19.
Summary of Capital Spending
Capital spending was $9.4 million and $5.9 million in fiscal 2020 and 2021, respectively, and the forecast for capital spending in fiscal 2022 is approximately $17.7 million, which is approaching the Company’s depreciation levels.
Capital Allocation Strategy
On July 28, 2021, the Company announced a multi-faceted capital allocation strategy which includes 1) a share repurchase plan because management believes that repurchasing the Company’s stock at current market prices represents an attractive capital allocation strategy for the Company. Management of the Company feels this is a unique opportunity to repurchase shares well below the intrinsic value of the Company given the outlook of the markets it serves, particularly the anticipated recovery in commercial aerospace, combined with gross margin expansion strategies 2) the recent adoption of a glide path for the U.S. pension plan to help secure improvements in funding percentage realized this fiscal year and 3) a U.S. pension plan accelerated funding strategy with the intention of fully funding the plan in approximately three years or less. These steps represent significant actions to de-risk the U.S. pension plan and strive to eliminate the largest liability on our balance sheet.
Further details of each strategy are as follows:
● Share Repurchase Plan: On July 28, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized the use of up to $20.0 million of available cash to purchase shares of the Company's common stock for a period of one year. The Board adopted the repurchase plan because it believed that repurchasing the Company’s stock at then-current market prices presented an attractive capital allocation strategy for the Company given the available options for the use of capital. Under the share repurchase plan, the Company is authorized to repurchase outstanding shares of its common stock in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company repurchased 112,978 shares with an aggregate purchase price of $4.2 million, under this authorization. As of September 30, 2021, there is $15.8 million remaining under the July 2021 authorization that is available to be re-purchased. The share repurchase plan may be suspended, modified or discontinued at any time, and the Company has no obligation to repurchase any amount of its common stock under the plan. The Company intends to make all repurchases and to administer the plan in accordance with applicable laws and regulatory guidelines, including Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
● Recent Adoption of Pension Plan Glide Path: The Company adopted a glide path strategy that changed the U.S. pension plan asset allocation with the intention of securing the improvement in pension plan funding percentage from 68% at September 30, 2020 to over 91% as of September 30, 2021. This improved funding was driven by better than expected return on plan assets combined with favorable movement of interest rates as well as pension contributions of $21 million. In addition, this strategy includes a customized liability-driven investment strategy that is expected to substantially reduce the plan’s future interest rate risk and an asset allocation designed to reduce the plan’s equity risk, both of which are expected to reduce the volatility of pension expense going forward.
● Accelerated Funding Strategy: The Company also increased pension funding levels to further reduce the pension liability as it strives to be fully funded with a zero net liability, in approximately two to three years, depending on future valuations and market conditions. The Company began this strategy with additional funding of $15.0 million in plan contributions in fiscal 2021 in addition to the current $6.0 million funding level ($21 million total). Additional future funding levels will be determined based upon market conditions and the Company’s financial position.
Valuation of the Pension Plan and the Retiree Healthcare Plan
The actuarial valuation of the U.S. pension and retiree healthcare plans on September 30, 2021 included a favorable increase in the discount rates used to measure the plan liabilities along with other favorable items including higher than expected return on plan assets and continued favorable retiree health care spending. The U.S. defined benefit pension net liabilities decreased from $105.2 million at the beginning of the year to $26.1 million at September 30, 2021. The funding percentage of assets to benefit obligation increased from 68.0% as of September 30, 2020 to 91.3% as of September 30, 2021. These amounts do not include the United Kingdom pension plan which is an $8.4 million net asset (shown in other assets on the consolidated balance sheet) or two small nonqualified pension plans with a liability of $0.6 million. In addition, the post-retirement health care liability, which is unfunded, declined from $93.3 million at September 30, 2020 to $83.0 million at September 30, 2021. This favorable valuation is expected to reduce expense in fiscal 2022 by $6.0 million, reflected primarily in the Nonoperating Retirement Benefit Expense in the Statement of Operations.
Volumes and Pricing
In fiscal 2019, volume shipped in the fourth quarter was 5.4 million pounds. Moving into the first half of fiscal 2020, volumes were negatively impacted by the grounding and subsequent production halt of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft. The second half of fiscal 2020 was then significantly impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which lowered volumes in the third and fourth quarter. Moving into fiscal year 2021, the pandemic continued to dramatically impact volumes with first quarter volumes bottoming at 2.8 million pounds. The second quarter began to improve with 3.5 million pounds, and the third and fourth quarters were 3.7 and 4.0 million pounds shipped, respectively.
While volumes shipped into the aerospace market began to improve in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, significant growth is still expected as the market begins its recovery. Aerospace volumes in fiscal 2021 were 31.3% below volumes of fiscal year 2020 and 51.7% below volumes of fiscal 2019. Published build rates of single aisle aircraft show significant growth expected in fiscal year 2022 and generally a return to 2019 levels in fiscal year 2023.
Volumes in the chemical processing market were relatively flat in fiscal year 2021 compared to 2020 with demand continuing to be impacted by the pandemic as well as weather-related events and supply chain challenges. Industrial gas turbine volumes were up 25.5% in fiscal year 2021 compared to 2020 driven by market share gain initiatives gaining traction. Volume in other markets grew 62.2% in fiscal year 2021 compared to 2020, led by increases in shipments to the flue gas desulphurization (FGD), oil & gas, nuclear and wear resistant markets. The largest growth occurred in the FGD market as business conditions continue to improve in the aerospace market. The Company expects to see a reduction in FGD shipments as it utilizes manufacturing capacity on higher-value products.
The product average selling price per pound in fiscal 2021 was $22.56, which is a 7.3% decrease over last fiscal year. The decrease is significantly driven by changes in product mix (both alloy and form) to lower value products and markets to increase volumes and combat fixed cost absorption headwinds. This is most evident in other markets with a 20.6% reduction in average selling price per pound to products described in the preceding paragraph in the FGD market. This lower value mix is expected to improve as the Company utilizes its manufacturing capacity on higher value products when demand in the aerospace market recovers. Multiple price increases have been announced, which is expected to offset inflation and continue to improve profitability.
The average market price of nickel as reported by the London Metals Exchange for the 30-days ending September 30, 2021 was $8.80 as compared to the prior year 30-days ending September 30, 2020 average market price of $6.74 per pound. The Company values inventory utilizing the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) inventory costing methodology. In a period of decreasing raw material costs, the FIFO inventory valuation normally results in higher costs of sales as compared to the last-in, first out method. Conversely, in a period of rising prices, the FIFO inventory valuation normally results in lower costs of sales as compared to the last-in, first out method.
Gross Profit Margin Trend Performance
The following tables show net revenue, gross profit margin and gross profit margin percentage for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021.
The significant drop in volumes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic compressed margins significantly in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020 and most significantly the first quarter of fiscal 2021. These low volume levels created a significant fixed cost absorption headwind which required a direct charge to cost of goods sold for excess fixed overhead per pound incurred due to abnormally low production levels that could not be capitalized into inventory. In the third and fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company charged $5.9 million and $4.0 million, respectively. In fiscal 2021, the direct charges continued each quarter at $5.9 million, $2.8 million, $2.0 million and $0.8 million. As volumes recover, the direct charge diminishes. No direct charges are expected going forward.
The Company’s focus initiatives have reduced the volume breakeven point by over 25%. The Company previously struggled to be profitable at roughly 5.0 million pounds. In fiscal 2021 with the current product mix, the Company can generate profits at lower volumes as demonstrated in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, producing a positive net income at only 3.7 million pounds shipped. The gross profit margin percentage improved over fiscal 2021 and ended in the fourth quarter above the pre-pandemic levels at 17.5%. Going forward, the Company anticipates improvement in volumes and net revenue driven by the expected aerospace market recovery.
Controllable Working Capital
Controllable working capital, which includes accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable and accrued expenses, was $238.7 million at September 30, 2021, a decrease of $26.3 million or 9.9% from $264.9 million at September 30, 2020. This decrease resulted primarily from accounts payable and accrued expenses increasing by $35.5 million in the aggregate, partially offset by accounts receivable increasing by $6.8 million and inventory increasing by $2.4 million. As compared to the third quarter ended June 30, 2021, controllable working capital increased $6.4 million, or 2.8%. This increase resulted primarily from inventory increasing $17.8 million as we built work-in-process inventory to support the increasing demand and accounts receivable increasing $6.0 million, partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $17.4 million in the aggregate.
Dividends Declared
On November 18, 2021, the Company announced that the Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly cash dividend of $0.22 per outstanding share of the Company’s common stock. The dividend is payable December 15, 2021 to stockholders of record at the close of business on December 1, 2021. The aggregate cash payout based on current shares outstanding will be approximately $2.8 million, or approximately $11.1 million on an annualized basis if current dividend levels are maintained.
Backlog
Set forth below is information relating to the Company’s backlog and the 30-day average nickel price per pound as reported by the London Metals Exchange. This information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto and the remainder of “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(1) Represents the average price for a cash buyer as reported by the London Metals Exchange for the 30 days ending on the last day of the period presented.
Order entry rates continued to increase each quarter of fiscal 2021. Backlog was $175.3 million at September 30, 2021, an increase of approximately $24.4 million, or 16.2%, from $150.9 million at June 30, 2021. The backlog dollars increased during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 due to an 8.9% increase in backlog average selling price combined with a 6.7% increase in backlog pounds. The increase in average selling price was due to a higher-value product mix in the backlog.
Backlog increased by $22.0 million, or 14.4%, from $153.3 million at September 30, 2020 to $175.3 million at September 30, 2021 due to a 29.2% increase in backlog pounds partially offset by an 11.4% decrease in backlog average selling price. The increase in backlog pounds was primarily driven by increases in demand in the chemical processing and industrial gas turbine markets. The decrease in average selling price was due to a lower-value product mix in the backlog.
Revenues by geographic area
Net revenues in fiscal 2019, 2020 and 2021 were generated primarily by the Company’s U.S. operations. Sales to domestic customers comprised approximately 61%, 61% and 53% of the Company’s net revenues in fiscal 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively. In addition, the majority of the Company’s operating costs are incurred in the U.S., as all of its manufacturing facilities are located in the U.S. It is expected that net revenues will continue to be highly dependent on the Company’s domestic sales and manufacturing facilities in the U.S.
The Company’s foreign and export sales were approximately $189.5 million, $149.8 million and $158.6 million for fiscal 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively. Additional information concerning foreign operations and export sales is set forth in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Quarterly Market Information
Results of Operations
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. For discussion related to 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K, please refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2020 Form 10-K, filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on November 19, 2020.
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
($ in thousands, except per share figures)
The following table includes a breakdown of net revenues, shipments and average selling prices to the markets served by the Company for the periods shown.
By market
Net Revenues. Net revenues were $337.7 million in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 11.3% from $380.5 million in fiscal 2020. Volume was 14.0 million pounds in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 4.5% from 14.7 million pounds in fiscal 2020, with decreases in aerospace and chemical processing, partially offset by increases in industrial gas turbine and other markets. The decrease in volume is primarily caused by COVID-19 and issues in the aerospace supply chain due to the 737 MAX, partially offset by increased volumes in the industrial gas turbine and flue gas desulphurization markets. The product average selling price was $22.56 per pound in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 7.3%, or $1.77, from $24.33 per pound in fiscal 2020. The product average selling price per pound decreased as a result of a lower-value product mix and other pricing considerations (such as customer mix, timing of customer agreement adjustors, etc.) as compared to fiscal 2020, which decreased the product average selling price per pound by approximately $3.02, partially offset by higher raw material market prices, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.25.
Sales to the aerospace market were $128.1 million in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 33.3% from $192.0 million in fiscal 2020, due to a 31.3% decrease in volume coupled with a 2.8% decrease in average selling price per pound. The decrease in volume was due to the impact of COVID-19 on the aerospace market and the reduced demand in the supply chain for the Boeing 737 MAX. The lower average selling price per pound shipped reflects a lower-value product mix, increased competition and other pricing factors, which decreased average selling price per pound by $1.89, partially offset by higher raw material market prices, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.14.
Sales to the chemical processing market were $63.1 million in fiscal 2021, relatively flat with sales of $63.2 million in fiscal 2020 on comparable volumes and average selling price per pound. The average selling price per pound reflects an increase in raw material market prices, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.48, partially offset by a lower-value product mix and increased competition and other pricing factors, which decreased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.29.
Sales to the industrial gas turbine market were $66.8 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of 18.0% from $56.6 million in fiscal 2020, due to an increase in volume of 25.5%, partially offset by a decrease in average selling price per pound of 6.0%, or $1.01. The increase in volume is primarily attributable to the impact of the Company’s share gain initiative. The decrease in average selling price per pound primarily reflects lower pricing due to competition and other factors combined with a lower-value product mix, which decreased average selling price per pound by approximately $2.23, partially offset by higher raw material market prices, which increased the average selling price per pound by approximately $1.22.
Sales to other markets were $58.1 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of 28.8% from $45.1 million in fiscal 2020, due to a 62.2% increase in volume, partially offset by a 20.6%, or $7.39, decrease in average selling price per pound. The increase in volume was primarily due to an increase in sales to the flue-gas desulfurization market. The decrease in average selling price reflects a lower-value product mix, increased competition and other factors, which decreased average selling price per pound by approximately $8.64, partially offset by higher raw material market prices, which increased average selling price per pound by approximately $1.25.
Other Revenue. Other revenue was $21.6 million in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 9.0% from $23.7 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in other revenue is primarily attributable to decreased toll conversion services.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales was $297.9 million, or 88.2% of net revenues, in fiscal 2021 compared to $335.9 million, or 88.3% of net revenues, in fiscal 2020. This decrease was primarily due to lower volumes sold combined with continued traction in the Company’s cost reduction initiatives, partially offset by lower fixed-cost absorption.
Gross Profit. As a result of the above factors, gross profit was $39.7 million in fiscal 2021, a decrease of $4.9 million from $44.6 million in fiscal 2020. Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue increased to 11.8% in fiscal 2021 as compared to 11.7% in fiscal 2020 despite shipped volumes decreasing by 4.5%, reflecting the continued traction of the Company’s cost reduction initiatives and pricing initiatives.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. Selling, general and administrative expense was $43.5 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $3.2 million, or 7.8%, from $40.3 million in fiscal 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to higher incentive compensation expenses, which were partially offset by significant cost-saving measures taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including headcount reductions and other measures. Selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of net revenues increased to 12.9% in fiscal 2021 compared to 10.6% in fiscal 2020.
Research and Technical Expense. Research and technical expense was $3.4 million, or 1.0% of net revenues, for fiscal 2021, compared to $3.7 million, or 1.0% of net revenues, in fiscal 2020.
Operating Income/(Loss). As a result of the above factors, operating loss in fiscal 2021 was $(7.1) million, compared to operating income of $0.6 million in fiscal 2020.
Nonoperating retirement benefit expense. Nonoperating retirement benefit expense was $1.5 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $6.8 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in expense was primarily driven by favorable retiree health care spending and higher than expected return on plan assets in the September 30, 2020 valuation.
Income Taxes. Income tax benefit was $1.1 million during fiscal 2021, a difference of $0.1 million from a benefit of $1.0 million in the same period of fiscal 2020, driven by a tax rate change in the United Kingdom that resulted in an increase to deferred tax expense of $0.4 million, partially offset by an increase in loss before taxes of $2.3 million, which resulted in a higher tax benefit.
Net Income/(Loss). As a result of the above factors, net loss for fiscal 2021 was $(8.7) million, a change of $2.2 million from net loss of $(6.5) million in fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Comparative cash flow analysis (2020 to 2021)
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $47.7 million at September 30, 2021, inclusive of $17.3 million that was held by foreign subsidiaries in various currencies, compared to $47.2 million at September 30, 2020. Additionally, there were zero borrowings against the line of credit outstanding as of September 30, 2021. The Company has access to a total of $100 million of availability on the line of credit, subject to a borrowing base formula and certain reserves. During fiscal 2021, the Company’s primary sources of cash were cash on-hand and cash from operations as detailed below.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $23.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $36.2 million in fiscal 2020, a decrease of $12.9 million. The decrease was primarily driven by increases in accounts receivable of $6.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to decreases in accounts receivable of $26.7 million during fiscal 2020, increases in inventory of $0.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to decreases in inventory of $15.3 million during fiscal 2020 and increases in other assets of $4.9 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to decreases in other assets of $0.6 million during fiscal 2020 as well as a net loss of $(8.7) million in fiscal 2021 as compared to net loss of $(6.5) million in fiscal 2020. In addition, changes in accrued pension and postretirement benefits reflect the lump-sum payment of $15.0 million into the U.S. pension plan in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. These changes were partially offset by increases in accounts payable of $33.9 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to a decrease in accounts payable of $21.2 million during fiscal 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $5.9 million in fiscal 2021, which was lower than cash used in investing activities during the same period of fiscal 2020 of $9.4 million, driven by lower additions to property, plant and equipment.
Net cash used in financing activities was $17.4 million in fiscal 2021, which was greater than cash used in financing activities during fiscal 2020 of $11.1 million, primarily as a result of purchases of treasury stock of $5.0 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to $0.2 million in fiscal 2020 and payment for debt issuance costs of $1.0 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to $0.0 million in fiscal 2020. Dividends paid of $11.2 million in fiscal 2021 were comparable to the prior year.
U.S. revolving credit facility
On October 19, 2020, the Company and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) and related Pledge and Security Agreement with certain other lenders (the “Security Agreement”, and, together with the Credit Agreement, the “Credit Documents”). The Credit Documents, which have a three-year term expiring in October 2023, replaced the Third Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement and related agreements, dated as of July 14, 2011, as amended, previously entered into between the Company, Wells Fargo Capital Finance, LLC and certain other lenders. The Credit Agreement provides for revolving loans in the maximum amount of $100.0 million, subject to a borrowing base and certain reserves. The Credit Agreement permits an increase in the maximum revolving loan amount from $100.0 million up to an aggregate amount of $170.0 million at the request of the borrower if certain conditions are met. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest, at the Company’s option, at either JPMorgan’s “prime rate”, plus 1.25% - 1.75% per annum, or the adjusted Eurodollar rate used by the lender, plus 2.25% - 2.75% per annum (with a LIBOR floor of 0.5%). Effective October 25, 2021, the Credit Agreement will replace LIBOR with SOFR as the financial services industry and market participants are transitioning away from interbank offering rates. As of September 30, 2021, the Credit Agreement had a zero balance. As of the same date, management believes the Company was in compliance with all applicable financial covenants under the Credit Agreement.
The Company must pay monthly, in arrears, a commitment fee of 0.425% per annum on the unused amount of the U.S. revolving credit facility total commitment. For letters of credit, the Company must pay a fronting fee of 0.125% per annum as well as customary fees for issuance, amendments and processing.
The Company is subject to certain covenants as to fixed charge coverage ratios and other customary covenants, including covenants restricting the incurrence of indebtedness, the granting of liens and the sale of assets. The covenant pertaining to fixed charge coverage ratios is only effective in the event the amount of excess availability under the revolver
is less than the greater of (i) 12.5% of the maximum credit revolving loan amount and (ii) $12.5 million. The Company is permitted to pay dividends and repurchase common stock if certain financial metrics are met. The Company may pay quarterly cash dividends up to $3.5 million per fiscal quarter so long as the Company is not in default under the Credit Documents. As of September 30, 2021, the most recent required measurement date under the Credit Agreement, management believes the Company was in compliance with all applicable financial covenants under the Credit Agreement. The Company currently believes it is not at material risk of not meeting its financial covenants over the next twelve months.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are collateralized by a pledge of substantially all of the U.S. assets of the Company, including the equity interests in its U.S. subsidiaries, but excluding the four-high Steckel rolling mill and related assets, which are pledged to Titanium Metals Corporation (“TIMET”) to secure the performance of the Company’s obligations under a Conversion Services Agreement with TIMET (see discussion of TIMET at Note 16 in the Company’s Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Borrowings under the Credit Documents are also secured by a pledge of a 100% equity interest in each of the Company’s direct foreign subsidiaries.
Future sources of liquidity
The Company’s sources of liquidity for the next twelve months are expected to consist primarily of cash generated from operations, cash on-hand and, if needed, borrowings under the U.S. revolving credit facility. At September 30, 2021, the Company had cash of $47.7 million, an outstanding balance of zero on the U.S. revolving credit facility (described above) and access to a total of approximately $100.0 million, subject to a borrowing base formula and certain reserves. Management believes that the resources described above will be sufficient to fund planned capital expenditures, any regular quarterly dividends declared and working capital requirements over the next twelve months.
The Company’s primary uses of cash over the next twelve months are expected to consist of expenditures related to:
● Funding operations;
● Capital spending;
● Dividends to stockholders
● Repurchases of Company’s stock; and
● Pension and postretirement plan contributions.
Capital investment in fiscal 2021 was $5.9 million, and the plan for capital spending in fiscal 2022 is $17.7 million.
Share Repurchase Program
On July 28, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized the use of up to $20 million to purchase shares of the Company's common stock through July 27, 2022. The Board adopted the repurchase plan because it believes that repurchasing the Company’s stock at current market prices presents an attractive capital allocation strategy for the Company given the available options for the use of capital. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company repurchased 112,978 shares with an aggregate purchase price of $4.2 million, under this authorization. As of September 30, 2021, there was $15.8 million remaining under the July 2021 authorization that is available to be used in the share repurchase program. The share repurchase plan may be suspended, modified or discontinued at any time, and the Company has no obligation to repurchase any amount of its common stock under the plan.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth the Company’s contractual obligations for the periods indicated, as of September 30, 2021:
(1) As of September 30, 2021, the revolver balance was zero, therefore no interest is due. However, the Company is obligated to the Bank for unused line fees and quarterly management fees.
(2) Represents payments for all operating lease obligations, including short term lease obligations.
(3) The Company has a funding obligation to contribute $26,663 to the domestic pension plan. These payments will be tax deductible. All benefit payments under the domestic pension plan will come from the plan and not the Company.
(4) Represents expected other postretirement benefits based upon anticipated timing of payments.
Inflation or Deflation
The Company may be favorably or unfavorably impacted by inflation or deflation, resulting in a material impact on its operating results. The Company attempts to pass onto customers both increases in consumable costs and material costs because of the value-added contribution the material makes to the final product, however, the Company may not be able to successfully offset a rapid increase in raw material costs adjustments to customer selling prices. In the event of raw material price declines, the Company’s customers may delay order placement, resulting in lower volumes. In the event of raw material price increases that the Company is unable to pass on to its customers, the Company’s cash flows or results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Overview
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to bad debts, inventories, income taxes, asset impairments, retirement benefits, matters related to product liability and other lawsuits and environmental matters. The process of determining significant estimates is fact specific and takes into account factors such as historical experience, current and expected economic conditions, product mix, pension asset mix and, in some cases, actuarial techniques and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of this process form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The Company routinely reevaluates these significant factors and makes adjustments where facts and circumstances dictate. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company’s accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company has identified certain critical accounting policies, which are described below. The following listing of policies is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of the Company’s accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of customer contracts are satisfied which occurs when control of the goods has been transferred to the customer and services have been performed. Allowances for sales returns are recorded as a component of net sales in the periods in which the related sales are recognized. The Company determines this allowance based on historical experience. Additionally, the Company recognizes revenue attributable to an up-front fee received from Titanium Metals Corporation (“TIMET”) as a result of a twenty-year agreement, entered into on November 17, 2006 to provide conversion services to TIMET. See Note 16 Deferred Revenue for a description of accounting treatment relating to this up-front fee.
Pension and Postretirement Benefits
The Company has defined benefit pension and postretirement plans covering most of its current and former employees. Significant elements in determining the assets or liabilities and related income or expense for these plans are the expected return on plan assets (if any), the discount rate used to value future payment streams, expected trends in health care costs and other actuarial assumptions. Annually, the Company evaluates the significant assumptions to be used to value its pension and postretirement plan assets and liabilities based on current market conditions and expectations of future costs. If actual results are less favorable than those projected by management, additional expense may be required in future periods.
The selection of the U.S. pension plan’s (the Plan) assumption for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based upon the Plan’s target allocation. The return on assets is based on fair value of the plan assets and their investment allocation at the beginning of the fiscal year. The Company also realizes that historical performance is no guarantee of future performance.
In the short term, substantial decreases in plan assets will result in higher plan funding contribution levels and higher pension expenses. A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result
in an increase in annual pension expense of about $0.7 million. To the extent that the actual return on plan assets during the year exceeds or falls short of the assumed long-term rate of return, an asset gain or loss is created. For funding purposes, gains and losses are generally amortized over a 6-year period.
Decreases in discount rates used to value future payment streams will result in higher liabilities for pension and postretirement plans. A decrease of 25 basis points would result in $9.6 million higher liability for the U.S. pension plan and $3.5 million higher liability for the postretirement plan. This increase in liability would also increase the accumulated other comprehensive loss that would be amortized as higher pension and postretirement expense over an amortization period of approximately 6.0 and 10.0 years, respectively.
Salaried employees hired after December 31, 2005 and hourly employees hired after June 30, 2007 are not covered by the pension plan; however, they are eligible for an enhanced matching program of the defined contribution plan (401(k)). Effective December 31, 2007, the U.S. pension plan was amended to freeze benefits for all non-union employees in the U.S. Effective September 30, 2009, the U.K. pension plan was amended to freeze benefits for employees in the plan.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of long-lived assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between book and tax basis of recorded assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance is required if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of whether or not a valuation allowance is needed is based upon an evaluation of both positive and negative evidence. In its evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance, the Company assesses prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The ultimate amount of deferred tax assets realized could be different from those recorded, as influenced by potential changes in enacted tax laws and the availability of future taxable income.
For the three years ended September 30, 2021, the Company recognized a cumulative loss before income taxes for the U.S. jurisdiction of $20.5 million. A valuation allowance was not recorded against the U.S. jurisdiction’s net deferred tax assets based on management’s evaluation of the positive and negative evidence, including expected future taxable income.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding New Accounting Standards.