Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is an analysis and discussion of the financial condition and results of operations of Home Bancorp, Inc. (the “Company”), and its wholly owned subsidiary, Home Bank, N.A. (the “Bank”). This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included herein in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and the description of our business included herein in Part 1, Item 1 “Business”.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
The Company reported net income for 2020 of $24.8 million, or $2.85 diluted EPS compared to $27.9 million, or $3.05 diluted EPS, reported for 2019. Our 2020 results reflect increased reserve builds during the first half of 2020 primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the impact of provision for loan loss expense was partially offset by an increase in net interest income, which was primarily driven by low interest rates on deposits and PPP loan income.
Highlights of the Company’s performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 are summarized below.
•Assets increased $391.4 million, or 17.8%, from December 31, 2019 to $2.6 billion at December 31, 2020.
•Loans increased by $265.6 million, or 15.5%, from December 31, 2019 to $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020. Excluding PPP loans, loans increased by $44.4 million, or 2.6%.
•On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the CECL framework, which resulted in a $6.1 million, or 33.9%, increase in the ACL upon adoption. During the fourth quarter of 2020, a revision to our estimate of the ACL on unfunded lending commitments reduced the CECL adoption impact by $940,000 from what was originally reported in our previously filed Forms 10-Q.
•The provision for loan losses totaled $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, up $9.7 million compared to 2019.
•The ALL totaled $33.0 million, or 1.66% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. The ACL, which is comprised of the allowance for loan losses plus the allowance for unfunded lending commitments, totaled $34.4 million, or 1.74% of total loans at December 31, 2020. Excluding PPP loans, the ratios of ALL to total loans and ACL to total loans were 1.87% and 1.96%, respectively.
•Total deposits increased $392.8 million, or 21.6%, from December 31, 2019 to $2.2 billion at December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases in demand deposit and NOW accounts.
•The Company repurchased 530,504 shares of common stock at an average price of $26.41 per share.
•The net interest margin was 3.96% for the year ended December 31, 2020, down 30 bps compared to 2019, primarily due to the decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets during 2020.
•The average yield paid on total interest-bearing deposits during 2020 was 0.72%, down 38 bps compared to 2019.
•Noninterest income decreased $110,000, or 0.8%, in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in service fees and charges and the absence of $1.2 million death benefit from a BOLI policy recognized in 2019, partially offset by an increase in gains on the sale of loans.
•Noninterest expense decreased $624,000, or 1.0%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Decreases across several noninterest expense categories (including, but not limited to, compensation, occupancy and marketing) were partially offset by increases in data processing and communication expense and regulatory fees.
COVID-19 RESPONSE
Banking operations remain unencumbered by state and local government COVID-19 restrictions. However, we have adapted to protect our employees and customers by working remotely, enhancing cleaning procedures, and enacting several other measures to reduce the risk of transmission of the virus. State government imposed COVID-19 restrictions continue to be in place within our Louisiana and Mississippi markets. The restrictions primarily place limits on capacity and hours of operation of certain businesses.
During the second and third quarters of 2020, the Company funded approximately 3,072 loans totaling $262.2 million under the Small Business Administration's ("SBA") Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"). At December 31, 2020, the total recorded net investment in PPP loans was $221.2 million, of which approximately 2,495 loans with an aggregate outstanding balance of $70.5 million were for amounts of $150,000 or less. The Company is prepared to assist customers in the second round of PPP loans in 2021.
To give immediate financial support to our customers, the Company began providing principal and/or interest payment relief options in March 2020. When we last reported the level of such deferrals in our third quarter Form 10-Q (as of September 30, 2020), $70.2 million, or 4% of total loans, were under deferral agreements. As of December 31, 2020, the level of deferrals decreased to $36.0 million, or 2% of total loans. The level of COVID-19 related deferrals formerly totaled $558.8 million, or 28% of total loans, at June 30, 2020. Of the loans that have exited deferral agreements, $469.2 million, or 98%, were current and performing as of December 31, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The accounting and financial reporting policies of the Company conform to generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) and to general practices within the banking industry. Accordingly, the financial statements require certain estimates, judgments and assumptions, which are believed to be reasonable, based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the periods presented. The following accounting policies comprise those that management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. These policies require numerous estimates or economic assumptions that may prove inaccurate or may be subject to variations which may significantly affect our reported results and financial condition for the period or in future periods.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Adoption of ASC 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses
Due to the adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, management maintains, based on current and forecasted information, an allowance for credit losses ("ACL") that reflects a current estimate of expected credit losses ("CECL") for the estimated life of the loan portfolio at reporting periods subsequent to the adoption date. For reporting periods prior to January 1, 2020, management maintained an allowance for loan losses ("ALL") at a level which reflected losses that were probable and reasonably estimable at the relevant reporting date. Under current and prior accounting guidance, loans are charged against the allowance when management believes that the collectability of the principal is unlikely. Subsequent recoveries are added to the allowance.
The ACL and ALL policies described below are supplemented by periodic reviews and validations performed by independent loan reviewers. The results of the reviews are reported to the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. The establishment of the ACL and ALL is and was significantly affected by management judgment. There is likelihood that different amounts would be reported under different conditions or assumptions. Federal regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our ACL and ALL. Such agencies may require management to make additional provisions for estimated losses based upon judgments different from those of management.
We continue to monitor and modify our ACL as conditions warrant. No assurance can be given that our level of ACL will cover all of the losses on our loans or that future adjustments to the ACL will not be necessary if economic and other conditions differ substantially from the conditions used by management to determine the current level of the ACL.
For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326:
The ACL which equals the sum of the ALL and the ACL on unfunded lending commitments, is established through provisions for credit losses. Management recalculates the ACL at least quarterly to reassess the estimate of credit losses for the total portfolio at the relevant reporting date. Under ASC 326, the ACL is measured on a pool basis when similar risk characteristics exist. For each pool of loans, management also evaluates and applies qualitative adjustments to the calculated ACL based on several factors, including, but not limited to, changes in current and expected future economic conditions, changes in industry experience and industry loan concentrations, changes in the volume and severity of nonperforming assets, changes in lending policies and personnel and changes in the competitive and regulatory environment of the banking industry. Loans that do not share similar risk characteristics are individually evaluated and are excluded from the pooled loan analysis. Refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the adoption of ASC 326 and its impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For reporting periods prior to January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326:
The ALL was maintained at an amount which management determined covered the reasonably estimable and probable losses. The ALL was established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense. The ALL estimation process included, among other things, an analysis of delinquency trends, nonperforming loan trends, the level of charge-offs and recoveries, prior loss experience, total loans outstanding, the volume of loan originations, the type, size and geographic concentration of loans, the value of collateral securing loans, the borrower’s ability to repay and repayment performance, the number of loans requiring heightened management oversight, economic conditions and industry experience. Based on the evaluation, management assigned risk ratings to segments of the loan portfolio. Such risk ratings were periodically reviewed by management and revised as deemed appropriate.
With respect to acquired loans, prior to January 1, 2020, the Company followed the reserve standard set forth in ASC 310, Receivables. At acquisition, the Company reviewed each loan to determine whether there is evidence of deterioration in credit quality since origination and if it was probable that the Company would be unable to collect all amounts due according to the loan’s contractual terms. The Company considered expected prepayments and estimated the amount and timing of undiscounted expected principal, interest and other cash flows for each loan pool meeting the criteria above, and determined the excess of the loan pool’s scheduled contractual principal and interest payments in excess of cash flows expected at acquisition as an amount that should not be accreted (nonaccretable difference). The remaining amount, representing the excess of the pool’s cash flows expected to be collected over the fair value, was accreted into interest income over the remaining life of the pool (accretable yield). The Company recorded a discount on these loans at acquisition to record them at their estimated fair values. As a result, acquired loans subject to ASC 310 were excluded from the calculation of the ALL at the acquisition date. If the present value of expected cash flows for a pool was less than its carrying value, an impairment was recognized by an increase in the ALL and a charge to the provision for loan losses. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information concerning our allowance for acquired loans prior to the adoption of ASC 326.
Loans
The following describes the distinction between originated and acquired loans and certain significant accounting policies relevant to each category.
Originated Loans
Loans originated for investment are reported at the principal balance outstanding net of unearned income. Interest on loans and accretion of unearned income are computed in a manner that approximates a level yield on recorded principal. Interest on loans is recorded as income is earned. The accrual of interest on an originated loan is discontinued when it is probable the borrower will not be able to meet payment obligations as they become due. For reporting periods prior to January 1, 2020, the Company maintained an ALL on originated loans that represented management’s estimate of probable losses incurred in this portfolio category. For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020, the Company maintains an ACL on all loans that reflects management's estimate of expected credit losses for the full life of the loan portfolio due to the adoption of the guidance under ASC 326. Refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the adoption of ASC 326.
Acquired Loans
Loans that were acquired as a result of business combinations are referred to as “acquired loans.” The Company's acquired loans were purchased prior to the adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020 and were recorded at estimated fair value at the acquisition date with no carryover of the related ALL. The acquired loans were segregated between those considered to be performing and those with evidence of credit deterioration (purchased credit impaired or "PCI"), and then further segregated into loan pools designed to facilitate the estimation of expected cash flows. The fair value estimate for each pool of acquired performing and PCI loans was based on the estimate of expected cash flows, both principal and interest, from that pool, discounted at prevailing market interest rates. The difference between the fair value of an acquired loan pool and the contractual amounts due at the acquisition date (the “fair value discount”) is accreted into income over the estimated life of the pool.
For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326:
Management estimates the ACL for acquired loans under the same methodology as originated loans. Changes in the ACL for acquired loans are recognized through the provision for loan losses and the provision for credit losses on unfunded lending commitments.
ASC 326 replaced the guidance for PCI loans with the concept of purchased credit deteriorated ("PCD"). For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020, PCI loans have been re-classified as PCD loans. For PCD loans, the Company applied the guidance under ASC 326 using the prospective transition approach. As a result, the Company adjusted the amortized cost basis of the PCD loans to reclassify $1.0 million of purchase discount to the ALL on January 1, 2020. The Company applied the guidance under ASC 326 using the modified retrospective approach for all non-PCD assets, which resulted in an increase in the ALL and a corresponding decrease to retained earnings. Refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the adoption of ASC 326.
PCD loans, under prior accounting policies, were excluded from nonperforming loans because they continued to earn interest income from the accretable yield at the pool level. With the adoption of ASC 326, the pools were discontinued and performance is based on contractual terms for individual loans.
For reporting periods prior to January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326:
Management estimated the ALL for acquired performing loans using a methodology similar to that used for originated loans. The allowance determined for each loan pool was compared to the remaining fair value discount for that pool. If the allowance amount calculated under the Company’s methodology was greater than the Company’s remaining discount, the additional amount called for was added to the reported allowance through a provision for loan losses. If the allowance amount calculated under the Company’s methodology was less than the Company’s recorded discount, no additional allowance or provision was recognized. Actual losses first reduced any remaining nonaccretable discount for the loan pool. Once the nonaccretable discount was fully depleted, losses were applied against the allowance established for that pool. Acquired performing loans were placed on nonaccrual status and were considered and reported as nonperforming or past due using the same criteria applied to the originated portfolio.
The excess of cash flows expected to be collected from a PCI loan pool over the pool’s estimated fair value at acquisition was referred to as the accretable yield and was recognized in interest income using an effective yield method over the remaining life of the pool. Each pool of PCI loans was accounted for as a single asset with a single composite interest rate and an aggregate expectation of cash flows.
Management estimated cash flows expected to be collected on each PCI loan pool periodically. If the present value of expected cash flows for a pool was less than its carrying value, an impairment was recognized by an increase in the ALL and a charge to the provision for loan losses. If the present value of expected cash flows for a pool was greater than its carrying value, any previously established ALL was reversed and any remaining difference increased the accretable yield, which was taken into interest income over the remaining life of the loan pool. PCI loans were generally not subject to individual evaluation for impairment and were not reported with impaired loans, even if they otherwise qualified for such treatment.
Foreclosed Assets and ORE
Foreclosed assets and ORE includes real property and other assets that have been acquired as a result of foreclosure, and real property no longer used in the Bank's business. Foreclosed assets and ORE are classified as such until sold or disposed. Foreclosed assets are recorded at fair value less estimated selling costs based on third party property valuations which are obtained at the time the asset is repossessed and periodically until the property is liquidated. ORE is recorded at the lower of its net book value or fair value at the date of transfer to ORE. Foreclosed assets and ORE holding costs are charged to expense. Gains and losses on the sale of foreclosed assets and ORE are charged to operations, as incurred. Costs associated with acquiring and improving a foreclosed property or ORE are usually capitalized to the extent that the carrying value does not exceed fair value less estimated selling costs.
Business Combinations
Assets and liabilities acquired in business combinations are recorded at their fair value. In accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations, the Company generally records provisional amounts at the time of acquisition based on the information available to the Company. The provisional estimates of fair values may be adjusted for a period of up to one year (“measurement period”) from the date of acquisition if new information is obtained. Subsequently, adjustments recorded during the measurement period are recognized in the current reporting period.
Income Taxes
We make estimates and judgments to calculate some of our tax liabilities and determine the recoverability of some of our deferred tax assets (“DTA”), which arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenues and expenses and enacted changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in the period in which they occur. We also estimate a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods. These estimates and judgments are inherently subjective. Historically, our estimates and judgments to calculate our deferred tax accounts have not required significant revision to our initial estimates.
In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, recent cumulative losses and our forecast of future taxable income. In determining future taxable income, we make assumptions for the amount of taxable income, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require us to make judgments about our future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we use to manage our business. Any reduction in estimated future taxable income may require us to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. An increase in the valuation allowance would result in additional income tax expense in the period and could have a significant impact on our future earnings.
Investment Securities
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASC 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, which introduced a new model known as CECL. ASC 326 requires expected credit related losses for available for sale debt securities to be recorded through an allowance for credit losses, while non-credit related losses will continue to be recognized through other comprehensive income. The Company’s held to maturity debt securities are also required to utilize the CECL approach to estimate expected credit losses. Refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the adoption of ASC 326.
For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326:
We evaluate our securities portfolio for impairment at least quarterly, and more frequently when economic and market conditions warrant such evaluations. The Company performs a process to determine whether the decline in the fair value of securities has resulted from credit losses or other factors. This process involves evaluating each security for impairment by monitoring credit performance, collateral type, collateral geography, bond credit support, loan-to-value ratios, credit scores, loss severity levels, pricing levels, downgrades by rating agencies, cash flow projections and other factors as indicators of potential credit issues. If this evaluation indicates the existence of credit losses, the Company compares the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security with the amortized cost basis. If the present value of expected cash flows is less than the amortized cost basis, an allowance for credit losses is recorded, limited by the amount that the fair value of the security is less than its amortized cost.
For reporting periods prior to January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326:
Securities were evaluated periodically to determine whether a decline in their fair value was other-than-temporary. The term “other-than-temporary” was not intended to indicate a permanent decline in value. Rather, it meant that the prospects for near term recovery of value were not necessarily favorable, or that there was a lack of evidence to support fair values equal to, or greater than, the carrying value of the investment. Management reviewed criteria such as the magnitude and duration of the decline, the reasons for the decline and the performance and valuation of the underlying collateral, when applicable, to predict whether the loss in value was other-than-temporary and the intent and ability of the Company to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in fair value. Once a decline in value was determined to be other-than-temporary, the carrying value of the security was reduced to its fair value and a corresponding charge to earnings was recognized for the decline in value determined to be credit related. The decline in value attributable to noncredit factors was recognized in other comprehensive income.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for its stock options in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires companies to expense the fair value of employee stock options and other forms of stock-based compensation. Management utilizes the Black-Scholes option valuation model to estimate the fair value of stock options. The option valuation model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including expected stock price volatility and option life. These subjective input assumptions materially affect the fair value estimate.
ACQUISITION ACTIVITY
The Company has completed five acquisitions since 2010. The following table is a summary of the Company’s acquisition activity as recorded.
SUMMARY OF ACQUISITION ACTIVITY
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Loans, Allowance for Credit Losses and Asset Quality
Loans
The types of loans originated by the Company are subject to federal and state laws and regulations. Interest rates charged on loans are affected principally by the demand for such loans and the supply of money available for lending purposes and the rates offered by our competitors. These factors are, in turn, affected by general and economic conditions, the monetary policy of the federal government, including the FRB, legislative tax policies and governmental budgetary matters.
The Company’s lending activities are subject to underwriting standards and loan origination procedures established by our Board of Directors and management. Loan originations are obtained through a variety of sources, primarily existing customers as well as new customers obtained from referrals and local advertising and promotional efforts. Single-family residential mortgage loan applications and consumer loan applications are taken at any of the Bank’s branch offices. Applications for other loans typically are taken personally by one of our loan officers, although they may be received by a branch office initially and then referred to a loan officer. All loan applications are processed and underwritten centrally at the Bank’s main office.
Total loans in portfolio (which does not include mortgage loans held for sale) increased $265.6 million, or 15.5%, from December 31, 2019 to $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the total recorded net investment in PPP loans was $221.2 million, which are included in commercial and industrial loans. The recorded investment in PPP loans is net of $5.4 million in deferred lender fees, which will be amortized into interest income over the life of the loans. Excluding PPP loans, total loans increased by $44.4 million, or 2.6%.
The following table summarizes the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio as of the dates indicated.
The following table reflects contractual loan maturities as of December 31, 2020, unadjusted for scheduled principal reductions, prepayments, or repricing opportunities. Of the $1.6 billion in loans which have contractual maturity dates subsequent to December 31, 2021, $1.2 billion have fixed interest rates and $382.6 million have floating or adjustable interest rates.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the guidance under ASC 326, which introduced a new model known as CECL. For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326, the ACL is maintained at level that reflects expected losses for the full life of the financial assets. Prior to January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326, the ALL was maintained at an amount which management determined covered reasonably estimable and probable losses. The day one impact of the change in accounting principle is reflected in the table below as an increase to the beginning balance in 2020. Management recalculates the ACL at least quarterly to reassess the estimate of credit losses for the total portfolio at the relevant reporting date. For more information on the adoption of ASC 326 and the Company's relevant accounting policies, refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table presents the activity in the allowance for credit losses for the years indicated.
(1)During the fourth quarter of 2020, a revision to our estimate of the ACL on unfunded lending commitments reduced the ASC 326 adoption impact from what was originally reported in our previously filed Forms 10-Q. Refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
At December 31, 2020, the ALL totaled $33.0 million, or 1.66% of total loans, and the ACL, which includes the reserve for unfunded lending commitments, totaled $34.4 million, or 1.74% of total loans. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for loan losses was $12.7 million, up $9.7 million from 2019. The provision for loan losses during 2020 reflected our assessment of the change in expected losses due primarily to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table presents the allocation of the allowance for loan losses as of December 31 for the years indicated.
Additional Information on Loan Portfolio Composition and the Allowance for Credit Losses
As the fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the national, regional and local economies, management continues to proactively monitor the loan portfolio to identify potential weaknesses that may develop. Specifically, management has identified and is monitoring exposures to borrowers and industries that may be impacted more immediately and acutely than others. In many instances, management has directly reached out to specific borrowers to provide guidance and assistance as appropriate. On a portfolio level, management continues to monitor aggregate exposures to highly sensitive segments for changes in asset quality, payment performance and liquidity levels. Additionally, management is monitoring unfunded commitments, such as lines of credit and overdraft protection, to monitor liquidity and funding issues that may arise with our customers.
The following table provides a summary of the loan portfolio and related reserves at December 31, 2020. We have separately identified certain information regarding PPP loans which, due to the existence of full repayment guarantees from the SBA as well as the likelihood that the vast majority of such loans will be forgiven, we believe entail minimal credit risk to the Company.
(1)At December 31, 2020, the allowance of $1.4 million related to unfunded lending commitments of $336.9 million. The ACL on unfunded lending commitments is recorded within accrued interest payable and other liabilities on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Asset Quality
One of management’s key objectives has been, and continues to be, maintaining a high level of asset quality. In addition to maintaining credit standards for new loan originations, we proactively monitor loans and collection and workout processes of delinquent or problem loans. When a borrower fails to make a scheduled payment, we attempt to cure the deficiency by making personal contact with the borrower. Initial contacts are generally made within 10 days after the date payment is due. In most cases, deficiencies are promptly resolved. If the delinquency continues, late charges are assessed and additional efforts are made to collect the deficiency. All loans which are designated as “special mention,” classified or which are delinquent 90 days or more are reported to the Board of Directors of the Bank monthly. For loans where the collection of principal or interest payments is doubtful, the accrual of interest income ceases. It is our policy, with certain limited exceptions, to discontinue accruing interest and reverse any interest accrued on any loan which is 90 days or more past due. On occasion, this action may be taken earlier if the financial condition of the borrower raises significant concern with regard to their ability to service the debt in accordance with the terms of the loan agreement. Interest income is not accrued on these loans until the borrower’s financial condition and payment record demonstrate an ability to service the debt.
An impaired loan generally is one for which it is probable, based on current information, that the lender will not collect all the amounts due under the contractual terms of the loan. Large groups of smaller balance, homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment. Loans collectively evaluated for impairment include smaller balance commercial loans, residential real estate loans and consumer loans. These loans are evaluated as a group because they have similar characteristics and performance experience. Larger (i.e., loans with balances of $250,000 or greater) commercial real estate loans, multi-family residential loans, construction and land loans and commercial and industrial loans are individually evaluated for impairment. Third party property valuations are obtained at the time of origination for real estate secured loans. When a determination is made that a loan has deteriorated to the point of becoming a problem loan, updated valuations may be ordered to help determine if there is impairment, which may lead to a recommendation for partial charge off or appropriate allowance allocation. Property valuations are ordered through, and are reviewed by, an appraisal officer at the Bank. The Company typically orders an “as is” valuation for collateral property if a loan is in a criticized loan classification. The Board of Directors is provided with monthly reports on impaired loans.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, loans identified as impaired and individually evaluated for expected losses, were $9.0 million and $8.7 million, respectively. Due to the adoption of ASC 326, total loans identified as impaired and individually evaluated at December 31, 2020 included $2.4 million of acquired loans, of which $277,000 was acquired with deteriorated credit quality. Under the former accounting guidance, acquired loans were evaluated on a pool basis and excluded from total loans individually evaluated for impairment at December 31, 2019. Loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality totaled $6.3 million and $7.4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For more information on the adoption of ASC 326, refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following tables provide a summary of loans identified as impaired and individually evaluated for expected losses as of the dates indicated.
Federal regulations and our policies require that we utilize an internal asset classification system as a means of reporting problem and potential problem assets. We have incorporated an internal asset classification system, substantially consistent with Federal banking regulations, as a part of our credit monitoring system. Federal banking regulations set forth a classification scheme for problem and potential problem assets as “substandard,” “doubtful” or “loss” assets. An asset is considered “substandard” if it is inadequately protected by the current net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. “Substandard” assets include those characterized by the “distinct possibility” that the insured institution will sustain “some loss” if the deficiencies are not corrected. Assets classified as “doubtful” have all of the weaknesses inherent in those classified “substandard” with the added characteristic that the weaknesses present make “collection or liquidation in full,” on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions and values, “highly questionable and improbable.” Assets classified as “loss” are those considered “uncollectible” and of such little value that their continuance as assets without the establishment of a specific loss reserve is not warranted. In addition to classified assets, assets which do not currently expose the Bank to sufficient risk to be classified may be categorized as "special mention." Special mention assets have an existing weakness that could cause future impairment.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a total of $35.3 million and $39.8 million, respectively, in loans classified as substandard. We had no assets classified as doubtful or loss at either date. For additional information, see Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following tables provide a summary of loans classified as special mention and substandard as of the dates indicated.
A bank’s determination as to the classification of its assets and the amount of its valuation allowances is subject to review by Federal bank regulators which can order the establishment of additional general or specific loss allowances. The Federal banking agencies have adopted an interagency policy statement on the allowance for loan and lease losses. The policy statement provides guidance for financial institutions on both the responsibilities of management for the assessment and establishment of allowances and guidance for banking agency examiners to use in determining the adequacy of general valuation guidelines. Generally, the policy statement recommends that institutions have effective systems and controls to identify, monitor and address asset quality problems; that management analyze all significant factors that affect the collectability of the portfolio in a reasonable manner; and that management establish acceptable allowance evaluation processes that meet the objectives set forth in the policy statement. Due to the adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, management maintains, based on current and forecasted information, an ACL that reflects a current estimate of expected credit losses for the estimated life of the loan portfolio at reporting periods subsequent to the adoption date. For reporting periods prior to January 1, 2020, management maintained an ALL at a level which reflected losses that were probable and reasonably estimable at the relevant reporting date. For all reporting periods, actual losses are uncertain and dependent upon future events and, as such, further additions to the level of ACL may become necessary.
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s total nonperforming assets and troubled debt restructurings as of the dates indicated.
(1)Due to the adoption of ASC 326, PCD loans of $390,000 are included in nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020. Prior to January 1, 2020, PCD loans were classified as PCI under ASC 310-30 and excluded from nonperforming loans because they continued to earn interest income from the accretable yield at the pool level regardless of their status as past due or otherwise not in compliance with their contractual terms. At adoption, the pools were discontinued and performance is based on contractual terms for individual loans. Refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the adoption of ASC 326. PCI loans that were 90 days or more past due and were accounted for under ASC 310-30 totaled $2.2 million, $1.7 million, $4.3 million and $2.7 million at December 31, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
As a result of Section 4013 of the CARES Act and recent interagency guidance issued by Federal banking regulators, modifications, such as deferrals of principal and/or interest payments, to borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic are not deemed to be TDRs if such modifications are made on loans that were current as of December 31, 2019. Such deferrals and loan modifications totaled $36.0 million, or 2% of total loans, at December 31, 2020 compared to $558.8 million (28% of total loans) at June 30, 2020. We will continue to follow the guidance of Federal banking regulators in making any TDR determinations.
Total nonperforming assets decreased by $8.6 million, or 30.0%, to $20.0 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $28.5 million at December 31, 2019. The ratio of non-performing assets to total assets was 0.77% at December 31, 2020, compared to 1.30% at December 31, 2019.
Nonperforming loans were down $5.7 million, or 23.4%, from December 31, 2019 primarily due to pay-downs on nonaccrual loans. Foreclosed assets and ORE were also down $2.9 million, or 68.7%, from December 31, 2019.
Investment Securities
The Company invests in securities pursuant to our Investment Policy, which has been approved by our Board of Directors. The Investment Policy is designed primarily to manage the interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities, to generate a favorable return without incurring undue interest rate or credit risk and to provide and maintain liquidity. The Asset-Liability Committee (“ALCO”), comprised of the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Operations Officer, Chief Credit Officer and Director of Financial Management, monitors investment activity and ensures that investments are consistent with the Investment Policy. The Board of Directors of the Company reviews investment activity monthly.
The investment securities portfolio decreased by an aggregate of $6.8 million, or 2.6%, during 2020. Securities available for sale made up 98.9% of the investment securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020. The following table sets forth the amortized cost and market value of our investment securities portfolio as of the dates indicated.
The following table sets forth the fixed versus adjustable rate profile of the investment securities portfolio as of the dates indicated. All amounts are shown at amortized cost.
The following table sets forth the amount of investment securities which mature during each of the periods indicated and the weighted average yields for each range of maturities as of December 31, 2020. No tax-exempt yields have been adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis. All amounts are shown at amortized cost.
The following table summarizes activity in the Company’s investment securities portfolio during 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a net unrealized gain on its available for sale investment securities portfolio of $6.5 million, compared to a net unrealized gain of $876,000 as of December 31, 2019.
Funding Sources
General
Deposits, loan repayments and prepayments, proceeds from investment securities sales, calls, maturities and paydowns, cash flows generated from operations and FHLB advances are our primary, ongoing sources of funds for use in lending, investing and for other general purposes.
Deposits
The Company offers a variety of deposit accounts with a range of interest rates and terms. Our deposits consist of checking, both interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing, money market, savings and certificate of deposit accounts.
The flow of deposits is influenced significantly by general economic conditions, changes in market interest rates and competition. Our deposits are obtained predominantly from the areas where our branch offices are located. We have
historically relied primarily on a high level of customer service and long-standing relationships with customers to attract and retain deposits; however, market interest rates and rates offered by competitors significantly affect our ability to attract and retain deposits.
Total deposits were $2.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, up $392.8 million, or 21.6%, compared to December 31, 2019. Certificates of deposits totaled $368.8 million as of December 31, 2020, down $26.7 million, or 6.7%, compared to December 31, 2019. The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s deposits as of the dates indicated.
The following table shows the average balance and average rate paid for each type of interest-bearing deposit for the periods indicated.
Certificates of deposit in the amount of $100,000 and over decreased $12.7 million, or 5.9%, from $217.3 million at December 31, 2019 to $204.6 million at December 31, 2020. The following table details the remaining maturity of large-denomination certificates of deposit of $100,000 and over as of the dates indicated.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances
Advances from the FHLB may be obtained by the Company upon the security of the common stock it owns in the FHLB and certain of its real estate loans and investment securities, provided certain standards related to creditworthiness have been met. Such advances are made pursuant to several credit programs, each of which has its own interest rate and range of maturities. Advances from the FHLB may be either short-term, maturities of one year or less, or long-term, maturities in excess of one year.
The Company had no short-term FHLB advances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Long-term FHLB advances totaled $28.8 million as of December 31, 2020, down $11.8 million, or 29.0%, compared to $40.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
Average FHLB advances were $45.1 million during 2020, down $7.4 million, or 14.1%, from 2019.
Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity provides a source of permanent funding, allows for future growth and provides the Company with a cushion to withstand unforeseen adverse developments. At December 31, 2020, shareholders’ equity totaled $321.8 million, up $5.5 million, or 1.7%, compared to $316.3 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the Company’s earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by the effect of the Company's common stock repurchases, dividends paid and the CECL adoption impact during 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net income in 2020 was $24.8 million, down $3.2 million, or 11.3%, compared to 2019. Diluted EPS for 2020 was $2.85, down $0.20, or 6.6% from 2019. The decrease in net income was primarily due to the provision for loan losses in 2020 (most of which was recorded in the first and second quarters of the year). The provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $12.7 million, up $9.7 million from 2019, reflecting our assessment of expected losses due primarily to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in our provision for loan losses was partially offset by an increase in net interest income, which was primarily driven by low interest rates on deposits and PPP loan income.
Net income in 2019 was $27.9 million, down $3.7 million, or 11.6%, compared to 2018. Diluted EPS for 2019 was $3.05, down $0.35, or 10.3% from 2018. Our 2019 results reflected record organic loan growth; however, our earnings were impacted by the compression of the net interest margin during 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between the interest income earned on interest-earning assets, such as loans and investment securities, and the interest expense paid on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. Our net interest income is largely determined by our net interest spread, which is the difference between the average yield earned on interest-earning assets and the average rate paid on interest bearing liabilities, and the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The Company’s net interest spread was 3.72%, 3.94% and 4.42% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Net interest income totaled $92.2 million in 2020, up $6.2 million, or 7.2%, compared to $86.0 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to lower deposit costs and an increase in loan income primarily due to PPP loans. Total interest expense on deposits decreased $4.0 million, or 26.7%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The average cost of total interest-bearing deposits decreased by 38 basis points to 0.72% in 2020.
The Company recognized $4.1 million of PPP lender fees in loan interest income in 2020. The remaining balance of $5.4 million in deferred lender fees will be amortized into interest income over the life of the PPP loans. Though net interest income increased, outstanding PPP loans negatively impacted the average loan yield by 17 basis points and the net interest margin by 4 basis points during 2020.
In addition, the increase in average cash and cash equivalents from 2019 to 2020 negatively impacted the average yield on total interest-earning assets and the net interest margin by 17 and 15 basis points, respectively. Average cash and cash equivalents are reflected in the increase in the average balance of other interest-earning assets. Average other interest-earning assets during 2020 were up $87.1 million from the average of $55.0 million during 2019.
In 2019, net interest income totaled $86.0 million, down $6.0 million, or 6.5%, compared to $92.0 million in 2018. The decrease in net interest income for 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to higher deposit costs during 2019. Total interest expense on deposits increased $6.0 million, or 65.8%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The average cost of total interest-bearing deposits in 2019 totaled 1.10%, up 43 basis points from 2018.
The Company’s net interest margin, which is net interest income as a percentage of average interest-earning assets, was 3.96%, 4.26%, and 4.62% during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, information regarding (i) the total dollar amount of interest income to the Company from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yields; (ii) the total dollar amount of interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant average rate; (iii) net interest income; (iv) net interest spread; and (v) net interest margin. Information is based on average monthly balances during the indicated periods. Taxable equivalent (“TE”) yields have been calculated using a marginal tax rate of 21%.
(1)Nonperforming loans are included in the respective average loan balances, net of deferred fees, discounts and loans in process. Acquired loans were recorded at fair value upon acquisition and accrete interest income over the remaining life of the respective loans.
The following table displays the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The table distinguishes between (i) changes attributable to volume (changes in average volume between periods times prior year rate), (ii) changes attributable to rate (changes in average rate between periods times prior year volume) and (iii) total increase (decrease).
Interest income includes interest income earned on earning assets as well as applicable loan fees earned. Interest income that would have been earned on nonaccrual loans had they been on accrual status is not included in the data reported above.
Provision for Loan Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the guidance under ASC 326, which introduced a new model known as CECL. For reporting periods beginning on and after January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326, our activity in the provision for loan losses, which are charges or recoveries to operating results, is undertaken to maintain a level of allowance that reflects expected losses for the full life of the financial assets. Prior to January 1, 2020 and the adoption of ASC 326, the activity in the provision for loan losses was recorded to maintain the allowance at an amount which management determined covered reasonably estimable and probable losses. For more information on the adoption of ASC 326, refer to Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $12.7 million, compared to $3.0 million and $3.9 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The provision for loan losses during 2020 reflected our assessment of the change in expected losses due primarily to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The provisions for 2019 and 2018 were primarily due to organic loan growth and downgrades in organic commercial real estate and commercial and industrial loan relationships.
Net charge-offs were $2.3 million for 2020, compared to net charge-offs of $1.5 million and $2.4 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. Charge-offs during 2020 were primarily related to $1.0 million on two acquired commercial relationships and $806,000 on an originated commercial relationship classified as substandard prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Net charge-offs for 2019 and 2018 were primarily due to the deterioration of previously recognized non-performing commercial real estate and commercial and industrial loan relationships.
Item 7. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Financial Condition - Allowance for Credit Losses" provides more information on the changes in the ALL and ACL.
Noninterest Income
The following table illustrates the primary components of noninterest income for the years indicated.
2020 compared to 2019
Noninterest income for 2020 totaled $14.3 million, down $110,000, or 0.8%, compared to 2019.
Service fees and charges for 2020 were down $1.3 million, or 21.8%, from 2019 primarily due to a decline in income from overdraft fees on deposit accounts.
Income from BOLI for 2020 was down $1.1 million, or 52.0%, from 2019 primarily due to the absence of a $1.2 million death benefit from BOLI on a former employee.
Gains on the sale of loans for 2020 were up $1.9 million, or 172.3%, from 2019. Due to the changes in the interest rate environment during 2020, borrowers found it advantageous to refinance residential mortgages.
2019 compared to 2018
Noninterest income for 2019 totaled $14.4 million, up $1.0 million, or 7.2%, compared to 2018. The increase was primarily due to the increase in income from BOLI. The Company received a non-taxable life insurance benefit of $1.2 million from BOLI following the death of a former employee during the third quarter of 2019.
Noninterest Expense
The following table illustrates the primary components of noninterest expense for the years indicated.
2020 compared to 2019
Noninterest expense for 2020 totaled $63.0 million, down $624,000, or 1.0%, from 2019.
Compensation and benefits expense for 2020 was down $480,000, or 1.2% compared to 2019 primarily due to decreases in health insurance costs and compensation expense related to the Company's ESOP driven primarily by the decline in market value of shares of the Company's common stock held by the ESOP. In addition, compensation and benefits expense for 2019 included $287,000 in costs related to the departure of a former executive.
Occupancy expense for 2020 was down $324,000, or 4.6%, compared to 2019. During 2019, the Company incurred $291,000 (pre-tax) of costs to terminate an office lease.
Marketing and advertising expense for 2020 was down $444,000, or 28.2%, compared to 2019 primarily due to a general decline across all marketing related activities during 2020.
Data processing and communication expense for 2020 was up $732,000, or 11.1%, compared to 2019 primarily due to increased costs of software contracts.
Regulatory fees for 2020 were up $547,000, or 65.9%, compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in FDIC assessments. The change in the Company's financial condition during 2020 led to a less favorable leverage ratio, which is used to compute FDIC assessments. In addition, the Company benefited from FDIC assessment credits during the third quarter of 2019. The credits were exhausted during the first quarter of 2020.
2019 compared to 2018
Noninterest expense for 2019 totaled $63.6 million, an increase of $380,000, or 0.6%, from 2018. The increase in noninterest expense in 2019 was primarily due to compensation and benefits expense, which increased by $1.6 million, or 4.4%, in 2019 compared to 2018. Compensation and benefits expense increased primarily due to an increase in salaries and employee health care costs. Compensation and benefits expense for 2019 also included $287,000 in costs related to the departure of a former executive. Noninterest expense for 2018 included $2.0 million in merger related expenses.
Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company incurred income tax expense of $6.0 million, $5.9 million and $6.7 million, respectively. The Company’s effective tax rate was 19.6%, 17.3% and 17.5% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The Company's effective tax rate increased in 2020 compared to 2019 and 2018 due to the absence of certain non-recurring transactions. During 2019, the Company received a non-taxable BOLI benefit of $1.2 million following the death of a former employee. During 2018, an updated analysis of the Company’s depreciation of certain assets as a result of a cost segregation study reduced 2018 income tax expense by $819,000.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of funds are from deposits, amortization of loans, loan prepayments and the maturity of loans, investment securities and other investments and other funds provided from operations. While scheduled payments from the amortization of loans and investment securities and maturing investment securities are relatively predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments can be greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. We also maintain excess funds in short-term, interest-bearing assets that provide additional liquidity.
We use our liquidity to fund existing and future loan commitments, to fund maturing certificates of deposit and demand deposit withdrawals, to invest in other interest-earning assets and to meet operating expenses. At December 31, 2020, certificates of deposit maturing within the next 12 months totaled $297.4 million. Based upon historical experience, we anticipate that a significant portion of the maturing certificates of deposit will be redeposited with us.
In addition to cash flows from loan and securities payments and prepayments as well as from sales of available for sale securities, we have significant borrowing capacity available to fund liquidity needs. In recent years, we have utilized borrowings as a cost efficient addition to deposits as a source of funds. Our borrowings consist of advances from the FHLB, of which we are a member. Under terms of the collateral agreement with the FHLB, we may pledge residential mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities as well as our stock in the FHLB as collateral for such advances. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average balance of our outstanding FHLB advances was $45.1 million. At December 31, 2020, we had $28.8 million in outstanding long-term FHLB advances and $787.2 million in additional FHLB advances available to us.
The following table summarizes the Company's primary and secondary sources of liquidity as of the date indicated.
Liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of business management. Excess liquidity is generally invested in short-term investments such as overnight deposits. On a longer-term basis, the Company maintains a strategy of investing in various lending and investment security products. The Company uses its sources of funds primarily to meet its ongoing commitments and fund loan commitments. The Company has been able to generate sufficient cash through its deposits, as well as borrowings, and anticipates it will continue to have sufficient funds to meet its liquidity requirements.
ASSET/ LIABILITY MANAGEMENT AND MARKET RISK
The objective of asset/liability management is to implement strategies for the funding and deployment of the Company’s financial resources that are expected to maximize soundness and profitability over time at acceptable levels of risk. Interest rate sensitivity is the potential impact of changing rate environments on both net interest income and cash flows. The Company measures its interest rate sensitivity over the near term primarily by running net interest income simulations.
Our interest rate sensitivity is also monitored by management through the use of models which generate estimates of the change in its net interest income over a range of interest rate scenarios. Based on the Company’s interest rate risk model, the table below sets forth the results of immediate and sustained changes in interest rates as of December 31, 2020.
The actual impact of changes in interest rates will depend on many factors. These factors include the Company’s ability to achieve expected growth in interest-earning assets and maintain a desired mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the actual timing of asset and liability repricing, the magnitude of interest rate changes and corresponding movement in interest rate spreads and the level of success of asset/liability management strategies.
Market risk is the risk of loss from adverse changes in market prices and rates. Our market risk arises primarily from the interest rate risk, which is inherent in our lending and deposit taking activities. To that end, management actively monitors and manages interest rate risk exposure. In addition to market risk, our primary risk is credit risk on our loan portfolio. We attempt to manage credit risk through our loan underwriting and oversight policies.
The principal objective of our interest rate risk management function is to evaluate the interest rate risk embedded in certain balance sheet accounts, determine the level of risk appropriate given our business strategy, operating environment, capital and liquidity requirements, performance objectives and interest rate environment and manage the risk consistent with approved guidelines. We seek to manage our exposure to risks from changes in interest rates while at the same time trying to improve our net interest spread. We monitor interest rate risk as such risk relates to our operating strategies. ALCO is responsible for reviewing our asset/liability and investment policies and interest rate risk position. ALCO meets at least monthly. The extent of the movement of interest rates is an uncertainty that could have a negative impact on future earnings.
We primarily have utilized the following strategies in our efforts to manage interest rate risk:
•we have increased our originations of shorter term loans, particularly commercial real estate and commercial and industrial loans;
•we generally sell our conforming long-term (30-year) fixed-rate single-family residential mortgage loans into the secondary market; and
•we have invested in securities, consisting primarily of mortgage-backed securities and collateral mortgage obligations, with relatively short average lives, generally three to five years, and we maintain adequate amounts of liquid assets.
In addition to the strategies above, the Company entered into certain interest rate swap agreements during the second quarter of 2020 as part of its interest rate risk management strategy. The Company’s objectives in using interest rate derivatives are to manage its exposure to interest rate movements. During 2020, such derivatives were used to hedge the variable cost associated with existing variable rate liabilities. Refer to Note 13, Derivatives and Hedging Activities, of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the effects of the derivative financial instruments on the consolidated financial statements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ACTIVITIES
To meet the financing needs of its customers, the Company issues financial instruments which represent conditional obligations that are not recognized, wholly or in part, in the statements of financial condition. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. Such instruments expose the Company to varying degrees of credit and interest rate risk in much the same way as funded loans. The same credit policies are used in these commitments as for on-balance sheet instruments. The Company’s exposure to credit losses from these financial instruments is represented by their contractual amounts.
The following table summarizes our outstanding commitments to originate loans and to advance additional amounts pursuant to outstanding letters of credit, lines of credit and the undisbursed portion of construction loans as of December 31 of the years indicated.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to be drawn upon, the total commitment amounts generally represent future cash requirements.
Unfunded commitments under commercial lines-of-credit and revolving credit lines are commitments for possible future extensions of credit to existing customers. These lines-of-credit usually do not contain a specified maturity date and may not be drawn upon to the total extent to which the Company is committed.
The Company is subject to certain claims and litigation arising in the ordinary course of business. In the opinion of management, after consultation with legal counsel, the ultimate disposition of these matters is not expected to have a material effect on the financial position or results of operations of the Company.
The following table summarizes our outstanding commitments to originate loans and to advance additional amounts pursuant to outstanding letters of credit, lines of credit and the undisbursed portion of construction loans as of December 31, 2020.
The Company has utilized leasing arrangements to support the ongoing activities of the Company. The required payments under such commitments and other contractual cash commitments as of December 31, 2020 are shown in the following table.
IMPACT OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
The financial statements, accompanying notes and related financial data of the Company presented herein have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of operations. Most of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature; therefore, the impact of interest rates has a greater impact on its performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.