Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements that are not statements of historical fact and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and subject to risks and uncertainties. Factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include those factors described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully review all of these factors, as well as the comprehensive discussion of forward-looking statements on page 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Harvard Bioscience is a leading developer, manufacturer and seller of technologies, products and services that enable fundamental research, discovery, and preclinical testing for drug development. Our customers range from renowned academic institutions and government laboratories to the world’s leading pharmaceutical, biotechnology and contract research organizations. With operations in North America, Europe, and China, we sell through a combination of direct and distribution channels to customers around the world.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our operations to date and the future impacts of the pandemic and any resulting economic impact are largely unknown and rapidly evolving. Since the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States, Europe and elsewhere, many customers, particularly academic research institutions, have been unable to maintain laboratory work which has negatively impacted, and will continue to negatively impact, our sales. Additionally, to ensure business continuity while maintaining a safe environment for employees aligned with guidance from government and health organizations, we transitioned the majority of our workforce to work-from-home while implementing social distancing requirements and other measures in factories to allow manufacturing and other personnel essential to production to continue work within our facilities. Business travel was significantly reduced during this period. While we have maintained operations under these conditions, these measures represent disruptions which can impact productivity including sales and marketing activities. Accordingly, these conditions in addition to the overall impact on the global economy has negatively impacted our results of operations and cash flows.
As a result of market and economic conditions, in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350 and ASC 360, we performed an analysis for potential interim impairment indicators of our intangible and other long-lived assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we concluded there were no impairments of goodwill, other indefinite-lived intangibles, or long-lived assets that resulted from triggering events due to COVID-19.
See Part I, Item 1. “Business-Our History and Strategy” of this report for a discussion of recent significant acquisitions, divestitures and other developments.
Revenue for the year ending December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted due to the conditions noted, and is likely to continue to be negatively impacted by delayed or partial reopening of academic research institutions. In April 2020, we implemented a COVID-19 mitigation plan designed to reduce expenses. Actions taken include work hour and temporary salary reductions, reductions-in-force and a realignment of our organizational structure to reduce management layers. During the second half of 2020 a portion of our employees returned to regular work hours in areas of the business based on sequential improvements in revenue. These cost reductions are in addition to the significant restructuring actions we initiated in the fourth quarter of 2019 as discussed below. If business interruptions resulting from COVID-19 were to be prolonged or expanded in scope, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows would be negatively impacted. We will continue to actively monitor this situation and will implement actions necessary to maintain business continuity.
Restructuring Plan
In July 2019, we announced the appointment by the Board of Directors of James Green as President and Chief Executive Officer and the appointment of Michael Rossi as Chief Financial Officer. Immediately thereafter we began a process to identify opportunities to improve profitability, increase cash flow and enhance internal capabilities to position the business for organic growth. As a result of this assessment, in September 2019 we announced a strategic action plan for 2020 and 2021. Key elements of this plan include:
●
Capitalizing on the strong existing Harvard Bioscience and Data Science franchises and products;
●
Adding new senior leadership with significant experience with turnarounds and driving growth and operational improvements within global, middle market life science manufacturing businesses;
●
Consolidating sub-scale operations and integrating existing functions and processes to drive scale and reduce fixed costs;
●
Increasing effectiveness of sales and product management to deliver organic sales growth; and
●
Improving cash flow and reducing debt and leverage.
In December 2019, we implemented the 2019 Restructuring Plan to deliver significant cost savings beginning in 2020 and to support delivery of the strategic action plan we announced in September 2019. The 2019 Restructuring Plan includes consolidation of our Connecticut manufacturing plant with our existing Massachusetts site, downsizing of operations in the United Kingdom and a reduction in force across the business equal to approximately 10% of our headcount. The 2019 Restructuring Plan is expected to deliver annualized run-rate savings of $4.0 million to $5.0 million. The original initiatives under the 2019 Restructuring Plan were completed in the second half of 2020.
We
A
As
Selected Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
In the table below, we provide an overview of selected operating metrics.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $102.1 million, a decrease of (12.1)%, or $14.1 million, compared to revenues of $116.2 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and in particular, lower sales to academic labs and other institutions that are temporarily closed as a result of the pandemic. The negative impact of academic lab closures has moderated since the middle of 2020 but continued to negatively impact the business exiting 2020. These reductions were partially offset by improved sales of products from our Preclinical product family to CRO and pharmaceutical customers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased $6.3 million, or 9.8%, to $58.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $64.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the reduction in revenue noted. Gross margin increased to 56.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 55.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to improved product mix as well as cost reduction initiatives partially offset by lower volumes.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales
General and administrative expenses
General
Research and development expenses
Research
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible asset expenses was $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and did not change materially as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Impairment charges
There were no impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020. Impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a write-off of $0.9 million related to in-process research and development intangible assets as a result of our on-going evaluation of our research and development activities, and a charge of $0.5 million related to the impairment of certain intangible assets due to the decision to discontinue one of our product lines and to cease operations in our facility in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.6 million, or 10.7%, compared with $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to lower average debt balances for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Debt extinguishment and related costs
On December 22, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement for the Citizens Credit Facility, which replaced our Prior Credit Facility. In connection with our entry into the Credit Agreement, we paid $0.6 million in debt extinguishment costs, wrote off $0.8 million of unamortized debt issuance costs, and paid $0.5 million to terminate our interest rate swap agreements.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net, were $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.3 million, compared with $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was substantially due to foreign currency exchange losses.
Income tax expense (benefit)
Income tax was an expense of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with a benefit of $(0.8) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective income tax rate was (7.1)% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 14.8% for the same period in 2019. The difference between our effective rates in 2020 as compared to 2019 is due to a change in estimate of the realizability of certain U. S. deferred tax assets. In 2020, we increased the valuation allowance against
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, internally generated cash flow from operations and our revolving credit facility. Our expected cash outlays relate primarily to cash payments due under our Credit Agreement described below as well as capital expenditures, severance and other payments associated with ongoing restructuring and cost reduction initiatives.
On December 22, 2020, we entered into the Citizens Credit Facility that provides for a term loan of $40.0 million and a $25.0 million senior revolving credit facility (including a $10.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $10.0 million swingline loan sub-facility). The Citizens Credit Facility matures on December 22, 2025.
The Citizens Credit Facility replaced the Prior Credit Facility which consisted of a revolving credit facility and a term loan and was scheduled to expire on January 31, 2023. In connection with entering into the Credit Agreement, we paid off the Prior Credit Facility as well as incurred $0.6 million in fees and expenses. We financed the payoff of the outstanding borrowings under the Prior Credit Facility with borrowings under the Citizens Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we held cash and cash equivalents of $8.3 million, compared with $8.3 million at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had $49.4 million and $55.0 million of borrowings outstanding, respectively. Total debt, net of cash and cash equivalents, was $41.1 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $46.7 million at December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries was $2.5 million and $3.5 million, respectively.
Condensed Consolidated Cash Flow Statements
Cash provided by operations was $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.3 million as compared with $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash flow from operations was primarily due to working capital reductions including significant improvements in accounts receivable collections.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of capital expenditures. Our investing activities used cash of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisting of $1.2 million used for capital expenditures and the receipt of $1.0 million in connection with the release of an escrow amount associated with the sale of substantially all of the assets of our wholly-owned subsidiary, Denville Scientific, Inc. (the “Denville Transaction”).
Cash used in financing activities was $8.0 million and $7.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in both years is due primarily to cash provided by operations utilized to reduce overall debt levels.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net payments to reduce total debt were $5.6 million. Prior to entering the Citizens Credit Facility, we made payments under the Prior Credit Facility of $11.1 million to reduce term loan borrowings, with net borrowings of $2.8 million under the revolving facility. At the closing of the Citizens Credit Facility, we repaid in full the Prior Credit Facility, which included $43.9 million of term loan borrowings and $2.8 million of outstanding revolver borrowings. Under the Citizens Credit Facility, we borrowed $49.4 million, consisting of a $40.0 million term loan and $9.4 million drawn on the revolving loan. Other financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily $1.9 million of costs associated with the refinancing of our debt previously described.
During the year ended December 31, 2019 we borrowed $4.3 million and repaid $11.7 million of debt, including an excess cash flow payment of $4.0 million and a payment of $1.0 million in connection with the release of an escrow amount associated with the Denville Transaction as required by the Prior Credit Facility, and ended the year with $55.0 million of borrowings.
On April 18, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note with PNC Bank, National Association, which provided for a loan in the amount of $6.1 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the PPP) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). On April 23, 2020, the SBA, in consultation with the U.S. Department of the Treasury, issued guidance regarding consideration of alternate available sources of liquidity and its impact on qualification for PPP loans. The Company reassessed its business plans and liquidity available under our existing credit facility and elected to repay all PPP funds. The PPP Loan was repaid in full on May 4, 2020.
Borrowing
On December 22, 2020, we entered into the Citizens Credit Facility which provides for a term loan of $40.0 million and a $25.0 million senior revolving credit facility (including a $10.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $ 10.0 million swingline loan sub-facility). Obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets and are guaranteed by certain of our direct, domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries. The Credit Agreement matures on December 22, 2025. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion regarding our Credit Agreement.
We are compliant with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had borrowings of $49.4 million and $55.0 million respectively, outstanding. We had available borrowing capacity under the revolving line of credit of $15.6 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on our borrowings was 3.25%.
Based on our current operating plans, including actions taken to mitigate the impact of COVID-19, we expect that our available cash, cash generated from current operations and debt capacity will be sufficient to finance current operations, any costs associated with restructuring activities and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. This assessment includes consideration of our best estimates of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results described above.
Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, investments, income taxes, litigation and other contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in each business combination. Goodwill is not subject to amortization, but is subject to at least an annual assessment for impairment. We perform our impairment analysis of goodwill on an annual basis during the fourth quarter of the year unless conditions arise that warrant a more frequent evaluation. For purposes of our goodwill analysis, we have one operating unit.
When goodwill is assessed for impairment, we have the option to perform an assessment of qualitative factors of impairment (optional assessment) prior to necessitating a quantitative impairment test. Should the optional assessment be used for any given year, qualitative factors to consider for a reporting unit include financial performance; legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business, or other factors; entity specific factors; industry and market considerations; and other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting unit. If we determine in the qualitative assessment that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative test is then performed. Otherwise, no further testing is required. For a reporting unit tested using a quantitative approach, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using an income approach.
Under the income approach, we measure fair value of the reporting unit based on a projected cash flow method using a discount rate determined by our management which is commensurate with the risk inherent in its current business model. Our discounted cash flow projections are based on its annual financial forecasts developed internally by management for use in managing our business. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired, and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, then the amount of goodwill impairment will be the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are comprised of existing technology, customer contracts and contractual relationships, and other definite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Identifiable intangible assets resulting from the acquisitions of entities accounted for using the purchase method of accounting are estimated by management based on the fair value of assets received. Identifiable definite-lived intangible assets are being amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method and estimated useful lives ranging from four to fifteen years.
We amortize definite-lived assets over their estimated useful lives. We evaluate definite-lived and indefinite-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The carrying value is not recoverable if it exceeds the undiscounted cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. Our estimates of future cash flows attributable to our assets require significant judgment based on our historical and anticipated results and are subject to many factors. Factors we consider important which could trigger an impairment review include significant negative industry or economic trends, significant loss of clients, and significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business.
When we determine that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above indicators of impairment, we measure the potential impairment based on a projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate determined by our management to be commensurate with the risk inherent in our current business model. An impairment loss is recognized only if the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. Different assumptions and judgments could materially affect the calculation of the fair value of our assets.
Income Taxes and Valuation Allowance
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our annual tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates, tax reserve changes and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining the annual tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We regularly assess the likelihood of tax adjustments in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we have operations and account for the related financial statement implications. We have established tax reserves that we believe are appropriate given the possibility of tax adjustments. Determining the appropriate level of tax reserves requires judgment regarding the uncertain application of tax laws. Reserves are adjusted when information becomes available or when an event occurs indicating a change in the reserve is appropriate. Changes in tax reserves could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Significant judgment is also required in determining the amount of deferred tax assets that will ultimately be realized and corresponding deferred tax asset valuation allowance. When estimating the necessary valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence for each jurisdiction including historical operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. If new information becomes available that would alter our estimate of the amount of deferred tax assets that will ultimately be realized, we adjust the valuation allowance through income tax expense. Changes in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Excess and Obsolete Inventory
Inventories are priced at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. When necessary, the write-down of inventory to its net realizable value is recorded for obsolete or slow-moving inventory based on assumptions about future demand and marketability of products, the impact of new product introductions and specific identification of items, such as product discontinuance or engineering/material changes. These estimates could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from actual requirements if future economic conditions, customer inventory levels or competitive conditions differ from our expectations.
Impact of Foreign Currencies
Our international operations in some instances operate in a natural hedge as we sell our products in many countries and a substantial portion of our revenues, costs and expenses are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the British pound, the euro, the Canadian dollar and the Swedish krona.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, changes in foreign currency exchange rates resulted in a favorable translation effect on our consolidated revenues and on our consolidated net loss. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates resulted in a favorable effect on revenues of approximately $0.5 million and a favorable effect on expenses of approximately $1.0 million.
The gain associated with the translation of foreign currency into U.S. dollars included as a component of comprehensive loss during the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $1.7 million, compared to a loss of $(0.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
In addition, the currency exchange rate fluctuations included as a component of net loss resulted in approximately $(0.5) million and $(0.1) million in currency loss during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements impacting our business, see “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” included in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” of this report.