ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this report to the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to HBT Financial, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the following parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K: Part I, Item 1 “Business”, Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data”, Part II, Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk”, and Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”
OVERVIEW
HBT Financial, Inc. is headquartered in Bloomington, Illinois and is the holding company for Heartland Bank. The Bank provides a comprehensive suite of business, commercial, wealth management, and retail banking products and services to businesses, families, and local governments throughout Central and Northeastern Illinois. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total assets of $3.7 billion, loans held for investment of $2.2 billion, and total deposits of $3.1 billion. HBT Financial, Inc. is a longstanding Central Illinois company, with banking roots that can be traced back 100 years.
Market Area
We currently operate 60 full-service and three limited-service branch locations across 18 counties in Central and Northeastern Illinois. We hold a leading deposit share in many of our markets in Central Illinois, which we define as a top three deposit share rank, providing the foundation for our strong deposit base. The stability provided by this low-cost funding is a key driver of our strong track record of financial performance.
Below is a summary of the loan and deposit balances by the metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas in which we operate.
The Bloomington-Normal metropolitan statistical area includes our branches within McLean and De Witt counties. The Champaign-Urbana metropolitan statistical area includes our branches within Champaign and Ford counties. The Chicago metropolitan statistical area includes our branches within Cook, DeKalb, Grundy, Kane, Kendall, Lake, and Will counties. The Lincoln micropolitan statistical area includes our branches within Logan county. The Ottawa-Peru micropolitan statistical area includes our branches within Bureau and LaSalle counties. The Peoria metropolitan statistical area includes our branches within Peoria, Marshall, Tazewell, and Woodford counties.
COVID-19 Response and Impact Overview
The Company has taken a number of steps to support our employees and customers while maintaining the health and safety of all involved, including, but not limited to:
● Enabling work from home for many employees and social distancing for employees who need to report to the office;
● Maintaining regular business hours at branches for drive-up services and the call center to serve customers while branch lobby service was closed due to mitigation efforts;
● Branch lobby service was reopened for all locations, when permitted by resurgence mitigation guidelines, except one location which was permanently closed and consolidated with an existing branch on June 30, 2020;
● Offering loan payment modifications to customers experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19;
● Waiving or refunding overdraft and ATM fees, as well as time deposit early withdrawal penalties, to customers experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19;
● Participating in the Small Business Administration’s (SBA) Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) with $185 million of PPP loans approved and funded to 2,329 businesses supporting approximately 24,000 employees in our communities.
The Company operates primarily in Illinois which has established a five-phase reopening plan. Illinois entered Phase 4 of its reopening plan on June 26, 2020 which includes occupancy restrictions on indoor dining at restaurants and bars, among other restrictions. Additionally, a three-tiered resurgence mitigation plan is used to implement additional restrictions for specific regions of Illinois, when the test positivity rate or other metrics exceed defined thresholds. Illinois is only likely to transition to Phase 5 of its reopening plan, a full reopening, when a vaccine or highly effective COVID-19 treatment is available.
Paycheck Protection Program Loans
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) established the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) which provides small businesses with funds to pay payroll costs, including benefits, and certain non-payroll costs such as mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. Administered by the SBA, program funds are provided to eligible businesses in the form of loans which may be fully forgiven when loan proceeds are used for payroll costs and allowable non-payroll costs. PPP loans are unsecured, have a two-year or five-year term, bear a fixed contractual interest rate of 1.00%, and are 100% guaranteed by the SBA.
Additionally, the SBA pays lenders fees for processing PPP loans, based on a set percentage of the loan amount. In accordance with ASC 310-20, these fees, along with direct origination costs are deferred and recognized over the life of the loan as an adjustment of yield (included in taxable loan interest income). Recognition of net deferred origination fees are accelerated upon loan forgiveness or repayment prior to contractual maturity.
The following table summarizes PPP loans originated, along with the origination fees received from the SBA, during the year ended December 31, 2020:
As of December 31, 2020, PPP loans, net of deferred origination fees, were $163.5 million or 7.3% of loans, before allowance for loan losses. The deferred origination fees were reduced by direct origination costs, primarily salaries and benefits costs, of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net deferred origination fees on PPP loans of $3.0 million were recognized as taxable loan interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020. Remaining net deferred origination fees on PPP loans totaled $4.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
Payment Modifications Related to COVID-19
Loan payment modifications have been made for borrowers experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19, with substantially all modifications in the form of a three-month interest-only period or a one-month payment deferral. Some borrowers have received more than one loan payment modification. Consistent with the applicable accounting and regulatory guidance, short-term loan payment modifications such as these are generally not considered a TDR.
Following the phased reopening of Illinois businesses and federal economic stimulus received by commercial and retail customers during the second quarter of 2020, the volume of loan modifications requests related to a COVID-19 financial hardship slowed significantly. Additionally, many loans that received a short-term payment modification returned to regular payments during the third and fourth quarters of 2020. The following table presents the number and balance of loans granted a payment modification that have not returned to regular payments.
Industries Adversely Impacted by COVID-19
While many industries have and will continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the retail, restaurant, and hotel industries are considered particularly susceptible to significant adverse impacts. Adverse impacts in these and other industries may result in a deterioration of the loan portfolio’s credit quality or an increase in provision for loan losses. The below table summarizes loan balances within the retail, restaurant, and hotel industries along with select credit quality information as of December 31, 2020.
(1) Borrowers that were granted a loan payment modification related to a COVID-19 financial hardship that have not returned to regular payments as of December 31, 2020.
(2) Includes those loans shown as Modified Payments - Substandard.
Subordinated Note Issuance
On September 3, 2020, to further enhance the Company’s strong capital and liquidity positions, we successfully completed a private placement of $40.0 million 4.50% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Subordinated Notes due 2030. This issuance of subordinated notes, which qualify as Tier 2 regulatory capital, contributed to an increase in the Company’s total risk based capital ratio, which was 17.40% at December 31, 2020, compared to 14.54% at December 31, 2019, while also significantly bolstering the cash reserves held at the holding company.
FACTORS AFFECTING OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Economic Conditions
Our business and financial performance are affected by the general economic conditions in the United States and more directly in the Illinois markets where we operate. The significant economic factors that are most relevant to our business and our financial performance include the general economic conditions, unemployment rates, real estate markets, and interest rates in the U.S. and in our markets.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Although the Company has maintained business operations with appropriate social distancing procedures since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, it has caused significant economic disruption throughout the United States and the communities that we serve. While the duration, severity, and ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unknown at this time, it may adversely impact the businesses we serve and impair the ability of our customers to fulfill their contractual obligations to us. This could adversely affect our asset valuations, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations, and the impacts may be material. We experienced, and we may continue to experience, the following adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic:
● Decrease in net interest income and net interest margin, as a result of the lower interest rate environment;
● Increase in provision for loan losses due to deterioration in the loan portfolio’s credit quality, as a result of the economic slow-down caused by the COVID-19 pandemic;
● Decrease in debit and credit card interchange income, as a result of a lower level of consumer activity and lower associated volume of debit and credit card transactions;
● Decrease in service charge income on deposit accounts, such as overdraft fees, as a result of federal economic stimulus payments received by customers and an increase in waived or refunded fees;
● Decrease in demand for loans, as a result of the economic slow-down caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adverse impacts may also include valuation impairments on our goodwill, intangible assets, investment securities, loans, mortgage servicing rights, deferred tax assets or counter-party risk derivatives.
The Company’s executive management continues to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic. As of the date of this filing, we anticipate we will continue to take actions to support our customers in a manner consistent with the current guidance provided by federal banking regulatory authorities.
Interest Rates
Net interest income is our primary source of revenue. Net interest income equals the excess of interest income earned on interest earning assets (including discount accretion on purchased loans plus certain loan fees) over interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. The level of interest rates as well as the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities both impact net interest income. Net interest income is also influenced by both the pricing and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities which, in turn, are impacted by external factors such as local economic conditions, competition for loans and deposits, the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve Board and market interest rates.
The cost of our deposits and short-term wholesale borrowings is largely based on short-term interest rates, which are primarily driven by the Federal Reserve Board’s actions. The yields generated by our loans and securities are typically driven by short-term and long-term interest rates, which are set by the market and, to some degree, by the Federal Reserve Board’s actions. The level of net interest income is therefore influenced by movements in such interest rates and the pace at which such movements occur. During 2019, overall market interest rates started to decline. The Federal Open Markets Committee lowered Federal Funds target rates for the first time in 11 years on July 31, 2019 and then again in September 2019 and October 2019, for a combined decrease of 75 basis points during 2019. In March 2020, the Federal Open Markets Committee lowered Federal Funds target rates twice, for a combined decrease of 150 basis points in response to the economic downturn related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect these rate cuts and potential increases in nonperforming loans as a result of the economic downturn related to the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to put downward pressure on our net interest margin. In general, we believe that rate increases will lead to improved net interest margins while rate decreases will result in lower net interest margins.
Credit Trends
We focus on originating loans with appropriate risk / reward profiles. We have a detailed loan policy that guides our overall loan origination philosophy and a well-established loan approval process that requires experienced credit officers to approve larger loan relationships. Although we believe our loan approval process and credit review process are strengths that allow us to maintain a high quality loan portfolio, we recognize that credit trends in the markets in which we operate and in our loan portfolio can materially impact our financial condition and performance and that these trends are primarily driven by the economic conditions in our markets. In addition, the economic slow-down caused by the COVID-19 pandemic may result in decreases in loan demand and increases in provision for loan losses due to increased net charge-offs and deterioration in the loan portfolio’s credit quality.
Competition
Our profitability and growth are affected by the highly competitive nature of the financial services industry. We compete with community banks in all our markets and, to a lesser extent, with money center banks, primarily in the Chicago MSA. Additionally, we compete with non-bank financial services companies and other financial institutions operating within the areas we serve. We compete by emphasizing personalized service and efficient decision-making tailored to individual needs. We do not rely on any individual, group, or entity for a material portion of our loans or our deposits. We continue to see increased competitive pressures on loan rates and terms and increased competition for deposits. Continued loan and deposit pricing pressure may affect our financial results in the future.
Regulatory Environment and Trends
We are subject to federal and state regulation and supervision, which continue to evolve as the legal and regulatory framework governing our operations continues to change. The current operating environment includes extensive regulation and supervision in areas such as consumer compliance, the BSA and anti-money laundering compliance, risk management and internal audit. We anticipate that this environment of extensive regulation and supervision will continue for the industry. As a result, changes in the regulatory environment may result in additional costs for additional compliance, risk management and audit personnel or professional fees associated with advisors and consultants. For additional information, please refer to “Supervision and Regulation” as well as “Risk Factors - Legal and Regulatory Compliance Risks.”
FACTORS AFFECTING COMPARABILITY OF FINANCIAL RESULTS
S Corp Status
Prior to the initial public offering, the Company, with the consent of its then current stockholders, elected to be taxed under sections of federal and state income tax law as an "S Corporation" which provides that, in lieu of Company income taxes, except for state replacement taxes, the stockholders separately account for their pro rata shares of the Company’s items of income, deductions, losses and credits. As a result of this election, no income taxes, other than state replacement taxes, had been recognized in the accompanying consolidated financial statements prior to October 11, 2019.
Effective October 11, 2019, the Company voluntarily revoked its S Corporation status and became a taxable entity (C Corporation). As such, any periods prior to October 11, 2019 will only reflect an effective state replacement tax rate. In connection with the conversion of tax status, the Company recognized a deferred tax asset, and the associated income tax benefit, of $0.5 million.
The following table illustrates the impact of being taxed as a C Corporation:
The C Corp equivalent effective rates reflect a federal tax rate of 21% and state income tax rate of 9.5%.
Public Company Costs
Following the completion of the initial public offering in 2019, the Company has incurred, and expects to continue to incur, additional costs associated with operating as a public company, hiring additional personnel, enhancing technology and expanding capabilities. The Company expects that these costs will include legal, regulatory, accounting, investor relations and other expenses that were not incurred as a private company. Sarbanes-Oxley and rules adopted by the SEC, the FDIC and national securities exchanges require public companies to implement specified corporate governance practices that were inapplicable as a private company.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview of Recent Financial Results
The following table presents selected financial results and measures as of and for the year ended December 31.
(1) Reflects adjustment to our historical net income for each period to give effect to the C Corp equivalent provision for income tax for such period.
(2) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
(3) On a tax-equivalent basis assuming a federal tax rate of 21% and state income tax rate of 9.5%.
N/A Not applicable.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income was $36.8 million decreasing by $30.0 million, or 44.9%,when compared to net income for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of $16.5 million, or 31.0%, when compared to C Corp equivalent net income for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income declined primarily due to lower net interest income and higher provision for loan losses. Net interest income declined by $16.2 million, primarily as a result of a lower interest rate environment. Provision for loan losses increased by $7.1 million, primarily due to the economic weakness resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Partially offsetting these declines was a $5.7 million increase in gains on sale of mortgage loans attributable to a strong mortgage refinancing environment and higher premiums received on mortgage loans sold.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net income was $66.9 million increasing by $3.1 million, or 4.8%, from the year ended December 31, 2018. Net income increased primarily due to increases in net interest income as a result of increases in asset yields offset by a smaller increase in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. Provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.3 million lower than the provision for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increases in net interest income were partially offset by a $3.0 million decline in the mortgage servicing rights fair value adjustment and a charge of $3.8 million associated with the termination of the supplemental executive retirement plan (SERP) included in employee benefits expense.
Income tax expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of the change in tax status to become a C Corporation effective October 11, 2019. In connection with the change of tax status, the Company recorded a nonrecurring income tax benefit of $0.5 million to recognize an initial deferred tax asset of the same amount. The C Corp equivalent net income increased $5.1 million, or 10.5%, reflecting the improvements in income before income tax expense previously discussed, partially offset by a slightly higher C Corp equivalent effective tax rate as a result of declines in federally tax-exempt interest income. See the “Factors Affecting Comparability of Financial Results: S Corp Status” section and Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to the change in tax status.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income equals the excess of interest income (including discount accretion on acquired loans) plus fees earned on interest earning assets over interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. Interest rate spread and net interest margin are utilized to measure and explain changes in net interest income. Interest rate spread is the difference between the yield on interest-earning assets and the rate paid for interest-bearing liabilities that fund those assets. The net interest margin is expressed as the percentage of net interest income to average interest-earning assets. The net interest margin exceeds the interest rate spread because noninterest-bearing sources of funds, principally noninterest-bearing demand deposits and stockholders’ equity, also support interest-earning assets.
The following tables sets forth average balances, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. Average balances are daily average balances. Nonaccrual loans are included in the computation of average balances but have been reflected in the table as loans carrying a zero yield. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees and costs, discounts and premiums, and purchase accounting adjustments that are accreted or amortized to interest income or expense.
(1) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
(2) On a tax-equivalent basis assuming a federal tax rate of 21% and state income tax rate of 9.5%.
(3) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
(4) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(5) Net interest-earning assets represents total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
The following table sets forth the components of loan interest income. Loan interest income includes contractual interest on loans, loan fees, accretion of acquired loan discounts and net earnings on cash flow hedges.
The following table sets forth the components of net interest income. Total interest income consists of contractual interest on loans, contractual interest on securities, contractual interest on interest-bearing deposits in banks, loan fees, accretion of acquired loan discounts, securities amortization, net, and other interest and dividend income. Total interest expense consists of contractual interest on deposits, contractual interest on other interest-bearing liabilities and other interest expense.
(1) On a tax-equivalent basis assuming a federal income tax rate of 21% and a state income tax rate of 9.5%.
(2) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the major categories of our interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Information is provided for each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities with respect to changes attributable to changes in volume (i.e., changes in average balances multiplied by the prior-period average rate), and changes attributable to rate (i.e., changes in average rate multiplied by prior-period average balances). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both volume and rate that cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $16.2 million, or 12.1%, to $117.6 million from $133.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to declines in benchmark interest rates, which drove lower yields on interest-earning assets. Partially offsetting this decline were an increase in interest-earning asset balances, lower costs on deposits, and a decrease in time deposit balances.
Net interest margin decreased as well to 3.54% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 4.31% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the decline in the average yield on earning assets. The contribution of acquired loan discount accretion to net interest income declined to $0.7 million or 2 basis points of the net interest margin, for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2.3 million or 7 basis points of the net interest margin, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Additionally, the $40 million of subordinated notes issued during the third quarter of 2020 is expected to add downward pressure to net interest income and net interest margin in subsequent periods. However, the proceeds from the issuance, which were primarily invested in debt securities, provide additional regulatory capital to buffer against higher than estimated credit losses and support organic or acquisitive growth.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $4.4 million, or 3.4%, to $133.8 million from $129.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by higher rates in the first half of 2019. Average rates on loans, securities, and interest-bearing deposits all increased in 2019, but asset yield increases exceeded deposit cost increases. Organic loan growth also contributed to the increase in net interest income, funded primarily through decreases in the securities portfolio, shifting our earning asset mix from the securities portfolio to the higher yielding loan portfolio. Net interest margin increased as well to 4.31% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 4.16% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The contribution of acquired loan discount accretion to net interest income declined to $2.3 million, or 7 basis points of the net interest margin, for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $4.0 million, or 13 basis points of the net interest margin, for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The quarterly net interest margins were as follows:
As the table above illustrates, net interest margin rose during 2018, peaked in the first quarter of 2019, and then declined during the remainder of 2019 and throughout 2020. During 2019, overall market interest rates started to decline. The Federal Open Markets Committee lowered Federal Funds target rates for the first time in 11 years on July 31, 2019 and then again in September 2019 and October 2019, for a combined decrease of 75 basis points during 2019. In March 2020, the Federal Open Markets Committee lowered Federal Funds target rates twice, for a combined decrease of 150 basis points in response to the economic downturn related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect these rate cuts and potential increases in nonperforming loans as a result of the economic downturn related to the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to put downward pressure on our net interest margin. In general, we believe that rate increases will lead to improved net interest margins while rate decreases will result in lower net interest margins.
Provision for Loan Losses
Provisions for loan losses are charged to operations in order to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we consider necessary to absorb probable incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio. In determining the level of the allowance for loan losses, management considers past and current loss experience, evaluations of collateral, current economic conditions, volume and type of lending, adverse situations that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay a loan and the levels of nonperforming and other classified loans. The amount of the allowance is based on estimates and the ultimate losses may vary from such estimates as more information becomes available or events change. We assess the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis and make provisions for loan losses in order to maintain the allowance. The provision for loan losses is a function of the allowance for loan loss methodology we use to determine the appropriate level of the allowance for inherent loan losses after net charge-offs have been deducted.
The deterioration of economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, the communities that we serve. As a result, our provision for loan losses increased in 2020. If future economic conditions deteriorate, or if the COVID-19 pandemic is prolonged or intensifies, our provision for loan losses may remain elevated, or increase, possibly materially, and adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The provision for loan losses was $10.5 million and $3.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in provision for loan losses was primarily due to $5.8 million of reserve build related to adjustments to qualitative factors to reflect the economic weakness resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020. Also contributing to the increase was a $3.8 million increase in specific reserves on loans individually evaluated for impairment from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
The provision for loan losses was $3.4 million and $5.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net charge-offs to average loans decreased from 0.23% during the year ended December 31, 2018 to 0.07% during the year ended December 31, 2019, reducing the need to provide for additional allowance for loan losses. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans increased from 0.96% at December 31, 2018 to 1.03% at December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in qualitative factor adjustments applied to certain categories of loans collectively evaluated for impairment.
Noninterest Income
The following table outlines the amount of and changes to the various noninterest income line items as of the dates indicated.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1.7 million, or 5.2%, to $34.5 million from $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to a $5.7 million increase in gains on sale of mortgage loans, attributable to a strong mortgage refinancing environment and higher premiums received on mortgage loans sold. A lower level of mortgage refinancing activity is anticipated in 2021 and is expected to result in lower mortgage banking profits, relative to 2020. Partially offsetting this increase were a $1.9 million decrease in service charges on deposit accounts, associated with lower overdraft incidences and fee waivers, and nonrecurring gains contained in the 2019 results, including gains on sales of First Community Title Services, Inc. and HBT insurance of $0.8 million and gains on sales of bank premises held for sale of $0.4 million.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Total noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $1.5 million, or 4.8%, to $32.8 million from $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase is primarily due to a $2.7 million decrease in losses on securities, as a result of targeted security sales for tax purposes during the year ended December 31, 2018 with no sales of securities during the year ended December 31, 2019. Gains (losses) on foreclosed assets, which vary based on property specific circumstances, also contributed to an increase in total noninterest income, increasing from a loss of a $1.3 million to a gain of $0.9 million. Fees on customer-related interest rate swaps of $0.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, included in other noninterest income, also contributed to noninterest income growth. There were no fees on customer-related interest rate swaps during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Partially offsetting these improvements were the mortgage servicing rights fair value adjustment and title insurance activity income. The mortgage servicing rights fair value adjustment declined from a gain of $0.6 million to a loss of $2.4 million, primarily due to actual and expected increases in mortgage refinances of serviced loans driven by declines in mortgage interest rates. Title insurance activity income declined $1.0 million, due to the sale of First Community Title Services, Inc. on February 15, 2019.
Noninterest Expense
The following table outlines the amount of and changes to the various noninterest expense line items as of the dates indicated.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $0.9 million, or 1.0%, to $92.0 million from $91.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in salaries expense was primarily driven by higher bonuses for mortgage lenders and overtime and bonuses for mortgage support personnel, as a result of increased residential mortgage origination volume. Partially offsetting this increase was a reduction in employee count occurred as a result of the sale of First Community Title Services, Inc. and HBT Insurance during the first quarter of 2019. Salaries and employee benefits expenses for First Community Title Services, Inc. and HBT Insurance was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no salaries and employee benefits expenses for First Community Title Services, Inc. or HBT Insurance subsequent to 2019.
The decrease in employee benefits expense was primarily the result of smaller charges related to the supplemental executive retirement plan (SERP) which was terminated in June 2019 and paid out in June 2020. The charge related to termination of the SERP was $1.5 million and $3.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The remaining $0.5 million increase in employee benefits expense was primarily related to higher medical benefit expenses.
The increase in data processing expense includes $0.2 million of nonrecurring costs related to systems conversion for the consolidation of State Bank of Lincoln into Heartland Bank and Trust Company as well as upgrades to certain ancillary systems. Increased other noninterest expenses include higher legal and professional fees associated with public company costs not incurred prior to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Total noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $0.7 million, or 0.8%, to $91.0 million from $90.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to a $3.3 million increase in employee benefits expense driven by a $3.8 million charge during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the termination of the SERP. The SERP liability varied inversely with interest rates and was paid out in June 2020.
This increase in total noninterest expense was partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in FDIC insurance expense due in part to the application of small bank assessment credits. The remaining small bank assessment credits available to the Bank was $0.4 million as of December 31, 2019, and may be applied, as determined by the FDIC, against future FDIC insurance assessments which are paid quarterly, in arrears. Routine salary increases were offset by a reduction in employee count as a result of the sale of First Community Title Services, Inc. and HBT Insurance during the first quarter of 2019. Salaries and employee benefits expenses for First Community Title Services, Inc. and HBT Insurance totaled $0.4 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company has historically been taxed under sections of federal and state tax law as an "S corporation" which provides that with the exception of certain state replacement and franchise taxes, current stockholders account separately for their share of the Company’s income, deductions, losses and credits. For additional information, see “Factors Affecting Comparability of Financial Results: S Corp Status”.
Effective October 11, 2019, the Company voluntarily revoked its S Corporation status and became a taxable entity (C Corporation). As such, any periods prior to October 11, 2019 will only reflect an effective state replacement tax rate. In connection with the conversion of tax status, the Company recognized a deferred tax asset, and the associated income tax benefit, of $0.5 million.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
We recorded income tax expense of $12.7 million, or 25.7% effective tax rate, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.3 million, or 7.3% effective tax rate, on a historical basis and $18.7 million, or 26.0% effective tax rate, on a pro forma C Corp equivalent basis during the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective income tax rate was lower than the combined federal and state statutory rate of approximately 28.5% primarily due to tax exempt interest income. Relative to the pro forma C Corp equivalent effective tax rate, the effective income tax rate decreased primarily due to tax exempt interest income making up a larger portion of pre-tax net income during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
We recorded income tax expense of $5.3 million, or 7.3% effective tax rate, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.9 million, or 1.3% effective tax rate, during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the transition to a C Corporation effective October 11, 2019. On a pro forma C Corp equivalent basis, the effective tax rate increased to 26.0% during the year ended December 31, 2019, from 25.3% during the year ended December 31, 2018, due to tax exempt interest income making up a smaller portion of pre-tax net income during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
(1) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
NM Not meaningful.
Balance Sheet Analysis
Comparison of December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019
Total assets were $3.67 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $421.5 million, or 13.0%, from December 31, 2019, which was primarily a result of an increase in total deposits that were invested primarily in debt securities and loans. Loans, before allowance for loan losses increased $83.2 million, primarily due to the origination of PPP loans which totaled $163.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Loans held for sale increased $10.2 million, primarily due to a strong mortgage refinancing environment.
Total deposits were $3.13 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $353.7 million, or 12.7%, from December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to PPP loan proceeds received by commercial customers and federal economic stimulus received by retail customers.
Core deposits to total deposits remained very high at 99.1% at December 31, 2020 compared to 98.4% at December 31, 2019, as we managed our deposit portfolio to retain higher value core deposit relationships and maintain the lowest practicable cost of funds. The loan to deposit ratio was 71.8% at December 31, 2020, decreasing from 77.9% at December 31, 2019.
Comparison of December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2018
Total assets remained almost unchanged from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019, decreasing $4.5 million, or 0.1%, to $3.25 billion as of December 31, 2019. Although total assets remained steady, the Company’s asset mix shifted with a $120.4 million decrease in the debt securities portfolio, a $97.1 million increase in cash and cash equivalents, and a $19.6 million increase in loans, before allowance for loan losses.
Total deposits were $2.78 billion at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $19.1 million, or 0.7%, from December 31, 2018. This slight decrease is primarily due to decreases in higher cost deposit categories such as time deposits, partially offset by increases in money market accounts. The decline in total deposits was also partially offset by deposit growth in the fourth quarter of 2019 which included approximately $40.2 million in increased balances in a small number of retail deposit accounts. The Company expected some outflow in these deposits during the first quarter of 2020.
Core deposits to total deposits remained very high at 98.4% at December 31, 2019 compared to 98.7% at December 31, 2018, as we managed our deposit portfolio to retain and increase higher value core deposit relationships and maintain the lowest practicable cost of funds. The loan to deposit ratio was 77.9% at December 31, 2019, increasing from 76.7% at December 31, 2018.
Loan Portfolio
The Company focuses on originating loans with appropriate risk / reward profiles. The Company has a detailed loan policy that guides the overall loan origination philosophy and a well-established loan approval process that requires experienced credit officers to approve larger loan relationships. The Company also has an active credit department that underwrites and prepares annual reviews for larger and more complex loan relationships.
Management monitors credit quality closely with a series of monthly reports and a quarterly Credit Committee meeting where performance and trends within the loan portfolio are reviewed. Portfolio diversification at the borrower, industry, and product levels is actively managed to mitigate concentration risk. In addition, credit risk management includes an independent loan review process that assesses compliance with loan policy, compliance with loan documentation standards, accuracy of the risk rating and overall credit quality of the loan portfolio.
Loan Categories
The principal categories of our loan portfolio are described below:
Commercial and Industrial: Consists of loans typically granted for working capital, asset acquisition and other business purposes. These loans are underwritten primarily based on the borrower’s cash flow with most loans secondarily supported by collateral. Most commercial and industrial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as accounts receivable, inventory, and equipment, and are typically supported by personal guarantees of the owners. Cash flows and collateral values may fluctuate based on general economic conditions, specific industry conditions and specific borrower circumstances.
Agricultural and Farmland: Consists of loans typically secured by farmland, agricultural operating assets, or a combination of both, and are generally underwritten to existing cash flows of operating agricultural businesses. Debt repayment is provided by business cash flows. Economic trends influenced by unemployment rates and other key economic indicators are not closely correlated to the credit quality of agricultural and farmland loans. The credit quality of these loans is most correlated to changes in prices of corn and soybeans and, to a lesser extent, weather, which has been partially mitigated by federal crop insurance programs.
Commercial Real Estate - Owner Occupied: Consists of loans secured by commercial real estate that is both owned and occupied by the same or a related borrower. These loans are primarily underwritten based on the cash flow of the business occupying the property. As with commercial and industrial loans, cash flows and collateral values may fluctuate based on general economic conditions, specific industry conditions, and specific borrower circumstances.
Commercial Real Estate - Non-owner Occupied: Consists of loans secured by commercial real estate for which the primary source of repayment is the sale or rental cash flows from the underlying collateral. These loans are underwritten based primarily on the historic or projected cash flow from the underlying collateral. Adverse economic developments or an overbuilt market typically impact commercial real estate projects. Trends in rental and vacancy rates of commercial properties impact the credit quality of these loans.
Multi-family: Consists of loans secured by five or more unit apartment buildings. Multi-family loans may be affected by demographic and population trends, unemployment or underemployment, and deteriorating market values of real estate.
Construction and Land Development: Consists of loans for speculative and pre-sold construction projects for developers intending to either sell upon completion or hold for long term investment, as well as construction of projects to be owner occupied. In addition, loans in this segment generally possess a higher inherent risk of loss than other portfolio segments due to risk of non-completion, changes in budgeted costs, and changes in market forces during the term of the construction period.
One-to-four Family Residential: Consists of loans secured by one-to-four family residences, including both first and junior lien mortgage loans for owner occupied and non-owner occupied properties and home equity lines of credit. The degree of risk in residential mortgage lending depends on the local economy, including the local real estate market and unemployment rates.
Municipal, Consumer and Other: Loans to municipalities include obligations of municipal entities and loans sponsored by municipal entities for the benefit of a private entity where that private entity, rather than the municipal entity, is responsible for repayment of the obligation. Consumer loans include loans to individuals for consumer purposes and typically consist of small balance loans. Economic trends determined by unemployment rates and other key economic indicators are closely correlated to the credit quality of the consumer loans. Loans to other financial institutions, as well as leases, are also included.
Loans by Type
The following table sets forth the composition of the loan portfolio, excluding loans held-for-sale, by type of loan as of December 31.
(1) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
Comparison of December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019
Loans, before allowance for loan losses increased by $83.2 million, or 3.8%, to $2.25 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $2.16 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to PPP loan originations during the second and third quarters of 2020. The $80.3 million decrease in loans before allowance for loan losses net of PPP loans from December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $43.2 million reduction in balances on existing lines of credit and a $19.0 million decrease in balances of participation loans purchased.
Comparison of December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2018
Loans, before the allowance for loan losses, increased by $19.5 million, or 0.9%, to $2.16 billion as of December 31, 2019 as compared to $2.14 billion as of December 31, 2018. Loan growth during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to continued organic loan growth in the commercial real estate - non-owner occupied and multi-family categories in our northern Illinois markets. Offsetting the organic loan growth was a $59.7 million reduction in the loan participations resulting primarily from the payoff of seven loans during the year ended December 31, 2019. The seven loan participations that paid off predominantly included $21.2 million in commercial and industrial, $4.8 million in commercial real estate - owner occupied, $4.9 million in commercial real estate - non-owner occupied, $18.4 million in multi-family, and $4.7 million in municipal, consumer, and other. Loan participations make up a small portion of the Company’s loan portfolio totaling $71.7 million and $131.4 million as of December 31, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Loan Portfolio Maturities
The following table summarizes the scheduled maturities of the loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020. Demand loans (loans having no stated repayment schedule or maturity) and overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming loans consist of all loans past due 90 days or more or on nonaccrual. Nonperforming assets consist of all nonperforming loans and foreclosed assets. Typically, loans are placed on nonaccrual when they reach 90 days past due, or when, in management’s opinion, there is reasonable doubt regarding the collection of the amounts due through the normal means of the borrower. Interest accrued and unpaid at the time a loan is placed on nonaccrual status is reversed from interest income. Interest payments received on nonaccrual loans are recognized in accordance with our significant accounting policies. Once a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, the borrower must generally demonstrate at least six months of payment performance and we believe that all remaining principal and interest is fully collectible, before the loan is eligible to return to accrual status. Management believes the Company’s lending practices and active approach to managing nonperforming assets has resulted in timely resolution of problem assets.
Loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality are considered past due or delinquent when the contractual principal or interest due in accordance with the terms of the loan agreement remains unpaid after the due date of the scheduled payment. However, these loans are considered performing, even though they may be contractually past due, as any non-payment of contractual principal or interest is considered in the periodic re-estimation of expected cash flows and is included in the resulting recognition of current period loan loss provision or future period yield adjustments. The accrual of interest is discontinued on loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality if management can no longer estimate future cash flows on the loan. Therefore, interest revenue, through accretion of the difference between the carrying value of the loans and the expected cash flows, is being recognized on all loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality, except those management can no longer estimate future cash flows.
When it appears likely that we will obtain title to real estate collateral, we develop an exit strategy by assessing overall market conditions, the current use and condition of the asset, and its highest and best use. If determined necessary to maximize value, we complete the necessary improvements or tenant stabilization tasks, with the applicable time value discount and improvement expenses incorporated into our estimates of the expected costs to sell. Substantially all foreclosed real estate is valued on an "as-is" basis.
Estimates of the net realizable value of real estate collateral also include a deduction for the expected selling costs. For most real estate collateral and foreclosed real estate, we apply a 7.0% deduction to the value of the asset to account for the expected costs to sell the asset. This estimate includes sales commissions and closing costs. Expenses for real estate taxes are accrued and repairs are expensed when incurred.
The following table sets forth information concerning nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets as of each of the dates indicated.
(1) Excludes loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality that are past due 90 or more days totaling $0.6 million, $0.1 million, $2.7 million, $0.3 million, and $4.6 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017, and 2016, respectively.
(2) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
Comparison of December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2018
Total nonperforming assets were $14.1 million as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of $10.0 million, or 41.5%, from $24.1 million as of December 31, 2019. The decline in nonperforming loans was primarily attributable to the pay down and subsequent return to accrual status of one agriculture credit which totaled $3.8 million at December 31, 2020 and $5.0 million at December 31, 2019, as well as the pay off or pay down of 5 loan relationships that totaled approximately $4.2 million since December 31, 2019.
Comparison of December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2018
Total nonperforming assets were $24.1 million as of December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.3 million, or 5.2%, from $25.5 million as of December 31, 2018, due primarily to a $4.5 million reduction in foreclosed assets as a result of sales, partially offset by a $3.1 million increase in nonaccrual loans. The increase in nonaccrual loans consisted primarily of a $4.3 million increase in agricultural and farmland nonaccrual loans, related primarily to one acquired loan relationship, partially offset by smaller variations in other loan categories. The one agricultural and farmland loan relationship placed on nonaccrual previously mentioned was individually evaluated for impairment and no specific reserves were required as of December 31, 2019.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
In general, if the Company grants a troubled debt restructuring (TDR) that involves either the absence of principal amortization or a material extension of an existing loan amortization period in excess of our underwriting standards, the loan will be placed on nonaccrual status. However, if a TDR is well secured by an abundance of collateral and the collectability of both interest and principal is probable, the loan may remain on accrual status. A nonaccrual TDR in full compliance with the payment requirements specified in the loan modification for at least six months may return to accrual status, if the collectability of both principal and interest is probable. All TDRs are individually evaluated for impairment.
The following table presents TDRs by loan category.
TDRs have remained a small portion of our loan portfolio as loan modifications to borrowers with deteriorating financial condition are generally offered only as a part of an overall workout strategy to minimize losses to the Company.
Risk Classification of Loans
Our policies, consistent with regulatory guidelines, provide for the classification of loans and other assets that are considered to be of lesser quality as pass-watch, substandard, doubtful, or loss.
A pass-watch loan is still considered a "pass" credit and is not a classified or criticized asset, but is a reflection of a borrower who exhibits credit weaknesses or downward trends warranting close attention and increased monitoring. These potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the loan. No loss of principal or interest is expected, and the borrower does not pose sufficient risk to warrant classification.
A substandard loan is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Assets so classified must have a well-defined weakness, or weaknesses, that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized as probable that the borrower will not pay principal and interest in accordance with the contractual terms.
An asset classified as doubtful has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified as substandard with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable. Assets classified as loss are those considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as assets is not warranted; such balances are promptly charged-off as required by applicable federal regulations.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our risk classifications of loans were as follows:
Pass-watch loans increased $82.0 million, or 64.8% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Additionally, substandard loans increased $12.1 million, or 16.7%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. This downward credit migration was primarily due to current or emerging credit weaknesses exhibited by borrowers negatively impacted by the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is an estimate of loan losses inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses represents amounts that have been established to recognize incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio that are both probable and reasonably estimable at the date of the consolidated financial statements. The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses which is charged to expense. Additions to the allowance are expected to maintain the adequacy of the total allowance. Loan losses are charged off against the allowance when the Company determines the loan balance to be uncollectible. Cash received on previously charged off amounts is recorded as a recovery to the allowance for loan losses.
The allowance for loan losses consists of two primary components, general reserves and specific reserves related to impaired loans. The general component covers non-impaired loans and is based on historical losses adjusted for qualitative factors. The historical loss experience is determined by portfolio segment and is based on the actual loss history experienced by the Company over the most recent 16-quarter period. This actual loss experience is adjusted for qualitative factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These qualitative factors include consideration of the following: levels of and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans; levels of and trends in charge-offs and recoveries; trends in volume and terms of loans; effects of any changes in risk selection and underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures, and practices; experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentrations.
These qualitative factors are inherently subjective and are driven by the repayment risk associated with each portfolio segment.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. The Company reviews the loan portfolio on an ongoing basis to determine whether any loans require classification and impairment testing in accordance with applicable regulations and accounting principles. When a loan is classified as either substandard or doubtful and in certain other cases, such as troubled debt restructurings, the Company generally measures impairment based on the fair value of the collateral, but also may use the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the original contractual interest rate, when practical.
The Company evaluates the allowance for loan losses based upon the combined total of the specific and general components. Generally, when the loan portfolio increases, absent other factors, the allowance for loan loss methodology results in a higher dollar amount of estimated probable incurred credit losses than would be the case without the increase. Conversely, when the loan portfolio decreases, absent other factors, the allowance for loan loss methodology generally results in a lower dollar amount of estimated probable losses than would be the case without the decrease.
While the Company uses the best information available to make evaluations, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may become necessary if conditions change substantially from the conditions used in previous evaluations. Determinations as to the risk classification of loans and the amount of the allowance for loan losses are subject to review by regulatory agencies, which can require that the Company establish additional loss allowances.
Net Charge-offs and Recoveries
The following table sets forth activity in the allowance for loan losses.
(1) See "Non-GAAP Financial Information" in Part II, Item 6 “Selected Financial Data” for reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most comparable GAAP measures.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net charge-offs to average total loans before allowance for loan losses have remained low during each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This ratio has remained low for several years, due primarily to the favorable economic conditions prior to the economic weakness resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and our continuous credit monitoring and collection efforts.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Net charge-offs and the ratio of net charge-offs to average loans, before allowance for loan losses were $1.6 million and 0.07%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $5.0 million and 0.23%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2018. This ratio has remained low for several years, due primarily to favorable economic conditions and our continuous credit monitoring and collection efforts.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses
The following table sets forth the allocation of allowance for loan losses by major loan categories.
Securities
The Company’s investment policy is established by management and approved by the board of directors. The policy emphasizes safety of the investment, liquidity requirements, potential returns, cash flow targets and consistency with our interest rate risk management strategy. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any non-U.S. Treasury or non-U.S. government agency debt securities that exceeded 10% of the Company’s total stockholders’ equity.
The following table sets forth the composition, amortized cost and fair values of debt securities available-for-sale and held-to-maturity.
We evaluate securities with significant declines in fair value on a quarterly basis to determine whether they should be considered other-than-temporarily impaired. There were no other-than-temporary impairments during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Portfolio Maturities and Yields
The composition and maturities of the debt securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020 is summarized in the following table. Maturities are based on the final contractual payment dates, and do not reflect the impact of prepayments or early redemptions that may occur. Security yields have not been adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis.
SOURCES OF FUNDS
Deposits
Management continues to focus on growing non-maturity deposits, through the Company’s relationship driven banking philosophy and community-focused marketing programs, and to deemphasize higher cost deposit categories, such as time deposits. Additionally, the Bank continues to add and improve ancillary convenience services tied to deposit accounts, such as mobile, remote deposits and peer-to-peer payments, to solidify deposit relationships.
The following tables set forth the distribution of average deposits, by account type.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The average balances of non-maturity deposits increased 10.6% from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020, with the increase primarily attributable to PPP loan proceeds received by commercial customers and federal economic stimulus received by retail customers. Partially offsetting the increase in non-maturity deposits was a 20.0% decline in the average balances of time deposits, which resulted in a 6.2% increase in average balances of total deposits from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
The average balances of non-maturity deposits increased 1.1% from the year ended December 31, 2018 to the year ended December 31, 2019, with the increase primarily attributable to an increase in money market accounts due to interest rate specials promoted for new money market accounts. Partially offsetting the increase in non-maturity deposits was a 10.4% decline in the average balances of time deposits, which resulted in a 0.7% decrease in average balances of total deposits from the year ended December 31, 2018 to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth time deposits by remaining maturity as of December 31, 2020.
Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase
All securities sold under agreements to repurchase are sweep instruments, maturing daily. The securities underlying the agreements are held under our control in safekeeping at third-party financial institutions, and include debt securities.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances and interest rates on our securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
Borrowings
Deposits are the primary source of funds for our lending activities and general business purposes. However, we may also obtain advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago (FHLB), purchase federal funds, and engage in overnight borrowing from the Federal Reserve. We may also use these sources of funds as part of our asset liability management process to control our long-term interest rate risk exposure, even if it may increase our short-term cost of funds. Our level of short-term borrowing can fluctuate on a daily basis depending on funding needs and the source of funds to satisfy the needs.
Our use of FHLB advances and federal funds purchased has been infrequent and has had a nominal impact on our total funding for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
The following table sets forth information concerning balances and interest rates on our borrowings.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
The consolidated financial statements and the related notes have been prepared in conformity with GAAP. GAAP generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation, if any, is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, changes in market interest rates have a greater impact on performance than the effects of inflation.
LIQUIDITY
Bank Liquidity
The overall objective of bank liquidity management is to ensure the availability of sufficient cash funds to meet all financial commitments and to take advantage of investment opportunities. The Bank manages liquidity in order to meet deposit withdrawals on demand or at contractual maturity, to repay borrowings as they mature, and to fund new loans and investments as opportunities arise.
The Bank continuously monitors its liquidity position to ensure that assets and liabilities are managed in a manner that will meet all of our short-term and long-term cash requirements. The Bank manages its liquidity position to meet the daily cash flow needs of clients, while maintaining an appropriate balance between assets and liabilities to meet the return on investment objectives. The Bank also monitors liquidity requirements in light of interest rate trends, changes in the economy and the scheduled maturity and interest rate sensitivity of the securities and loan portfolios and deposits.
As part of the Bank’s liquidity management strategy, the Bank is also focused on minimizing costs of liquidity and attempts to decrease these costs by promoting noninterest bearing and low-cost deposits and replacing higher cost funding including time deposits and borrowed funds. While the Bank does not control the types of deposit instruments our clients choose, those choices can be influenced with the rates and the deposit specials offered.
Additional sources of liquidity include unpledged securities, federal funds purchased, and borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago (FHLB). Unpledged securities may be sold or pledged as collateral for borrowings to meet liquidity needs. Interest is charged at the prevailing market rate on federal funds purchased and FHLB borrowings. Funds obtained from federal funds purchased and FHLB borrowings are used primarily to meet day to day liquidity needs. The total amount of the remaining credit available to the Bank from the FHLB at December 31, 2020 was $342.8 million.
As of December 31, 2020, management believed adequate liquidity existed to meet all projected cash flow obligations of the Bank. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had no material commitments for capital expenditures.
Holding Company Liquidity
The Company is a corporation separate and apart from the Bank and, therefore, it must provide for its own liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, HBT Financial, Inc. had cash and cash equivalents of $44.1 million. The private placement of $40.0 million of subordinated notes completed on September 3, 2020 significantly bolstered the cash reserves at the holding company.
The Company’s main source of funding is dividends declared and paid to it by the Bank. Due to state banking laws, the Bank may not declare dividends in any calendar year in an amount that would exceed the accumulated retained earnings after giving effect to any unrecognized losses and bad debts without the prior approval of the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. In addition, dividends paid by the Bank to the Company would be prohibited if the effect thereof would cause a Bank’s capital to be reduced below applicable minimum capital requirements. Management believes that these limitations will not impact the Company’s ability to meet its ongoing short-term cash obligations. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, the Bank paid $17.6 million, $110.0 million, and $44.4 million, in dividends to the Company, respectively.
The liquidity needs of the Company on an unconsolidated basis consist primarily of operating expenses, dividends to stockholders and interest payments on the subordinated notes and junior subordinated debentures. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, holding company operating expenses consisted of interest expense of $2.2 million, $1.9 million, and $1.8 million, respectively, and other operating expenses of $2.5 million, $1.0 million, and $1.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, management was not aware of any known trends, events or uncertainties that had or were reasonably likely to have a material impact on the Company’s liquidity.
As of December 31, 2020, management believed adequate liquidity existed to meet all projected cash flow obligations of the Company. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no material commitments for capital expenditures.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
The overall objectives of capital management are to ensure the availability of sufficient capital to support loan, deposit and other asset and liability growth opportunities and to maintain capital to absorb unforeseen losses or write-downs that are inherent in the business risks associated with the banking industry. The Company seeks to balance the need for higher capital levels to address such unforeseen risks and the goal to achieve an adequate return on the capital invested by our stockholders.
Regulatory Capital Requirements
The ability of the Company to pay dividends to its stockholders is dependent upon the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Company.
The Company and Bank are each subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal and state banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory, and possibly additional discretionary, actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the financial statements of the Company and the Bank.
In addition to meeting minimum capital requirements, the Company and the Bank must also maintain a “capital conservation buffer” to avoid becoming subject to restrictions on capital distributions and certain discretionary bonus payments to management. The capital conservation buffer requirement began phasing in on January 1, 2016 and became fully implemented on January 1, 2019 at 2.5% of risk-weighted assets.
(1) The Tier 1 capital to average assets ratio (known as the “leverage ratio”) is not impacted by the capital conservation buffer.
(2) The prompt corrective action provisions are not applicable to bank holding companies.
N/A Not applicable.
Cash Dividends
The below table summarizes the cash dividends paid by quarter for years ended December 31.
On October 1, 2019, the Company’s board of directors declared a special dividend payable to the Company’s stockholders of record as of October 2, 2019, in the aggregate amount of approximately $170.0 million. The special dividend was paid on October 22, 2019 using net proceeds from the Company’s initial public offering and the proceeds of dividends received from Heartland Bank and State Bank of Lincoln.
During 2020, the Company paid quarterly cash dividends of $0.15 per share.
Stock Repurchase Program
On November 2, 2020, the Company’s board of directors approved a stock repurchase program that authorizes the Company to repurchase up to $15 million of its common stock. The stock repurchase program will be in effect until December 31, 2021 with the timing of purchases and number of shares repurchased dependent upon a variety of factors including price, trading volume, corporate and regulatory requirements, and market conditions. The Company is not obligated to purchase any shares under the stock repurchase program, and the stock repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As a financial services provider, the Bank is routinely a party to various financial instruments with off-balance sheet risks, such as commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit, unused lines of credit and commitments to sell loans. While these contractual obligations represent our future cash requirements, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process afforded to loans originated by the Bank. Although commitments to extend credit are considered while evaluating our allowance for loan losses, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no reserves for unfunded commitments. For additional information, see “Note 23 - Commitments and Contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include operating leases for premises and equipment. The following table summarizes our significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations and other funding needs by payment date at December 31, 2020.
(1) Excludes interest.
(2) Represents amounts due to the recipient and does not include unamortized issuance costs or discounts.
(3) This commitment represents amounts we are obligated to contribute to a limited partnership investment in accordance with the provisions of the respective limited partnership agreements. The capital contributions may be required at any time, and are therefore reflected in the "less than one year" category.
JOBS ACT ACCOUNTING ELECTION
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). The JOBS Act permits us an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards affecting public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we choose to affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements applicable to public companies.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Critical accounting estimates are those that are critical to the portrayal and understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and require management to make assumptions that are difficult, subjective or complex. These estimates involve judgments, assumptions and uncertainties that are susceptible to change. In the event that different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending on the severity of such changes, the possibility of a materially different financial condition or materially different results of operations is a reasonable likelihood. Further, changes in accounting standards could impact the Company’s critical accounting estimates. The following accounting estimates could be deemed critical:
Allowance for Loan losses
The allowance for loan losses (allowance) is an estimate of loan losses inherent in the Company's loan portfolio. The allowance is established through a provision for loan losses which is charged to expense. Additions to the allowance are expected to maintain the adequacy of the total allowance. Loan losses are charged off against the allowance when the Company determines the loan balance to be uncollectible. Cash received on previously charged off amounts is recorded as a recovery to the allowance.
The allowance consists of two primary components, general reserves and specific reserves related to impaired loans. The general component covers non-impaired loans and is based on historical losses adjusted for qualitative factors. The historical loss experience is determined by portfolio segment and is based on the actual loss history experienced by the Company over the most recent 16-quarter period. This actual loss experience is adjusted for qualitative factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These qualitative factors include consideration of the following: levels of and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans; levels of and trends in charge-offs and recoveries; trends in volume and terms of loans; effects of any changes in risk selection and underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures, and practices; experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentrations. These qualitative factors are inherently subjective and are driven by the repayment risk associated with each portfolio segment.
Loans acquired that have evidence of deterioration in credit quality since origination and for which it is probable, at acquisition, that the Company will be unable to collect all contractually required payments receivable, are initially recorded at fair value (as determined by the present value of expected future cash flows) with no allowance for loan losses. Loans are evaluated by management at the time of purchase to determine if there is evidence of deterioration in credit quality since origination. Loans where there is evidence of deterioration of credit quality since origination may be aggregated and accounted for as a pool of loans if the loans being aggregated have common risk characteristics. The difference between the undiscounted cash flows expected at acquisition and the investment in the loan, or the "accretable yield," is recognized as interest income over the life of the loan. Contractually required payments for interest and principal that exceed the undiscounted cash flows expected at acquisition, or the "nonaccretable difference," are not recognized as a yield adjustment. Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses. Subsequent increases in expected cash flows result in a reversal of the provision for loan losses to the extent of prior charges or a reclassification of the difference from nonaccretable to accretable yield with a positive impact on interest income on a prospective basis. If the Company does not have the information necessary to reasonably estimate cash flows to be expected, it may use the cost recovery method or cash basis method of income recognition.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired using the acquisition method of accounting. Determining the fair value often involves estimates based on third-party valuations, such as appraisals, or internal valuations based on discounted cash flow analyses or other valuation techniques. Goodwill is not amortized, instead, the Company assesses the potential for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates income tax expense based on amounts expected to be owed to federal and state tax jurisdictions. Estimated income tax expense is reported in the statements of income. Accrued and deferred taxes, as reported in other assets or other liabilities in the balance sheets, represent the net estimated amount due to or to be received from taxing jurisdictions either currently or in the future. Management judgment is involved in estimating accrued and deferred taxes, as it may be necessary to evaluate the risks and merits of the tax treatment of transactions, filing positions, and taxable income calculations after considering tax-related statutes, regulations and other relevant factors. Because of the complexity of tax laws and interpretations, interpretation is subject to judgment.