Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our prior year Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading provider of data and analytics technology and services to healthcare organizations. Our Solution comprises a cloud-based data platform, analytics software, and professional services expertise. Our customers, which are primarily healthcare providers, use our Solution to manage their data, derive analytical insights to operate their organizations, and produce measurable clinical, financial, and operational improvements. We envision a future where all healthcare decisions are data informed.
Health Catalyst was founded in 2008 by healthcare analytics industry pioneers. Our founders and team developed the initial version of our Solution, consisting of an early version of our data platform, select analytics accelerators, and professional services expertise. From the beginning, our Solution has been focused on enabling our mission: to be the catalyst for massive, measurable, data-informed healthcare improvement. We currently employ more than 1,000 team members.
Highlights from the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 include:
•For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, our total revenue was $188.8 million, $154.9 million, and $112.6 million, respectively. The growth in revenue was primarily due to revenue from new customers, including customers of our recent acquired entities, and existing customers paying higher technology access fees from contractual, annual escalators.
•For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we incurred net losses of $115.0 million, $60.1 million, and $62.0 million, respectively.
•For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, our Adjusted EBITDA was $(21.3) million, $(27.4) million, and $(38.1) million, respectively.
See “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data-Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information about this financial measure, including the limitations of such measure and a reconciliation to the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. See “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance” for more information about important opportunities and challenges related to our business.
On July 29, 2019, we closed our IPO in which we issued and sold 8,050,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $26.00 per share for aggregate net proceeds of $190.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. This pandemic, which has continued to spread, and the related adverse public health developments, including orders to shelter-in-place, travel restrictions, and mandated business closures, have adversely affected workforces, organizations, governments, customers, economies, and financial markets globally, leading to an economic downturn and increased market volatility. It has also disrupted the normal operations of many businesses, including ours. COVID-19 has disrupted and we believe will continue to disrupt the normal operations of our customers, which are primarily healthcare providers. Given the unknown timeline and the near-term uncertainty of COVID-19 on our business, there continues to be uncertainty as to the extent to which the global COVID-19 pandemic may adversely impact our business operations, financial performance, and results of operations at this time. The ongoing COVID-19 surge, coupled alongside vaccine rollout logistics, likely indicate that our country and national healthcare system will be under some amount of continued strain over the coming months. That said, we continue to be encouraged as we witness meaningful evidence that the healthcare provider ecosystem is significantly better equipped and prepared to respond to the ongoing pandemic, including through its treatment efficacy, supply chain logistics, capacity planning, and broader operational optimization. Lastly, we see additional reasons for optimism over the near-to-medium term, as we begin to witness early signs of progress on vaccine rollout logistics.
We are fortunate to have a highly recurring revenue model in which greater than 90% of our revenue is recurring in nature. As such, we expect that the near-term impact of COVID-19 on our total revenue will be relatively muted, as evidenced by our revenue performance for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, we benefit from a high level of technology revenue predictability, especially our DOS subscription customers that typically have built-in, contractual technology revenue escalators. We also have developed a number of technology and services solutions designed specifically to support healthcare providers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Importantly, since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, our customers’ overall usage of our data platform has increased meaningfully. Additionally, we have seen usage of our COVID-19-specific products shift from those focused on COVID-19 preparedness to those focused on financial recovery and planning analytics in areas such as elective procedures, ambulatory care, and revenue cycle. Given these factors, we have seen minimal impact on our technology dollar-based retention as a result of COVID-19 and would anticipate similar dynamics moving forward.
Regarding our professional services, we continue to see high levels of engagement of our team member base, who remain engaged on both COVID-19-recovery work as well as focusing on more general clinical, financial, and operational improvement work. That said, the financial strain imposed by COVID-19 on a number of our customers has led to a meaningfully lower professional services dollar-based retention than we have achieved historically. The primary drivers for the decrease in our Adjusted Professional Services Gross Margin from 35% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020 include the lower professional services dollar-based retention mentioned above, temporary professional services discounts provided to support our customers through the near-term financial strain they have experienced related to COVID-19, as well as some shift in the mix of professional services delivered.
We added nine net new DOS subscription customers during the year ended December 31, 2020. In the first half of 2020, given the significant impact of COVID-19 on our healthcare provider end market, the number of first half new customer additions was meaningfully lower than we originally anticipated entering the year. As we entered the second half of 2020, we were pleased to see healthcare organizations adjusting well to the "new normal" operating environment, with COVID-19 highlighting the need for a more robust, commercial-grade data and analytics solution. Likewise, given the financial strain imposed by the pandemic, prospective customers have shown an increased focus on revenue and cost optimization analytics, from which we believe we are well positioned to benefit. On the other hand, the COVID-19 pandemic continued to create some near-term financial uncertainty, making some health systems more cautious in their near-term purchasing decisions. Given these operating dynamics, in the second half of 2020 we experienced similar overall pipeline conversion rates to the second half of 2019.
Any negative impact to 2020 total revenue caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has also resulted in a negative impact to our 2020 Adjusted EBITDA. We have and continue to plan to partially offset any negative total revenue impact through cost containment efforts, resulting in less of a negative Adjusted EBITDA impact compared to the negative total revenue impact.
Importantly, in our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain centrally committed to our team members, ensuring they stay at the center of the Health Catalyst Flywheel. As such, any cost containment efforts implemented will have a bias towards non-headcount related items.
Over the long run, as we get through the COVID-19 pandemic and healthcare organizations' operations begin to normalize, we continue to be optimistic that the pandemic will serve as an overall tailwind in the industry’s adoption of data and analytics. At the health system level, we are seeing meaningful evidence that COVID-19 is highlighting the need for a commercial-grade data and analytics solution to replace patchwork homegrown systems.
Our Business Model
We offer our Solution to a variety of healthcare organizations, primarily in the United States, including academic medical centers, integrated delivery networks, community hospitals, large physician practices, ACOs, health information exchanges, health insurers, and other risk-bearing entities. We categorize our customer count into two primary categories: DOS Subscription Customers and Other Customers. DOS Subscription Customers are defined as customers who access our DOS platform via a technology subscription contract. Other Customers generally include DOS non-subscription customers and other customers from historical acquisitions. As of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we had 74, 65, and 50 DOS Subscription Customers with active subscriptions, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we served over 300 Other Customers compared to 65 as of December 31, 2019. The significant increase in Other Customers from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to our acquisitions of Able Health, Healthfinch, and Vitalware.
We derive substantially all of our revenue through subscriptions for use of our technology and professional services on a recurring basis. In 2020, greater than 90% of our total revenue was recurring in nature. Customers pay for our technology primarily on a subscription basis for our entire technology suite or for pieces of our technology (e.g., DOS-only). We generally provide access to our technology and deliver professional services to customers on a recurring basis, with our technology invoiced upfront annually or quarterly and our professional services invoiced monthly. Most of our technology and professional services contracts have up to a three-year term, of which the vast majority are terminable after one year upon 90 days' notice. As we increase the use cases we address at a given customer, we have the opportunity to upsell incremental technology and services. We have demonstrated an ability to upsell technology and services to our customer base over time as evidenced by a Dollar-based Retention Rate of 102%, 109%, and 107% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The primary costs incurred to deliver our technology are hosting fees and headcount-related costs associated with our cloud services and support teams. Hosting fees are related to providing our technology through a cloud-based environment hosted primarily by Microsoft Azure. However, we also operate a private data center where certain customers are hosted and have deployed DOS on-premise to a small number of customers. Over time, we plan to migrate our on-premise and private data center customers to Azure-hosted environments, increasing our technology cost of revenue. We have experienced and expect to continue to experience operational inefficiencies associated with managing multiple hosting providers, resulting in a headwind against Adjusted Technology Gross Margin. The primary costs incurred to deliver our professional services are the salaries, benefits, and other headcount-related costs of our team members.
We delineate our sales organization by new customer acquisition and existing customer retention and expansion. Selling efforts to new customers vary. Many of our new customers engage with us broadly for multiple use cases, requiring buy-in during the sales cycle across the C-suite. Alternatively, in some instances, we engage with a customer in a single-use case. After we demonstrate measurable improvements, we work with our customers to expand the utilization of our Solution to other use cases or enterprise-wide. The average sales cycle for a new customer is approximately one year, and that timeline can vary materially. Because of our vertical focus on the healthcare industry, we believe our sales and marketing resources can be deployed more efficiently than at horizontally-focused companies that provide technology and services to multiple industries. Over the past few years, we have invested in growth infrastructure by adding to our sales operations and marketing teams, which are built to help us scale over the long term.
We have demonstrated a consistent track record of innovation through research and development over time as evidenced by our new product features and new product offerings. This innovation is driven by feedback we glean from our customers, professional services teams, and the market generally. Our investments in product development have been focused on increasing the capabilities of our Solution and expanding the number of use cases we address for our customers.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key financial metrics, to manage our business and evaluate our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry:
We monitor the key metrics set forth in the preceding table to help us evaluate trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness and efficiency of our operations, and determine employee incentives. We discuss Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Gross Margin, and Adjusted EBITDA in more detail below.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin
Adjusted Gross Profit is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as revenue less cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization and excluding stock-based compensation, tender offer payments deemed compensation, and post-acquisition restructuring costs. We define Adjusted Gross Margin as our Adjusted Gross Profit divided by our revenue. We believe Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin are useful to investors as they eliminate the impact of certain non-cash expenses and allow a direct comparison of these measures between periods without the impact of non-cash expenses and certain other non-recurring operating expenses. We believe these non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as these metrics generally eliminate the effects of certain items that may vary from company to company for reasons unrelated to overall profitability.
See above for information regarding the limitations of using our Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin as financial measures and for a reconciliation of revenue to our Adjusted Gross Profit, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as net loss adjusted for interest and other expense, net, loss on debt extinguishment, income tax provision (benefit), depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, acquisition transaction costs, change in fair value of contingent consideration, duplicate headquarters rent expense, tender offer payments deemed compensation, and post-acquisition restructuring costs when they are incurred. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides investors with useful information on period-to-period performance as evaluated by management and comparison with our past financial performance. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as this metric generally eliminates the effects of certain items that may vary from company to company for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
See “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data - Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for information regarding the limitations of using our Adjusted EBITDA as a financial measure and for a reconciliation of our net loss to Adjusted EBITDA, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Other Key Metrics
We also regularly monitor and review the number of DOS Subscription Customers and Dollar-based Retention Rate as shown in the following tables:
DOS Subscription Customers
Since 2016, our primary contracting model is a subscription-based contract to our DOS platform, analytics applications, and professional services. Given how fundamental DOS is to our Solution and because the vast majority of our total revenue is derived from DOS Subscription Customers, we believe our DOS Subscription Customer count, which represents customers with active subscriptions at period end, is the best representation of our market penetration and the growth of our business. Our 2020 DOS Subscription Customer additions of nine was lower than the historical annual number of additions due to the impact of COVID-19 on our sales achievement during the first half of 2020.
Dollar-based Retention Rate
We calculate our Dollar-based Retention Rate as of a period end by starting with the sum of the Annual Recurring Revenue (ARR) from customers as of the date 12 months prior to such period end (prior period ARR). We then calculate the sum of the ARR from these same customers as of the current period end (current period ARR). Current period ARR includes any upsells and also reflects contraction or attrition over the trailing twelve months but excludes revenue from new customers added in the current period. We then divide the current period ARR by the prior period ARR to arrive at our Dollar-based Retention Rate. We calculate ARR for each customer as the expected monthly recurring revenue of our customers as of the last day of a period multiplied by 12. Because our primary business model is to contract for our DOS platform, analytics applications, and professional services, acquired customers that have not subscribed to DOS are not included in the Dollar-based Retention Rate metrics.
Given our high level of technology revenue predictability, we would anticipate minimal impact on our technology dollar-based retention as a result of COVID-19, however, the financial strain imposed by COVID-19 on a number of our customers has led to a meaningfully lower professional services dollar-based retention in 2020, and thus a lower total Dollar-based Retention Rate, compared to what we have achieved historically. Given that our customer base will be under some amount of continued pandemic-related financial and operational uncertainty over the coming months, we anticipate that there will be continued strain on our professional services dollar-based retention in the near-term.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future growth, success, and performance are dependent on many factors, including those set forth below. While these factors present significant opportunities for us, they also represent the challenges that we must successfully address in order to grow our business and improve our results of operations.
•Impact of COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected workforces, organizations, governments, customers, economies, and financial markets globally, leading to an economic downturn and increased market volatility. It has also disrupted the normal operations of many businesses, including ours. This outbreak, as well as intensified measures undertaken to contain the spread of COVID-19, could decrease healthcare industry spending, adversely affect demand for our technology and services, cause one or more of our customers to file for bankruptcy protection or go out of business, cause one or more of our customers to fail to renew, terminate, or renegotiate their contracts, affect the ability of our sales team to travel to potential customers and the ability of our professional services teams to conduct in-person services and trainings, impact expected spending from new customers, negatively impact collections of accounts receivable, and harm our business, results of operations, and financial condition. It is not possible for us to predict the duration or magnitude of the adverse results of the outbreak and its effects on our business, results of operations, or financial condition at this time.
•Add new customers. We believe that our ability to increase our customer base will enable us to drive growth. Our potential customer base is generally in the early stages of data and analytics adoption and maturity. We expect to further penetrate the market over time as potential customers invest in commercial data and analytics solutions. As one of the first data platform and analytics vendors focused specifically on healthcare organizations, we have an early-mover advantage and strong brand awareness. Our customers are large, complex organizations who typically have long procurement cycles which may lead to declines in the pace of our new customer additions.
•Leverage recent product and services offerings to drive expansion. We believe that our ability to expand within our customer base will enable us to drive growth. Over the last few years, we have developed and deployed several new analytics applications including CORUS, Touchstone, Patient Safety Monitor, Population Builder, and others. Because we are in the early stages of certain of our applications’ lifecycles and maturity, we do not have enough information to know the impact on revenue growth by upselling these applications and associated services to current and new customers.
•Impact of acquisitions. We have acquired multiple companies over the last few years, including the Medicity acquisition in June 2018, the Able Health acquisition in February 2020, the Healthfinch acquisition in July 2020, and the Vitalware acquisition in September 2020. The historical and go-forward revenue growth profiles of these businesses may vary from our core DOS Subscription Customers, thus impacting our overall growth rate. Specifically, Medicity customers have generated a lower Dollar-based Retention Rate than DOS Subscription Customers and we expect flat to declining revenue from Medicity customers in the foreseeable future. If our cross-sell efforts and technology integration strategies are successful related to the recent acquisitions, this could offset revenue declines from Medicity customers. As we integrate the teams acquired via our recent acquisitions, we have also incurred integration-related costs and duplicative costs that could impact our operating cost profile in the near-term.
•Changing revenue mix. Our technology and professional services offerings have materially different gross margin profiles. While our professional services help our customers achieve measurable improvements and make them stickier, they have lower gross margins than technology revenue. In 2020, our technology revenue and professional services revenue represented 58% and 42% of total revenue, respectively. Changes in our revenue mix between the two offerings would impact future Total Adjusted Gross Margin. Furthermore, changes within the types of professional services we offer over time can have a material impact on our Adjusted Professional Services Gross Margin, impacting our future Total Adjusted Gross Margin. See “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data-Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information.
•Transitions to Microsoft Azure as DOS hosting provider. We incur hosting fees related to providing DOS through a cloud-based environment hosted by Microsoft Azure. We also operate a private data center where we host DOS for certain customers and we maintain a small number of customers that have deployed DOS on-premise. We are in the process of transitioning customers we host in our private data center and who deployed DOS on-premise to Azure-hosted environments. The Azure cloud provides customers with more advanced DOS product functionality and a more seamless customer experience; however, hosting customers in Azure is more costly than our private data center and on-premise deployments on a per-customer basis. This transition will result in higher cost of technology revenue and provide a headwind against increases in Adjusted Technology Gross Margin.
Recent Acquisitions
Able Health, Inc.
On February 21, 2020, we acquired Able Health, Inc. (Able Health), a leading software-as-a-service provider of quality and regulatory measurement tracking and reporting to healthcare providers and risk-bearing entities, in a transaction accounted for as a business combination. We believe this acquisition will strengthen Health Catalyst’s Quality and Regulatory Measures capabilities. The acquisition consideration transferred was $21.5 million and was comprised of net cash consideration of $15.2 million, Health Catalyst common shares with a fair value of $3.3 million, and contingent consideration based on achievement of Able Health specified incremental customer billings for the year ending December 31, 2020. The purchase resulted in Health Catalyst acquiring 100% ownership in Able Health.
Healthfinch, Inc.
On July 31, 2020, we acquired Healthfinch, Inc. (Healthfinch), which provides a workflow integration engine delivering insights and analytics into EMR workflows to automate physicians’ ability to close patient care gaps in real-time, in a transaction accounted for as a business combination. We believe this acquisition will strengthen our existing population health capabilities. The acquisition consideration transferred was $50.5 million and was comprised of net cash consideration of $16.9 million, Health Catalyst common shares with a fair value of $27.8 million, and contingent consideration based on certain earn-out performance targets for Healthfinch during an earn-out period that ends on July 31, 2021. The purchase resulted in Health Catalyst acquiring 100% ownership in Healthfinch.
Vitalware, LLC
On September 1, 2020, we acquired Vitalware, LLC (Vitalware), a provider of revenue workflow optimization and analytics SaaS technology solutions to healthcare organizations, in a transaction accounted for as a business combination. Vitalware’s flagship offering is a chargemaster management solution that delivers analytics for the complex regulatory and compliance functions needed by healthcare provider systems. Additionally, Vitalware brings to bear newer product suites to help health systems capture lost revenue and to support compliance with expanding pricing transparency regulation. The acquisition consideration transferred was $119.2 million and was comprised of net cash consideration of $69.6 million, Health Catalyst common shares with a fair value of $41.3 million, and contingent consideration based on certain earn-out performance targets for Vitalware during an earn-out period that ends on March 31, 2021. The purchase resulted in Health Catalyst acquiring 100% ownership in Vitalware.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive our revenue from sales of technology and professional services. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, technology revenue represented 58%, 54%, and 51% of total revenue, respectively, and professional services revenue represented 42%, 46%, and 49% of total revenue, respectively.
Technology revenue. Technology revenue primarily consists of subscription fees charged to customers for access to use our data platform and analytics applications. We provide customers access to our technology through either an all-access or limited-access, modular subscription. Most of our subscription contracts are cloud-based and have up to a three-year term, of which the vast majority are terminable after one year upon 90 days' notice. DOS Subscription Customers that access our technology through an all-access or limited access, modular subscription generally have agreements with built-in annual escalators for technology access fees. Also included in technology revenue is the maintenance and support we provide, which generally includes updates and support services.
Professional services revenue. Professional services revenue primarily includes analytics services, domain expertise services, outsourcing services, and implementation services. Professional services arrangements typically include a fee for making full-time equivalent (FTE) services available to our customers on a monthly basis. FTE services generally consist of a blend of analytic engineers, analysts, and data scientists based on the domain expertise needed to best serve our customers.
Deferred revenue
Deferred revenue consists of customer billings in advance of revenue being recognized from our technology and professional services arrangements. We primarily invoice our customers for technology arrangements annually or quarterly in advance. Amounts anticipated to be recognized within one year of the balance sheet date are recorded as deferred revenue and the remaining portion is recorded as deferred revenue, net of current portion on the consolidated balance sheets.
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization
Cost of technology revenue. Cost of technology revenue primarily consists of costs associated with hosting and supporting our technology, including third-party cloud computing and hosting costs, contractor costs, and salary and related personnel costs for our cloud services and support teams.
Although we expect cost of technology revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we transition customers to third-party hosted data centers with Microsoft Azure and increase headcount to accommodate growth, we anticipate cost of technology revenue as a percentage of technology revenue will generally decrease over the long term. We expect cost of technology revenue as a percentage of technology revenue to fluctuate and potentially increase in the near term, primarily due to additional costs associated with transitioning customers from on-premise and our managed data centers to Microsoft Azure.
Cost of professional services revenue. Cost of professional services revenue consists primarily of costs related to delivering our team’s expertise in analytics, strategic advisory, improvement, and implementation services. These costs primarily include salary and related personnel costs, travel-related costs, and outside contractor costs. We expect cost of professional services revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we increase headcount to accommodate growth.
Operating expense
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily include salary and related personnel costs for our sales, marketing, and account management teams, lead generation, marketing events, including our Healthcare Analytics Summit (HAS), marketing programs, and outside contractor costs associated with the sale and marketing of our offerings.
We plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing to grow our customer base, expand in new markets, and increase our brand awareness. The trend and timing of sales and marketing expenses will depend in part on the timing of our expansion into new markets and marketing campaigns. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods, but decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term. Our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily include salary and related personnel costs for our data platform and analytics applications teams, subscriptions, and outside contractor costs associated with the development of products. We have developed an open, flexible, and scalable data platform. We plan to continue to invest in research and development to develop new solutions and enhance our applications library. We expect that research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods, but decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term. Our research and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily include salary and related personnel costs for our legal, finance, people operations, IT, and other administrative teams, including certain executives. General and administrative expenses also include facilities, subscriptions, corporate insurance, outside legal, accounting, and directors' fees.
Due to the closing of our IPO on July 29, 2019, we incurred and expect to continue to incur additional costs as a result of operating as a public company, including costs related to compliance and reporting obligations of public companies, and increased costs for insurance, investor relations, and corporate governance. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, but decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term. Our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily attributable to our capital investment and consist of fixed asset depreciation, amortization of intangibles considered to have definite lives, and amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs.
Interest and other expense, net
Interest and other expense, net primarily consists of interest income from our investment holdings and interest expense. Interest expense is primarily attributable to the Notes, our now extinguished term loan, and imputed interest on acquisition-related consideration payable. It also includes the amortization of discounts on debt and amortization of deferred financing costs related to our various debt arrangements.
Income tax provision (benefit)
Income tax provision (benefit) consists of U.S. federal, state, and foreign income taxes. Because of the uncertainty of the realization of the deferred tax assets, we have a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards (NOLs) and tax credits related primarily to research and development.
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal and state NOLs of $419.6 million and $334.6 million, respectively, which will begin to expire for federal and state tax purposes in 2032 and 2023, respectively. Our existing NOLs may be subject to limitations arising from ownership changes and, if we undergo an ownership change, our ability to utilize our NOLs and tax credits could be further limited by Sections 382 and 383 of the Code. Future changes in our stock ownership, many of which are outside of our control, could result in an ownership change under Sections 382 and 383 of the Code. Our NOLs and tax credits may also be limited under similar provisions of state law.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act) was enacted and signed into U.S. law to provide economic relief to individuals and businesses facing economic hardship as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Changes in tax laws or rates are accounted for in the period of enactment. We are continuing to analyze these legislative developments and believe that the income tax provisions of the CARES Act do not have a significant impact on our current taxes, deferred taxes, or uncertain tax positions. The CARES Act also provides for the deferral of an employer’s portion of social security payroll taxes for the remainder of 2020. Under the CARES Act, half of the deferred amount will have to be paid in each of December 2021 and December 2022. We began deferring the social security payroll tax match in April 2020.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenue for each of the periods indicated:
__________________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense, as follows:
(2)Includes tender offer payments deemed compensation expense, as follows:
(3) Includes post-acquisition restructuring costs, as follows:
(4) Includes acquisition transaction costs, as follows:
(5) Includes the change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities, as follows:
(6) Includes duplicate headquarters rent expense, as follows:
Discussion of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue was $188.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $154.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $33.9 million, or 22%.
Technology revenue was $110.5 million, or 58% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $84.0 million, or 54% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The revenue growth was primarily from new DOS Subscription Customers, acquired technology customers, and revenue from existing customers paying higher technology access fees from contractual, annual escalators, and new offerings of expanded support services.
Professional services revenue was $78.4 million, or 42% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $71.0 million, or 46% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The professional services revenue growth is primarily due to implementation, analytics, outsourcing, and other improvement services being provided to new DOS Subscription Customers and expanded deployment of services with existing customers. This growth was partially offset by temporary professional services discounts provided to support our customers through the near-term financial strain they have experienced related to COVID-19.
Cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization
Cost of technology revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization, was $35.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $7.8 million, or 28%. The increase in cost of technology revenue was primarily due to $4.2 million in increased cloud computing and hosting costs largely from the current year acquisitions and the expanded use of Microsoft Azure to serve existing and new customers, and an increase of $2.3 million in salary and related personnel costs from an increase in cloud services and support headcount.
Cost of professional services revenue was $62.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $47.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $14.9 million, or 31%. This increase was primarily due to a $13.4 million increase in salary and related personnel costs from additional professional services headcount and additional stock-based compensation of $2.5 million, which were partially offset by a decrease in travel-related expenses of $1.8 million.
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses were $55.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $47.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $8.1 million, or 17%. The increase was primarily due to a $9.3 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $0.9 million increase in the provision for credit losses, which were partially offset by a decrease in travel-related expenses of $3.0 million.
Sales and marketing expense as a percentage of total revenue decreased from 31% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 29% in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and development
Research and development expenses were $53.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $46.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $7.3 million, or 16%. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $3.4 million in stock-based compensation and an increase of $4.0 million in salary and related personnel costs from additional development team headcount.
Research and development expense as a percentage of revenue decreased from 30% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 28% in the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses were $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $27.5 million, or 87%. The increase was primarily due to increases of $14.1 million in change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities, $4.5 million in stock-based compensation, $2.7 million in acquisition-related transaction costs, $2.6 million in salary and related personnel costs from additional headcount, $1.4 million in duplicate rent expense, and $1.4 million in corporate insurance costs.
General and administrative expense as a percentage of revenue increased from 20% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 31% in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $9.5 million, or 103%. This increase was primarily due to the amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue increased from 6% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 10% in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
__________________
(1)Not meaningful.
On April 14, 2020, we used $57.0 million of proceeds from the Note Offering to prepay in full all outstanding indebtedness, including prepayment penalties, under the Credit Agreement and terminate the Credit Agreement. We recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, including approximately $7.0 million of repayment fees and $1.5 million unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs related to the OrbiMed term loan.
On February 6, 2019, we entered into the OrbiMed Credit Facility that established a senior term loan facility of up to $80.0 million under certain conditions and we simultaneously borrowed $50.0 million. The use of proceeds from the OrbiMed senior term loan included an immediate repayment of our $20.0 million term loan from SVB that required a prepayment premium of $0.5 million and the write-off of deferred debt issuance costs of $1.2 million, resulting in a $1.7 million loss on extinguishment of debt.
Interest and other expense, net
Interest and other expense, net increased $8.2 million, or 238%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to an increase in interest expense of $7.5 million due to the increase in net borrowings resulting from the Notes Offering that occurred in April 2020.
Income tax provision (benefit)
__________________
(1)Not meaningful.
Income tax provision (benefit) consists of current and deferred taxes for U.S. federal, state, and foreign income taxes. On December 22, 2017, federal tax legislation was enacted that included lowering the U.S. corporate income tax rate to 21% effective in 2018. We remeasured certain deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the tax rates at which they are expected to reverse in the future, which is generally 21%. As we had a full valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, the allowance was adjusted accordingly based on the remeasured deferred tax asset and liability position. As a result, the federal tax legislation had a limited impact on our income tax provision (benefit).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $270.9 million, which were held primarily for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are comprised primarily of money market funds, U.S. treasury notes, commercial paper, corporate bonds, and asset-backed securities.
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the proceeds we received through private sales of equity securities, payments received from customers under technology and professional services arrangements, borrowings under our loan and security agreements, and our recent IPO. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our pace of new customer growth and expanded customer relationships, technology and professional services renewal activity, and the timing and extent of spend to support the expansion of sales, marketing, and development activities. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and amounts available under our credit facilities will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months, though we may require additional capital resources in the future.
Convertible Senior Notes
On April 14, 2020, we issued $230.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the Notes), pursuant to an Indenture dated April 14, 2020, with U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers. We received net proceeds from the sale of the Notes of $222.5 million, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and offering expenses payable by us.
The Notes are senior, unsecured obligations and accrue interest payable semiannually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, beginning on October 15, 2020, at a rate of 2.50% per year. The Notes will mature on April 15, 2025, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. The Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, with the form of consideration determined at our election. The conversion rate is initially 32.6797 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes (which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $30.60 per share of our common stock).
Capped Calls
On April 8, 2020, concurrently with the pricing of the Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions (the Base Capped Calls) with certain financial institutions, or option counterparties. In addition, in connection with the initial purchasers’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional Notes, on April 9, 2020, we entered into additional capped call transactions (together with the Base Capped Calls, the Capped Calls) with each of the option counterparties. We used approximately $21.6 million of the net proceeds from the Note Offering to pay the cost of the Capped Calls. The Capped Calls have initial cap prices of $42.00 per share, subject to certain adjustments. The Capped Calls are expected generally to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted Notes, as the case may be, with such reduction and/or offset subject to the cap price.
Refer to Note 11 of our consolidated financial statements for additional details regarding the private offering of the Notes and the Capped Calls.
Initial Public Offering
On July 29, 2019, we closed our IPO in which we issued and sold 8,050,000 shares (inclusive of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 1,050,000 shares, which was exercised on July 25, 2019) of common stock at $26.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $194.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and before deducting offering costs of $4.6 million.
OrbiMed financings
On February 6, 2019, we entered into the Credit Agreement with OrbiMed that established a senior term loan facility of up to $80.0 million under certain conditions. The contractual interest rate is the higher of LIBOR plus 7.5% and 10.0%. On February 6, 2019, we borrowed $50.0 million under the Credit Agreement with principal payments due beginning in 2023, and we simultaneously repaid our $20.0 million term loan from SVB in full. In addition, we repaid in full the outstanding balance of $1.3 million under the SVB revolving line of credit. Additionally, on February 6, 2019, we sold 437,787 shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock for a purchase price of $12.2 million. The effect of the OrbiMed debt proceeds, the Series F stock issuance, and the repayment of the SVB term loan resulted in a net increase in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $38.7 million, net of fees and debt prepayment premiums. On April 14, 2020, we used $57.0 million of proceeds from the Note Offering to prepay in full all outstanding indebtedness, including prepayment penalties, under the Credit Agreement with OrbiMed, dated February 6, 2019, as amended, and terminate the Credit Agreement.
SVB revolving line of credit
In June 2016, we signed a Loan and Security Agreement with SVB which established a revolving line of credit based on a formula amount. On February 6, 2019, we amended the Loan Agreement with SVB which reduced the revolving line of credit to a current maximum of $5.0 million with an obligation to maintain a minimum of $5.0 million cash or cash equivalents on deposit with SVB to maintain the assurance of future credit availability. The line may be increased to $10.0 million upon request and approval by SVB. The maturity date of the revolving line of credit was amended to be February 6, 2021. On April 8, 2020, we entered into a Pay-Off Letter Agreement with SVB, pursuant to which we paid to SVB immaterial termination costs, representing all amounts due and owing under the Loan Agreement, dated as of October 6, 2017.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash flows is cash collections from our customers for technology and professional services arrangements. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenses, marketing expenses, and technology costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $26.1 million, which included a net loss of $115.0 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $18.7 million in depreciation and amortization of property, equipment, and intangible assets, $38.0 million in stock-based compensation, $14.1 million in change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities, $8.5 million of loss from the extinguishment of debt, and $8.1 million in amortization of debt discount and issuance costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $32.2 million, which included a net loss of $60.1 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $9.2 million in depreciation and amortization of property, equipment, and intangible assets, $17.8 million in stock-based compensation, $1.7 million of loss from the extinguishment of debt, and $1.1 million in amortization of debt discount and issuance costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in operating activities was $40.3 million, which included a net loss of $62.0 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $4.2 million in stock-based compensation and $7.4 million in depreciation and amortization of property, equipment, and intangible assets. The 2018 net loss also included an $8.3 million charge that was paid in association with the repurchase of common stock at a price in excess of its estimated fair value as part of the 2018 tender offer that is further described in Note 13 to the audited consolidated financial statements. The tender offer cash payments are not expected to be recurring in future periods.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $82.6 million was primarily due to $189.5 million in purchases of short-term investments, $101.7 million used in current year business acquisitions, and $9.0 million in purchases of property, equipment, and intangible assets, reduced by the $219.1 million sale and maturity of short-term investments.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $209.6 million was primarily due to $256.0 million in purchases of short-term investments and $4.3 million in purchases of property, equipment, and intangible assets, reduced by the $50.7 million sale and maturity of short-term investments.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 of $21.4 million was primarily due to $37.9 million provided from the sale and maturity of short-term investments, reduced by $14.0 million used to purchase short-term investments and $2.5 million in purchases of property, equipment, and intangible assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $182.6 million was primarily the result of $222.5 million in net proceeds from the private offering of the Notes, $36.3 million in stock option exercise proceeds, and $4.3 million in proceeds from our ESPP, reduced by the $57.0 million payoff of the OrbiMed Credit Facility, $21.7 million used to purchase Capped Calls, including issuance costs, and the $1.6 million in payments of acquisition-related obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $231.4 million was primarily the result of $194.6 million in IPO proceeds, net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions, $47.2 million in net proceeds drawn under the OrbiMed Credit Facility, $12.1 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock, $2.7 million in stock option exercise proceeds, and $3.0 million in proceeds from our ESPP, reduced by the $21.8 million payoff of the SVB debt, $4.6 million in payments of deferred offering costs, and $1.7 million in payments of acquisition-related obligations.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 of $24.3 million was primarily the result of $34.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock, $10.0 million in proceeds drawn under the SVB Debt Agreements and $3.0 million in stock option exercise proceeds, reduced by an $8.7 million repurchase of our common stock, and $13.9 million in payments of acquisition-related obligations.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table presents a summary of our payments due under contractual arrangements as of December 31, 2020:
__________________
(1)On April 14, 2020, we issued $230.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025, pursuant to an Indenture dated April 14, 2020, with U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers. We received net proceeds from the sale of the Notes of $222.5 million, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and offering expenses payable by us.
(2)We lease our facilities under long-term operating leases, which expire at various dates through 2031.
The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions and the approximate timing of the transaction.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers or business partners and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from data breaches, or intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the applicable periods. We base our estimates, assumptions, and judgments on our knowledge and experience about past and current events and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions, and judgments on an ongoing basis.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues primarily from technology subscriptions and professional services. We determine revenue recognition by applying the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy the performance obligation.
We recognize revenue net of any taxes collected from customers and subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Technology Revenue
Technology revenue primarily consists of subscription fees charged to customers for access to use our technology. We provide customers access to our technology through either an all-access or limited-access, modular subscription. The majority of our subscription arrangements are cloud-based and do not provide customers the right to take possession of the technology or contain a significant penalty if the customer were to take possession of the technology. Revenue from cloud-based subscriptions is recognized ratably over the contract term beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer. Most of our subscription contracts have up to a three-year term, of which the vast majority are terminable after one year upon 90 days notice.
Subscriptions that allow the customer to take software on-premise without significant penalty are treated as time-based licenses. These arrangements generally include access to technology, access to unspecified future products and maintenance and support. Revenue for upfront access to the technology library is recognized at a point in time when the technology is made available to the customer. Revenue for access to unspecified future products included in time-based license subscriptions is recognized ratably over the contract term beginning on the date that the access is made available to the customer.
We also have certain perpetual license arrangements. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the software. Technology revenue also includes maintenance and support revenue which generally includes bug fixes, updates, and support services. Revenue related to maintenance and support is recognized over the contract term beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer.
Professional Services Revenue
Professional services revenue primarily includes data and analytics services, domain expertise services, outsourcing services, and implementation services. Professional services arrangements typically include a fee for making FTE services available to our customers on a monthly basis. FTE services generally consist of a blend of analytic engineers, analysts, and data scientists based on the domain expertise needed to best serve our customers. Professional services are typically considered distinct from the technology offerings and revenue is generally recognized as the service is provided using the “right to invoice” practical expedient.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Many of our contracts include multiple performance obligations. We account for performance obligations separately if they are capable of being distinct and distinct within the context of the contract. In these circumstances, the transaction price is allocated to separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine standalone selling prices based on the observable price a good or service is sold for separately when available. In cases where standalone selling prices are not directly observable, based on information available, we utilize the expected cost plus a margin, adjusted market assessment, or residual estimation method. We consider all information available including our overall pricing objectives, market conditions, and other factors, which may include the value of contracts, customer demographics, and the types of users.
Standalone selling prices are not directly observable for our all-access and limited-access technology arrangements, which are composed of cloud-based subscriptions, time-based licenses, and perpetual licenses. For these technology arrangements, we use the residual estimation method due to the limited number of standalone transactions and/or prices that are highly variable.
Variable Consideration
We have also entered into at-risk and shared savings arrangements with certain customers whereby we receive variable consideration based on the achievement of measurable improvements which may include cost savings or performance against metrics. For these arrangements, we estimate revenue using the most likely amount that we will receive. Estimates are based on our historical experience and best judgment at the time to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue recognized will not occur. Due to the nature of our arrangements, certain estimates may be constrained until the uncertainty is further resolved.
Business Combinations
The results of businesses acquired in a business combination are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Purchase accounting results in assets and liabilities of an acquired business generally being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any excess consideration over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on each acquisition accounted for as a business combination in order to record the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on our best estimate of fair value. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. Significant estimation is required in determining the fair value of the customer-related intangible assets and technology-related intangible assets. The significant estimation is primarily due to the judgmental nature of the inputs to the valuation models used to measure the fair value of these intangible assets, as well as the sensitivity of the respective fair values to the underlying significant assumptions. We typically use the income approach or cost approach to measure the fair value of intangible assets. The significant assumptions used to form the basis of the estimates included the number of engineer hours required to develop technology, expected revenue including revenue growth rates, rate and timing of obsolescence, royalty rates and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) margin used in the estimate for customer relationships, and backlog. Many of these significant assumptions were forward-looking and could be affected by future economic and market conditions. We engage the assistance of valuation specialists in concluding on fair value measurements in connection with determining fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
Transaction costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred and are included in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Goodwill
We record goodwill as the difference between the aggregate consideration paid for a business combination and the fair value of the identifiable net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill includes the know-how of the assembled workforce, the ability of the workforce to further improve technology and product offerings, customer relationships, and the expected cash flows resulting from these efforts. Goodwill may also include expected synergies resulting from the complementary strategic fit these businesses bring to existing operations. Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present or circumstances suggest that impairment may exist.
Our first step in the goodwill impairment test is a qualitative analysis of factors that could be indicators of potential impairment. Next, if a quantitative analysis is necessary, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, the goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered impaired. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based awards, including stock options and RSUs, are measured and recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on the fair value of the award on the grant date. For awards subject to performance conditions, we record expense when the performance condition becomes probable. We record forfeitures of stock-based awards as the actual forfeitures occur.
We have issued two types of employee stock-based awards, standard and two-tier. Our standard stock-based awards vest solely on a service-based condition. For these awards, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Two-tier employee stock-based awards contain both a service-based condition and performance condition, defined as the earlier of (i) an acquisition or change in control of the company or (ii) upon the occurrence of an initial public offering by the Company. A change in control event and effective registration event are not deemed probable until consummated; accordingly, no expense is recorded related to two-tier stock-based awards until the performance condition becomes probable of occurring.
Awards that contain both service-based and performance conditions are recognized using the accelerated attribution method once the performance condition is probable of occurring. The service-based condition is generally a service period of four years. Upon closing our IPO, we recorded cumulative share-based compensation expense of approximately $6.0 million using the accumulated attribution method for two-tier employee stock-based awards for which the service condition had been satisfied at that date.
The grant date fair value of RSUs is determined using the market closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. This requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of stock options, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent our best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The resulting fair value, net of actual forfeitures, is recognized on a straight-line basis over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award.
Stock-based compensation expense related to purchase rights issued under the 2019 Health Catalyst Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) is based on the Black-Scholes option-pricing model fair value of the estimated number of awards as of the beginning of the offering period. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized using the straight-line method over the offering period.
These assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, other than the fair value of our common stock, are estimated as follows:
•Expected volatility. Since a public market for our common stock did not exist prior to our IPO and, therefore, we did not have a sufficient trading history of our common stock, we estimated the expected volatility based on the volatility of similar publicly-held entities (guideline companies) over a period equivalent to the expected term of the pre-IPO awards. In evaluating the similarity of guideline companies to us, we considered factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, size, and financial leverage. We intend to primarily use the volatility history of the share price of our common stock as it becomes available.
•Expected term. We estimate the expected term using the simplified method, as we do not have sufficient historical exercise activity to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method calculates the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding as the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual expiration date of the award.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for maturities corresponding with the expected term of the award.
•Expected dividend yield. We have never declared or paid any dividends and do not presently plan to pay dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (ASU 2018-17), which simplifies the accounting for non-employee share-based payment transactions, the fair value measurement date for non-employee awards was the date the performance of services was completed. Upon adoption of ASU 2018-07 on January 1, 2019, the measurement date for non-employee awards is the date of grant. The compensation expense for non-employees is recognized, without changes in the fair value of the award, in the same period and in the same manner as though we had paid cash for the services, which is typically the vesting period of the respective award.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements included within Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.