ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes in our Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include those described in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in our Annual Report on Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements. Certain tabular information may not foot due to rounding. Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday closest to December 31. "Fiscal 2020" represents the 53-week period ended January 21, 2021."Fiscal 2019" represents the 52-week period ended December 28, 2019."Fiscal 2018" represents the 52-week period ended December 29, 2018.
Overview
We provide parts cleaning, containerized waste management, used oil collection, vacuum truck services, antifreeze recycling, and field services, and we own and operate a used oil re-refinery where we re-refine used lubricating oils into high quality lubricant base oil and other products. We are the second largest provider of industrial and hazardous waste services to small and mid-sized customers in both the vehicle maintenance and manufacturing industries, and we have the second largest used oil re-refining capacity in North America. Our services help our customers manage their used chemicals and liquid and solid wastes, while also helping to minimize their regulatory burdens. We operate from a network of 89 branch facilities providing services to customers in 45 states and parts of Canada. We conduct business through two principal operating segments: Environmental Services and Oil Business.
Our Environmental Services segment revenues are generated primarily from providing parts cleaning, containerized waste management, vacuum truck, antifreeze recycling services, and field services. Revenues from this segment accounted for 72% of our total revenues for fiscal 2020. In the Environmental Services segment, we define and measure same-branch revenues for a given period as the subset of all our branches that have been open and operating throughout and between the periods being compared, and we refer to these as established branches. We calculate average revenues per working day by dividing our revenues by the number of non-holiday weekdays in the applicable fiscal year or fiscal quarter.
Our Oil Business segment consists primarily of our used oil collection and used oil re-refining activities, which accounted for 28% of our total revenue for fiscal 2020.
We have established prices for our services primarily based on the perceived value of those services in the marketplace. Our customer agreements typically provide for annual renewal and price increases. With respect to our oil product sales, some prices are set through contracts or purchase orders with customers, which may be based on the market prices of an underlying commodity or market indicator.
Our operating costs include the costs of the materials we use in our products and services, such as used oil collected from customers or purchased from third party collectors, solvent, and other chemicals. The used solvent that we retrieve from customers in our product reuse program is accounted for as a reduction in our net cost of solvent under operating costs, whether placed in inventory or sold to a purchaser for reuse. Changes in the price of crude oil can impact operating costs indirectly as it may impact the price we pay for solvent or our cost to obtain used oil, although we attempt to offset volatility in the oil markets by managing the spread between our costs to procure used oil and the prices we charge for our products and services. Operating
costs also include transportation of solvents and waste, payments to third parties to recycle or dispose of the waste materials that we collect, and the costs of operating our re-refinery, recycling centers, hubs, and branch system including personnel costs (including commissions), facility rent, truck leases, fuel, and maintenance. Our operating costs as a percentage of sales generally increase in relation to the number of new branch openings. As new branches achieve route density and scale efficiencies, our operating costs as a percentage of sales generally decrease.
We use profit before corporate selling, general, and administrative expenses ("SG&A") as a key measure of segment profitability. We define profit before SG&A as revenue less operating costs and depreciation and amortization from operations.
Our selling, general, and administrative expenses include the costs of performing centralized business functions, including sales management at or above the regional level, business management, billing, receivables management, accounting and finance, information technology, environmental health and safety, and legal.
We operate a used oil re-refinery located in Indianapolis, Indiana, through which we re-refine used oil into high quality lubricant base oil and other products. We supply the base oil to firms that produce and market finished lubricants. Our re-refinery has an annual nameplate capacity of approximately 75 million gallons of used oil feedstock, allowing it to produce approximately 49 million gallons of lubricating base oil per year when operating at capacity.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies are those that both are important to the accurate portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results and require subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
In order to prepare financial statements that conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, commonly referred to as GAAP, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Certain estimates are particularly sensitive due to their significance to the financial statements and the possibility that future events may be materially different from our expectations.
We have identified the following accounting policies as those that require us to make the most subjective or complex judgments in order to fairly present our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Actual results in these areas could differ materially from management's estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and contingent consideration be recorded as of the date of acquisition at their respective fair values. It further requires acquisition-related costs to be recognized separately from the acquisition and expensed as incurred and restructuring costs to be expensed in periods subsequent to the acquisition date.
Identifiable Intangible Assets
The fair value of intangible assets may be based on material judgments made by management. We sometimes engage third party valuation appraisal firms to assist us in determining the fair values and useful lives of the assets acquired. Such valuations and useful life determinations require us to make material estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies, and also include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows to be earned from the continued operation of the acquired business and discount rates applied in determining the present value of those cash flows. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates, or actual results. These intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated economic lives.
Goodwill
In each of fiscal years 2018, 2019, and 2020, the Company performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether the two-step quantitative impairment test was necessary. The Oil Business reporting unit had zero goodwill throughout each of these fiscal years. Based on the qualitative assessments in each year, the Company concluded it is more likely than not that the fair value of the Environmental Services reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount including goodwill, and therefore the two-step quantitative test was not necessary and no impairment was indicated.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount and do not bear interest. Consistent with industry practices, we require payment from most customers within 30 days of invoice date. Our amounts due from customers are stated at their net estimated realizable value. The allowance for uncollectible accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable lifetime-expected credit losses in existing accounts receivable and is determined based on our historical collections experience, age of the receivable, knowledge of the customer and the condition of the general economy and industry as a whole. The Company does not have any off-balance-sheet credit exposure related to its customers. In the last five years, our provisions for uncollectible accounts have averaged 0.3% of sales.
Inventory
Inventory consists primarily of used oil, processed oil, catalyst, new and used solvents, new and used antifreeze products, new and refurbished parts cleaning machines, drums, and other items. Inventories are valued at the lower of first-in, first-out ("FIFO") cost and net realizable value, net of any reserves for excess, obsolete, or unsalable inventory. We perform a physical inventory count on a periodic basis and use the results of these counts to determine inventory quantities. The quantities are used to help determine the value of our inventory. We continually monitor our inventory levels at each of our distribution locations and evaluate inventories for excess or slow-moving items.
In evaluating inventory for impairment, the Company considers factors that may impact the valuation of inventory, including declines in net realizable value. If circumstances indicate the cost basis of inventories exceed their net realizable value, inventories are reduced to net realizable value. In fiscal 2020, we recorded no inventory impairment charges.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangibles subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. During fiscal 2020, we recorded impairment charges to long-lived assets relating to properties held for sale in Wilmington, Delaware and Ft. Pierce, Florida. Impairment charges recorded were approximately $1.4 million for the write-down of these properties to their fair market value. There were no impairment charges in fiscal 2019. Assets to be disposed of are separately presented in the balance sheet and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell, and are no longer be depreciated.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruption and volatility on a global scale resulting in, among other things, an economic slowdown. In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, national and local governments around the world have instituted certain measures, including travel bans, prohibitions on group events and gatherings, shutdowns of certain businesses, curfews, shelter-in-place orders and recommendations to practice social distancing. As our operations have been deemed essential, we have taken several measures to combat the COVID-19 downturn which have resulted in attenuating activity and, in some cases, required temporary closures of certain of our facilities. In addition, we have taken steps to minimize the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic through-out our business and to protect the safety of our employees and customers. The duration of these measures is unknown and may be extended, and additional measures may be necessary.
As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, some of our customers have permanently or temporarily closed their businesses, limited our access to their businesses, or have a decreased demand for our products and services due to a slowdown in the demand for their own products or services. While we experienced a material decrease in activity in both of our Environmental Services and our Oil Business segments during the second quarter of fiscal 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw continued improvement in our business through-out the second half of the year compared to what we believed was the low point of this downturn during the second quarter of 2020.
Entering this economic downturn, we had a strong balance sheet which we expected would position us to take advantage of some of the opportunities we believed would be in front of us once as we emerged from this challenging time. During fiscal 2020, we were able to generate positive operating and overall cash flow as our business continued to recover from the depths of
the pandemic impact. We do not expect to have to access our revolving line of credit due to negative impacts to our business from the pandemic and we remained in compliance with the covenants in our bank Credit Facility as of the end of fiscal 2020.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted and is dependent on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic and the related length of its impact on the global economy, and any new information that may emerge concerning the COVID-19 outbreak and the actions to contain it or treat its impact. The continued impact on our business as a result of COVID-19 pandemic could result in a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition, prospects and the trading prices of our securities in the near-term and beyond 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
Fiscal Year Ended January 2, 2021 versus Fiscal Year Ended December 28, 2019
For discussion of our fiscal 2019 results of operations and comparison with fiscal 2018 results of operations, please refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019.
The following table sets forth certain operating data as a percentage of revenues for the periods indicated:
Revenues
In fiscal 2020, we generated $406.0 million of revenue compared to prior year revenue of $444.4 million, a decrease of $38.4 million, or 8.7%. The Company's 2020 fiscal year comprised of 256 working days compared to 253 working days in fiscal 2019. On a sales-per-working day basis, revenue decreased approximately 9.7% in fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year.
Revenue from our Environmental Services segment decreased $12.0 million, or 4.0%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in revenue was mainly due to the impacts of COVID-19 related volume declines in our field services, parts cleaning, containerized waste, and antifreeze product and service lines, partially offset by favorable pricing in our parts cleaning and containerized waste businesses, along with volume increases in our vacuum services business.
Revenue from our Oil Business decreased $26.5 million, or 18.7%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to lower volumes of base oil gallons sold along with lower base oil pricing. During fiscal 2020, the average selling price for our base oil product decreased approximately 16%, along with a decline of approximately 6% in base oil gallons sold compared to fiscal 2019.
Operating costs
Operating costs decreased $28.0 million, or 8%, to $321.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared to $349.6 million in fiscal 2019. The decrease was mainly driven by lower demand for our products and services which resulted in lower variable costs, along with the implementation of cost control initiatives by the Company due to the impacts of COVID-19.
We expect that in the future our operating costs in the Environmental Services business will continue to increase as our service volume increases; however, a decrease in crude oil prices could partially offset this cost increase because a decrease in price could cause a decline in the price we pay for parts cleaning solvent and diesel fuel. Whether or not we have an increase in service volume, an increase in the price of crude oil could result in an increase in operating costs in the Environmental Services segment since this will likely result in an increase in the price we pay for parts cleaning solvent and diesel fuel. In the Oil Business segment, our operating costs could increase or decrease in the future depending on changes in the price for crude oil which could directly impact our used oil collection costs and processing costs at our re-refinery.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $3.1 million, or 6.2%, from fiscal 2019 to $47.1 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by lower travel costs and lower share-based compensation expense, partially offset by higher office salaries and software licensing fees. Overall, selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues increased slightly to 12.7% in fiscal 2020 from 12.2% in fiscal 2019 due to the decrease in revenue, partially offset by lower overall SG&A expense.
Other (income) expense - net
Other (income) - net was $5.4 million for fiscal 2020 driven mainly by a $6.5 million reversal of settlement claims related to a class action lawsuit referred to below, partially offset by $1.4 million of impairment charges relating to the closure of the Company's facility in Wilmington Delaware. Other expense - net of $13.5 million for fiscal 2019 primarily consists of an $11.0 million charge taken in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019 as a result of the settlement of a class action lawsuit to resolve claims made against us in litigation pertaining to fuel surcharges. In addition, approximately $2.7 million of expense was related primarily to costs and asset write-offs associated with site closure.
Interest expense - net
Interest expense - net was $1.3 million for fiscal 2020. The Company recorded interest expense of $1.6 million, of which approximately $0.9 million of interest expense was on our term loan, and $0.3 million was amortization of debt issuance costs, along with $0.4 million of finance lease interest expense. The Company also recorded approximately $0.4 million of interest income in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2019, the Company recorded interest expense of $1.7 million, of which $1.2 million of interest expense relates to borrowings under our Credit Agreement, and $0.3 million was amortization of debt issuance costs. No interest was capitalized in fiscal 2020 or fiscal 2019.
Provision for income taxes
The Company's effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 was 28.8% compared to 27.0% in fiscal 2019. The difference in the effective tax rate is principally attributable to deductibility of certain fringe benefits as well as expiration of state tax credits. See footnote 15 - Income Taxes for more information.
Segment Information
The following table presents revenues by segment:
Revenue from our Environmental Services segment decreased $12.0 million, or 4.0%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in revenue was mainly due to the impacts of COVID-19 related volume declines in our field services, parts cleaning, containerized waste, and antifreeze product and service lines, partially offset by favorable pricing in our parts cleaning and containerized waste businesses, along with volume increases in our vacuum services business.
Revenue from our Oil Business decreased $26.5 million, or 18.7%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to lower volumes of base oil gallons sold along with lower base oil pricing. During fiscal 2020, the average
selling price for our base oil product decreased approximately 16%, along with a decline of approximately 6% in base oil gallons sold compared to fiscal 2019.
Segment Profit (Loss) before Corporate Selling, General and Administrative Expenses ("SG&A")
The following table presents profit by segment before corporate SG&A:
*Includes depreciation and amortization related to operating activity but not depreciation and amortization related to corporate selling, general, and administrative activity. For further discussion see Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
In fiscal 2020, Environmental Services profit before SG&A expense decreased $11.6 million, or 15.3%. The decrease was mainly due to lower revenues stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic and related shelter-in-place orders. Profit before corporate SG&A expense as a percentage of revenues in the Environmental Services segment decreased to 22.1% in fiscal 2020 compared to 25.0% in fiscal 2019. The decline in margin was mainly due to lower revenue, higher third-party disposal and insurance costs, partially offset by lower health and welfare costs.
The sale of used solvent generated by customers participating in our product reuse program for parts cleaning is not accounted for as revenues, but rather as a reduction in our net cost of solvent under operating costs. In both fiscal 2020 and 2019, the impact of used solvent sales was immaterial.
In fiscal 2020, Oil Business profit before corporate SG&A expense decreased $4.7 million, or 101.0%, compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in profit before corporate SG&A expense was mainly due to a narrowing of the spread between the selling price of our base oil and the cost to collect used oil feedstock. The decrease in spread was primarily due to a material decrease in the demand for finished lubricants mainly driven by the COVID-19 pandemic which lowered demand for finished lubricants which in-turn lowered demand for our base oil products. These events led to an approximate 16% decline the selling price for our base oil products compared to fiscal 2019.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, cash and cash equivalents were $67.6 million and $60.7 million, respectively. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations and funds available to borrow under our term loan and revolving bank credit facility.
Debt and Financing Arrangements
The Company's Credit Agreement, dated February 21, 2017 ("Credit Agreement"), provides for borrowings of up to $95.0 million, subject to the satisfaction of certain terms and conditions, comprised of a term loan of $30.0 million and up to $65.0 million of borrowings under a revolving loan. The actual amount available under the revolving loan portion of the Credit Agreement is limited by the Company's total leverage ratio. The amount available to draw at any point in time would be further reduced by any standby letters of credit issued.
Loans made under the Credit Agreement may be Base Rate Loans or LIBOR Rate Loans, at the election of the Company subject to certain exceptions. Base Rate Loans have an interest rate equal to (i) the higher of (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (b) the London Interbank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 1%, or (c) Bank of America's prime rate, plus (ii) a variable margin of between 0.75% and 1.75% depending on the Company's total leverage ratio, calculated on a consolidated basis.
LIBOR rate loans have an interest rate equal to (i) the LIBOR rate plus (ii) a variable margin of between 1.75% and 2.75% depending on the Company's total leverage ratio. Amounts borrowed under the Credit Agreement are secured by a security interest in substantially all of the Company's tangible and intangible assets.
On July 27, 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, announced that it intends to phase out the London Interbank Offered Rate by the end of 2021. We expect that widespread use of LIBOR will transition to alternative interest rates in the near future. Since loans made under our Credit Agreement may be based on LIBOR based loans, the phasing out of LIBOR may adversely affect interest rates that could result in higher borrowing costs and higher interest expense. The Company is currently evaluating its options under our Credit Agreement, but at this time we cannot reasonably estimate the impact to our financial statements.
The Credit Agreement contains customary terms and provisions (including representations, covenants, and conditions) for transactions of this type. Certain covenants, among other things, restrict the Company's and its Subsidiaries' ability to incur indebtedness, grant liens, make investments and sell assets. The Credit Agreement contains customary events of default, covenants and representations and warranties. Financial covenants include:
•An interest coverage ratio (based on interest expense and EBITDA) of at least 3.5 to 1.0;
•A total leverage ratio no greater than 3.0 to 1.0, provided that in the event of a permitted acquisition having an aggregate consideration equal to $10.0 million or more, at the Borrower’s election, the foregoing 3.00 to 1.00 shall be deemed to be 3.25 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter in which such permitted acquisition occurs and the three immediately following fiscal quarters and will thereafter revert to 3.00 to 1.00;
•A capital expenditures covenant limiting capital expenditures to $100.0 million plus, if the capital expenditures permitted have been fully utilized, an additional amount for the remaining term of the Agreement equal to 35% of EBITDA for the thirteen “four-week” periods most recently ended immediately prior to the full utilization of such $100.0 million basket
As of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement. As of January 2, 2021, and December 28, 2019, the Company had $4.0 million and $1.1 million of standby letters of credit issued, respectively, and $61.0 million and $63.9 million was available for borrowing under the bank credit facility, respectively.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, available borrowings, and other sources of financings will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. We cannot guarantee this will be the case or that our assumptions regarding revenues and expenses underlying this belief will be accurate. If, in the future, we require more liquidity than is available to us under our credit facility, we may need to raise additional funds through debt or equity offerings. Adequate funds may not be available when needed or may not be available on terms favorable to us, especially given the current condition of the financial credit markets. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, dilution to existing stockholders may result. If we raise additional funds by obtaining loans from third parties, the terms of those financing arrangements may include negative covenants or other restrictions on our business that could impair our operational flexibility, and would also require us to fund additional interest expense. If funding is insufficient at any time in the future, we may be unable to develop or enhance our products or services, take advantage of business opportunities, or respond to competitive pressures, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Summary of Cash Flow Activity
The most material items affecting the comparison of our operating activities for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 are summarized below:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities -
•Earnings - Our increase in net income during fiscal 2020 favorably impacted our net cash provided by operating activities by $3.2 million compared to fiscal 2019.
•Accounts Receivable - The decrease in accounts receivable had a favorable impact on cash provided by operating activities of $11.1 million for fiscal 2020.
•Accounts Payable- The decrease in accounts payable in fiscal 2020 unfavorably affected cash flows from operating activities by $10.5 million.
•Non-cash item- During the second quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company reversed $6.5 million of an $11.0 million non-cash charge from a class action settlement agreement in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities -
•Capital expenditures - We made capital expenditures as follows:
Business acquisitions, net of cash acquired - We used $10.0 million for an acquisition during the second quarter of 2020. See Note 3 - Business Combinations to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for more information.
•Net Cash Used in Financing Activities - The Company dispersed $2.8 million to acquire the remaining ownership interest in one of our subsidiaries.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual commitments consist of operating leases and short-term purchasing commitments. We anticipate that we will experience an increase in our lease commitments consistent with anticipated growth in operations, infrastructure, and personnel and additional resources devoted to building our network of hubs and branches.
The following table summarizes our existing obligations as of January 2, 2021:
Payments Due by Fiscal Year
(In thousands)
(1) We lease railcars, office space, warehouse facilities, equipment and vehicles under non-cancelable operating lease agreements which expire at various dates through 2030.
(2) Finance leases include a fleet of mobile equipment.
(3) Excludes interest payments.
(4) Interest on long term debt is calculated at the contractual rate or, in the case of the Term A loan, at the effective rate as of January 2, 2021.
(5) Our purchase obligations are open purchase orders as of January 2, 2021, and are primarily for capital expenditures, used oil, catalyst, disposal, and solvent. They represent expected payments to third party service providers and other commitments entered into during the normal course of our business. While our purchase obligations are generally cancellable with or without notice without penalty, certain vendor agreements provide for cancellation fees or penalties depending on the terms of the contract.
(6) Unrecognized tax benefits have not been included because no reasonable estimate can be made as to the likelihood, dollar amount, or timing of potential future cash expenditures.
We offer a guarantee for our services. To date, costs relating to this guarantee have not been material.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of the end of fiscal 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.