ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes filed as a part of this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors currently known to us, which could cause our financial results subsequent fiscal years to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, those forward-looking statements. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on this information which speaks only as of the date of this report. We are not obligated to update this information, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required by law.
Overview
Please refer to “Item 1. Business” for a general description of our business and “Item 2. Properties” for details regarding the location and key metrics about our various properties.
Consolidated Financial Data
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
We currently generate revenue from the following sources: (1) sales of single-family homes, (2) sales of developed lots and other real estate investments, and (3) sale and transport of raw materials to third parties. We recognize revenue on both the sale of homes and land when title and possession of the property has transferred to the buyer. Revenue from the sale and/or transport of raw materials is recognized at the time the service is performed.
Our revenue increased by approximately 63% to $50,397,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $30,953,500 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue growth was attributable to an increase in the number of home and finished lot sales during the period. In 2019, we sold and closed 46 homes in two communities, and 61 finished building lots in one community. In 2020, we sold and closed 76 homes in five communities and 104 finished building lots in two communities.
Gross Margin
Our gross margin percentage decreased to 4.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 10.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our significant components of cost of sales are land and land development, direct vertical costs of construction, and interest and other indirect costs. If cost of sales interest is excluded, the gross margin percentage would be 10.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 14.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. We believe this information is meaningful as it isolates the impact that indebtedness has on gross margin and permits readers to make better comparisons with our competitors who adjust gross margins in a similar fashion. Our decrease in gross margins from 2020 to 2019 was a result of (i) unanticipated costs related to the 104 finished lots that were sold to a national home builder, as more blasting and drilling was done on the site than initially planned, which caused cost overruns and timing delays, contributing to increased financing costs; and (ii) three home sales from one of our legacy communities had negative margins as a result of extended carrying costs when the homes sold slower than initially anticipated. Each project has margins unique to the subdivision based on the cost of the land, development cost, and product type sold.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased $2,027,100 or 58.5 %, to $5,493,900 during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $3,466,800 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to the following:
1. Insurance costs increased by $583,900, primarily driven by the purchase of directors and officer’s insurance (“D&O Insurance”);
2. Additional payroll expense of $485,400 related to staffing changes and compensation increases;
3. Depreciation and amortization of $297,600 related to the acquisition of heavy construction equipment;
4. Commission payments of $259,500 related to increased sales of construction materials;
5. Professional fees of $172,100 for consulting fees not directly attributable to our initial public offering; and
6. Stock compensation of $115,700.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense decreased by $124,600 or 45% to $(154,600) for the year ended December 31, 2020, from expense of $(279,200) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by forgiveness of our PPP loan of $562,300 offset by loss on the sale of equipment of $267,700 and forfeited escrow deposits of $80,300.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
Our income tax benefit (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 is reflective of our effective annual tax rate of (3.2)% due to the benefit expected to be realized from net operating losses which had a valuation allowance per ASC 740 applied to our deferred tax asset. Income tax benefit (provision) decreased $751,400 or (118%) to $(116,800) for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $634,600 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Income (Loss)
Our net income (loss) decreased by $3,959,100 for the year ended December 31, 2020 with a net loss of $(3,762,100) from net income of $197,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net loss is primarily attributable to a decrease in margin and an increase in our operating expenses, as described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal uses of capital were operating expenses, land purchases, land development, home construction, and the payment of routine liabilities. We used funds generated by operations and available borrowings to meet our short-term working capital requirements. We remain focused on generating increasingly positive margins in our homebuilding operations and acquiring desirable land positions in order to maintain a strong balance sheet and keep us poised for growth.
We employ both debt and equity as part of our ongoing financing strategy to provide us with the financial flexibility to access capital on the best terms available. In that regard, we employ prudent leverage levels to finance the acquisition and development of our lots and construction of our homes. Our existing indebtedness is recourse to us and we anticipate that future indebtedness will likewise be recourse.
Our management considers a number of factors when evaluating our level of indebtedness and when making decisions regarding the incurrence of new indebtedness, including the purchase price of assets to be acquired with debt financing, the estimated market value of our assets, and the ability of particular assets, and our Company as a whole, to generate cash flow to cover the expected debt service. Our governing documents do not contain a limitation on the amount of debt we may incur and our board of directors may change our target debt levels at any time without the approval of our shareholders.
The terms of construction loans are one year and range in interest rates from 8% to 40%. The terms of equipment loans are one to five years and range in interest rates from 0.00% to 14.41%.
We intend to finance future acquisitions and developments with the most advantageous source of capital available to us at the time of the transaction, which may include a combination of common and preferred equity, secured and unsecured corporate level debt, property level debt and mortgage financing, and other public, private, or bank debt.
Material Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2020, we had real estate loans (excluding debt discount) of $16,582,400, equipment loans of $5,595,500, and finance leases of $999,400. As of December 31, 2019, we had real estate loans (excluding debt discount) of $25,024,700, equipment loans of $3,476,800, and finance leases of $520,700. The decrease in construction loans is due to sale of lot inventory in 2020 and the increase in equipment and finance loans is due to the purchase of additional construction equipment used to increase our capacity to develop lots as quickly as possible. As of December 31, 2020, we had a D&O insurance loan of $741,200 due to the purchase of D&O insurance. All construction loans are secured by related property and equipment and finance loans by the related equipment. (See footnotes 5, 6, 7, 11, and 12 to the audited financial statements for terms and interest rates.)
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $3,017,800 resulting from a net loss of $(3,762,100), $699,800 in non-cash items, and a $6,080,100 net cash inflow from changes in working capital. Non-cash expenses consisted of $878,700 depreciation and amortization, $267,700 loss on sale of equipment, $115,700 stock compensation, and PPP loan forgiveness $(562,300). The increase in cash resulting from changes in working capital consisted primarily of a $6,755,900 decrease in real estate work in process and change in all other components of working capital of $(675,800).
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used by operating activities was $3,184,900 resulting from net income of $197,000, $588,200 in non-cash items, and a $3,970,100 net cash outflow from changes in working capital. Non-cash items consisted primarily of depreciation and amortization expense of $581,100. The decrease in cash resulting from changes in working capital consisted primarily of a $6,089,900 increase in real estate work in process and increase in accounts payable and accrued expense of $2,969,400.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided in investing activities was $579,200 resulting from proceeds from sale of equipment of $987,200 and for purchase of property and equipment of $408,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used by investing activities was $402,800 for the purchase of equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $1,630,500, the major components of which include $10,789,000 from the issuance of stock, $582,800 from the proceeds of a PPP loan, $10,470,200 net repayment of constructions loans and related party construction loans, repayment of equipment loans of $1,409,000, repayment of a D&O insurance loan of $484,300, and repayment of financing leases of $564,400.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $3,796,800, of which $4,907,100 was from construction loans, repayment of equipment loans of $444,900, repayment of financing leases of $185,100, and distributions of $488,400.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into land purchase contracts in order to procure lots for the construction of our homes. We are subject to customary obligations associated with entering into contracts for the purchase of land and improved lots. These purchase contracts typically require a cash deposit, and the purchase of properties under these contracts is generally contingent upon satisfaction of certain requirements, including obtaining applicable property and development entitlements.
Contractual Obligations Table
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations, including interest payments on long-term debt, as of December 31, 2020, including estimated cash payments due by period.
Inflation
Our homebuilding operations can be adversely impacted by inflation, primarily from higher land, financing, labor, material, and construction costs. In addition, inflation can lead to higher mortgage rates which can significantly affect the affordability of mortgage financing to homebuyers. While we attempt to pass on cost increases to customers through increased prices, when weak housing market conditions exist, we are often unable to offset cost increases with higher selling prices.
NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Nature of Operations
Our principal business activity involves acquiring raw land and developed lots for the purpose of building and selling single family and multi-family dwellings in the Puget Sound region of Washington State, California, and Texas. We utilize our heavy equipment resources to develop an inventory of finished building lots and provide development infrastructure construction, on a contract basis, for other home builders. Single family construction and infrastructure construction contracts vary but are typically less than one year.
On August 1, 2019, we changed our name from Harbor Custom Homes, Inc. to Harbor Custom Development, Inc.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include all of our subsidiaries. For a list of our subsidiaries and our attributable interests in them, please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Basis of Presentation
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operation are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). The following is a summary of our most critical accounting policies. Please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Our board of directors and stockholders approved a 1-for-2.22 reverse split of our common stock, which was effected on April 15, 2020. The reverse split combined each 2.22 shares of our outstanding common stock into one share of common stock. No fractional shares were issued. All references to our securities have been adjusted in the financial statements to reflect the split of our common stock as if it had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented.
All numbers in these financial statements are rounded to the nearest $100.
Reclassification
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current year presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on the reported results of operations.
Use of Estimates
Management uses estimates and assumptions in preparing these financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Those estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported revenues and expenses. Actual results could vary from the estimates that were used.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”) which establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for stock-based employee compensation. It defines a fair value-based method of accounting for an employee stock option or similar equity instrument.
We recognize all forms of share-based payments at their fair value on the grant date, which are based on the estimated number of awards that are ultimately expected to vest.
Options and warrants are valued using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. Grants of share-based payment awards issued to non-employees for services rendered and have been recorded at the fair value of the share-based payment. The grants are amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods, which is generally the vesting period. If an award is granted, but vesting does not occur, any previously recognized compensation expense is reversed in the period related to the termination of service.
Stock-based compensation expenses are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations. Please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our stock based compensation.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Earnings (loss) per share (“EPS”) is the amount of earnings (or loss) attributable to each share of common stock. Pursuant to ASC 260-10-45-10 through 260-10-45-16, basic EPS shall be computed by dividing income available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Income available to common stockholders shall be computed by deducting both the dividends declared in the period on preferred stock (whether or not paid) and the dividends accumulated for the period on cumulative preferred stock (whether or not earned) from income from continuing operations (if that amount appears in the income statement) and also from net income. The computation of diluted EPS is similar to the computation of basic EPS except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the dilutive potential common shares had been issued during the period to reflect the potential dilution that could occur from common shares issuable through contingent shares issuance arrangement, stock options, or warrants.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
For purposes of this disclosure, the fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced sale or liquidation. The carrying amount of our short-term financial instruments approximates fair value due to the relatively short period to maturity for these instruments.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the statement of cash flows, we consider all short-term debt securities purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. There were no cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are reported at the amount we expect to collect from outstanding balances. We provide an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon a review of the outstanding accounts receivable, historical collection information, and existing economic conditions. We determine if receivables are past due based on days outstanding, and amounts are written off when determined to be uncollectible by management. The allowances for doubtful accounts were $0 and $11,300 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Property and Equipment and Depreciation
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Expenditures for major additions and betterments are capitalized. Maintenance and repairs are charged to operations as incurred. Depreciation is computed by the straight-line method (after considering their respective estimated residual values) over the estimated useful lives. Please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Real Estate Assets
Real estate assets are recorded at cost, except when real estate assets are acquired that meet the definition of a business combination in accordance with FASB ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” where acquired assets are recorded at fair value. Interest, property taxes, insurance, and other incremental costs (including salaries) directly related to a project are capitalized during the construction period of major facilities and land improvements. The capitalization period begins when activities to develop the parcel commence and ends when the asset constructed is completed. The capitalized costs are recorded as part of the asset to which they relate and are expensed when the underlying asset is sold.
We capitalized interest from related party borrowings of $1,024,800 and $1,229,400 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We capitalized interest from third-party borrowings of $2,401,400 and $1,563,700 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our real estate assets regarding how a property is classified as “held for sale.”
In addition to our annual assessment of potential triggering events in accordance with ASC 360, we apply a fair value-based impairment test to the net book value assets on an annual basis and on an interim basis if certain events or circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have occurred.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we did not have any projects that qualified for an impairment charge.
Revenue and Cost Recognition
ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), establishes principles for reporting information about the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from the entity’s contract to provide goods or services to customers. Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of a promised good or service. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods or services.
ASC 606 requires us to apply the following steps: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied. Please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our revenue recognition of our real estate and construction materials.
Revenues for Real Estate and Construction Materials
Revenues from contracts with customers are summarized by product category as follows for the years ended December 31:
Cost of Sales
Land acquisition costs are allocated to each lot based on the size of the lot in relation to the size of the total project. Development cost and capitalized interest are allocated to lots sold based on the same criteria.
Costs relating to the handling of recycled construction materials and converting items into usable construction materials for resale are charged to cost of sales as incurred.
Advertising
Costs for designing, producing, and communicating advertising are expensed as incurred. Advertising expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $37,500 and $67,500, respectively.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 842 using the modified retrospective approach and recognized a right of use (“ROU”) asset and related liability on the consolidated balance sheet in the amount of $474,200 related to the operating lease for office and warehouse space.
As part of the adoption, we elected the practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard. Refer to Note 12 - Leases in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional disclosures required by ASC 842.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the estimated future tax effects of net operating loss, credit carryforwards, and temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts measured at the current enacted tax rates. We apply the criteria established the FASB Accounting Standards Update No. 2019-12, Income taxes (Topic 740) to determine if any valuation allowances are needed each year.
We recognize a tax benefit for an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. There are no uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about new accounting pronouncements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no impairment losses recognized for long-lived assets. For further discussion about the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets, please refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Offering Costs Associated with Public Offerings
We comply with the requirements of FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Cost related to the formation and preparation of our initial public offering were approximately $1,401,100 and, together with the underwriters’ discount, were netted against the proceeds of our initial public offering. We also closed on a follow-on public offering in January 2021. During 2020, we incurred approximately $65,100 of capitalizable costs associated with the follow-on public offering, which will be netted against the proceeds of the follow-on public offering in 2021. These costs were capitalized as of December 31, 2020 and are shown on the balance sheet as Deferred Offering Costs.
Seasonality
Historically, the homebuilding industry experiences seasonal fluctuations in quarterly operating results and capital requirements. We typically experience the highest new home order activity in the spring and summer, although this activity is also highly dependent on the number of active selling communities, timing of new community openings, and other market factors. Since it typically takes four to six months to construct a new home, we deliver more homes in the second half of the year as spring and summer home orders convert to home deliveries. Because of this seasonality, home starts, construction costs, and related cash outflows have historically been highest in the second and third quarters and the majority of cash receipts from home deliveries occurs during the second half of the year. We expect this seasonal pattern to continue over the long-term, although it may be affected by volatility in the homebuilding industry.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act, and we are eligible to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies.” These provisions include:
● a requirement to present only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in a public offering registration statement;
● an exemption to provide less than five years of selected financial data in a public offering registration statement;
● an exemption from the auditor attestation requirement of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (“SOX”) in the assessment of the emerging growth company’s internal control over financial reporting;
● an exemption from the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards until they would apply to private companies; and
● an exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board requiring mandatory audit partner rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report in which the auditor would be required to provide additional information about the audit and the financial statements of the issuer.
We have elected to adopt the reduced disclosure requirements available to emerging growth companies. As a result of this election, the information that we provide in this Annual Report may be different than the information you may receive from other public companies in which you hold equity interests.
We will cease to be an “emerging growth company” upon the earliest of: (i) the end of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering, (ii) the first fiscal year after our annual gross revenues are $1.07 billion or more, (iii) the date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities or (iv) as of the end of any fiscal year in which the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700 million as of the end of the second quarter of that fiscal year.