ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
H-CYTE, Inc is a hybrid-biopharmaceutical company dedicated to developing and delivering new treatments for patients with chronic respiratory and pulmonary disorders. During the last 18 months, the Company has evolved into two separate verticals under its Healthcare Medical Biosciences Division with its entrance into the biologics development space (“Biologics Vertical”). This new vertical is complementary to the Company’s current Lung Health Institute (LHI) autologous infusion therapy business (“Infusion Vertical”) and represents a high growth opportunity to develop a robust pipeline of FDA approved therapeutics, focused on underserved disease states. This focus on next generation treatments has the potential to bring advancements to patients who have had few options beyond managing their symptoms with inhalers and nebulizers.
To support the Company’s approach to clinical development for biologics, the Company sought and was granted external verification that the results from LHI’s real-world database of patients, who were treated with LHI’s autologous infusion therapy, was valid. Using advanced statistical modeling, the Company generated real world evidence validating that its proprietary PRP- PBMC therapy provides statistically significant improvement in FEV1 at both three months and twelve months, as well as an excellent safety profile and quality of life advantages. This evidence was accepted for publication in January 2021 and appears in the, “Journal of Regenerative Medicine & Biology Research.”
A second publication has been submitted that will further support the Company’s autologous infusion therapy. This real-world study focuses on the sentinel measurement of lung disorders. Entitled, “FEV1 Absolute Volume Analysis and predicted FEV changes” this study will focus primarily on efficacy of the Infusion Vertical’s PRP-PBMC therapy in its patient population. In addition, the company is seeking FDA clearance of the device used in its Infusion Vertical to have a specific indication for lung disorders.
The Company’s Biologics Vertical has commenced preclinical work in support of filing an Investigational New Drug Application (“IND”) with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). The Company is anticipating an initial submission during the second half of 2021.
On July 11, 2019, MedoveX Corp. (“MedoveX”) changed its name to H-CYTE, Inc. (“H-CYTE” or the “Company”) by filing a Certificate of Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Certificate of Incorporation”) with the Secretary of the State of Nevada. The name change and the Company’s new symbol, HCYT, became effective with FINRA on July 15, 2019. H-CYTE was incorporated in Nevada on July 30, 2013 as SpineZ Corp.
On October 18, 2018, H-CYTE (formerly named MedoveX) entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (“APA”) with Regenerative Medicine Solutions, LLC, RMS Shareholder, LLC (“Shareholder”), Lung Institute LLC (“LI”), RMS Lung Institute Management LLC (“RMS LI Management”) and Cognitive Health Institute Tampa, LLC (“CHIT”), (collectively “RMS”). On January 8, 2019, the APA was amended, and the Company acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of RMS as reported in the 8-K/A filed in March of 2019. Based on the terms of the APA and its amendment (collectively the “APA”), the former RMS members had voting control of the combined company as of the closing of the RMS acquisition. For accounting purposes, the acquisition transaction has been treated as a reverse acquisition whereby the Company is deemed to have been acquired by RMS and the historical financial statements prior to the acquisition date of January 8, 2019 now reflect the historical financial statements of RMS.
Impact of COVID-19
The coronavirus outbreak (“COVID-19”) has adversely affected the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in 2020. The impact of the outbreak of COVID-19 on the businesses and the economy in the United States and the rest of the world is and is expected to continue to be significant. The extent to which COVID-19 outbreak will continue to impact business and the economy is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. Accordingly, the Company cannot predict the extent to which its financial condition and results of operation will be affected. The Company took steps to protect its vulnerable patient base (elderly patients suffering from chronic lung disease) by cancelling all treatments effective March 23, 2020 through the end of July 2020. The Company made the decision in late March 2020, to layoff approximately 40% of its employee base, including corporate and clinical employees and to cease operations at the LHI clinics in Tampa, Nashville, Scottsdale, Pittsburgh, and Dallas. The Company reopened operations in August 2020 at its clinics in Tampa, Nashville, and Scottsdale. The clinics in Pittsburgh and Dallas did not reopen and were closed permanently.
The Company believed these expense reductions were necessary during the unexpected COVID-19 pandemic. Due to COVID-19, the Company was not able to generate revenue from March 23, 2020 until August 2020. With the Company’s revenue-generating activities suspended for a portion of 2020 and the negative impact that COVID-19 has had on its medical biosciences division, the Company will need to raise cash from debt and equity offerings to continue its operations. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in doing so. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity.
The Company has updated its business model to decrease corporate overhead and marketing expense to significantly reduce expenses. The Company believes as COVID-19 begins to dissipate due to vaccinations being administered nationwide, patients will again begin to travel to one of the LHI clinics for treatment. The Company continues to focus on developing a new FDA approved biologic for the treatment of chronic lung disease.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth certain operational data including their respective percentages of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
H-Cyte, Inc
Statement of Operations
Revenue and Gross Profit
Revenue is derived predominantly from the Company’s Biosciences division, which resulted in revenue, net of allowance for refunds, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, of approximately $2,151,000 and $8,347,000, respectively. The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year is attributable to suspending operations, the permanent closure of two of the five LHI clinics, and the ongoing effects due to COVID-19 to the Biosciences division.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company generated a gross profit totaling approximately $1,384,000 (64% of revenue) and $6,294,000 (75% of revenue), respectively. The decrease in revenue is due to the effects of COVID-19. Gross profit decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the Company using part-time medical staff to treat its patients in Tampa and Scottsdale causing cost of sales for patient care to increase.
Salaries and Related Costs
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company incurred approximately $3,199,000 and $8,646,000, respectively, in salaries and related costs. Included in salaries and related costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 was approximately $1,690,000 in compensation expense related to the common stock issued to Mr. William E. Horne, former Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”), on April 25, 2019. These shares were fully vested upon the issuance of a restricted stock award. Excluding the non-recurring stock compensation expense of approximately $1,690,000, the Company realized a decrease in salaries and related costs for the periods ending December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, due to its recent cost reduction measures effective in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company made the decision in late March 2020, to layoff approximately 40% of its employee base, including corporate and clinical employees and to cease operations at the LHI clinics in Tampa, Nashville, Scottsdale, Pittsburgh, and Dallas. The Company reopened operations in August 2020 at its clinics in Tampa, Nashville, and Scottsdale. The clinics in Pittsburgh and Dallas did not reopen and were closed permanently.
Other General and Administrative
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company incurred approximately $3,747,000 and $6,847,000, respectively, in other general and administrative costs. The decrease is attributable to cost saving measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company made the decision in late March 2020, to layoff approximately 40% of its employee base, including corporate and clinical employees and to cease operations at the LHI clinics in Tampa, Nashville, Scottsdale, Pittsburgh, and Dallas. The Company reopened operations in August 2020 at its clinics in Tampa, Nashville, and Scottsdale. The clinics in Pittsburgh and Dallas did not reopen and were closed permanently.
Advertising
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had approximately $297,000 and $4,910,000, respectively, in advertising costs. The decrease is attributable to a shift in the Company’s marketing plan and cost saving measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company re-evaluated its marketing plan in 2020 and decided to significantly reduce marketing spend during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loss on Impairment
The Company recorded a loss on impairment for its DenerveX technology of approximately $2,944,000 and its goodwill totaling approximately $12,564,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. As the Company has determined that the DenerveX System no longer represents part of its strategic plans for the future, the loss on impairment of the technology was recorded. The Company also determined the fair value of the reporting unit was less than the carrying amount of goodwill. As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2019 the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company did not have impairment losses.
Depreciation & Amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized approximately $81,000 in depreciation and amortization expense, compared to approximately $834,000 in 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to amortization of the technology intangible asset acquired in the Merger for the year ended December 31, 2019. The expense for 2020 was significantly lower due to no amortization recorded in 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense was approximately $1,463,000 and $299,000 respectively. The increase is attributable to new financing being arranged for the year ended December 31, 2020 along with the closing of the Rights Offering on September 11, 2020.
The change in fair value of redemption put liability and change in fair value of the derivative liability - warrants for the year ended December 31, 2019 were approximately $347,000 and $827,000, respectively, and was a result of the assumption of the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock in the Merger and the Series D Convertible Preferred Stock financing in 2019, respectively. The change in fair value of redemption put liability and change in fair value of the derivative liability - warrants for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $273,000 and $2,987,000, respectively, and was a result of the change in fair value at the end of each reporting period and was subsequently reclassified to equity at the close of the Rights Offering (see Note 12).
Liquidity, Sources of Liquidity, and Going Concern
The Company had approximately $1,641,000 and $1,424,000 of cash on hand at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company incurred net losses of approximately $6,459,000 and $29,808,000 for the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company has historically incurred losses from operations and expects to continue to generate negative cash flows as the Company’s revenue activities are suspended and as the Company implements its business plan. The consolidated financial statements are prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) as applicable to a going concern.
The Biosciences division will incur losses until sufficient revenue is attained utilizing the infusion of capital resources to expand marketing and sales initiatives along with the development of a biologics protocol and taking that protocol through the FDA process.
COVID-19 has adversely affected the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company took steps to protect its vulnerable patient base (elderly patients suffering from chronic lung disease) by cancelling all treatments effective March 23, 2020 through July 2020. The Company also made the decision in late March, to layoff approximately 40% of its employee base, including corporate and clinical employees, and to cease operations at the LHI clinics located in Tampa, Scottsdale, Pittsburgh, Nashville, and Dallas. The Company resumed operations in August at the Tampa, Nashville, Scottsdale, and Pittsburgh clinics. The Pittsburgh clinic ceased operations permanently at the end of October 2020. The Dallas clinic did not re-open and was closed permanently. The Company believed these expense reductions were necessary during the unexpected COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company has updated its business model to decrease corporate overhead and marketing expense to significantly reduce expenses. The Company believes that as COVID-19 begins to dissipate due to vaccinations being administered nationwide, that patients will again feel comfortable traveling to one of the LHI clinics for treatment. The Company continues to focus on developing a new FDA approved cellular therapy for the treatment of chronic lung disease.
Going Concern
The recent coronavirus outbreak (“COVID-19”) has adversely affected the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. The impact of the outbreak of COVID-19 on the economy in the U.S. and the rest of the world is and is expected to continue to be significant. The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak will continue to impact the economy is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. Accordingly, the Company cannot predict the extent to which its financial condition and results of operation will be affected.
The Company has updated its business model to decrease corporate overhead and marketing expense to significantly reduce expenses. The Company believes that as COVID-19 begins to dissipate due to vaccinations being administered nationwide, that patients will again feel comfortable traveling to one of the LHI clinics for treatment. The Company’s Biologics Vertical has commenced preclinical work in support of filing an Investigational New Drug Application (“IND”) with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). The Company is anticipating an initial submission during the second half of 2021.
With the Company’s revenue-generating activities hindered significantly by COVID-19, the Company will need to raise cash from debt and equity offerings to continue clinical operations and to take the biologics protocol to the FDA. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in doing so.
Although cost reduction measures were taken in 2020, due to COVID-19, the present level of cash is insufficient to satisfy the Company’s current operating requirements. The Company is seeking additional sources of funds from the sale of equity or debt securities or through a credit facility.
There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional funds or that the terms and conditions of any future financings will be acceptable to the Company or its shareholders. In the event the Company is unable to fund its operations from existing cash on hand, operating cash flows, additional borrowings, or raising equity capital, there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Fair Value Measurements
We measure certain non-financial assets at fair value on a non-recurring basis. These non-recurring valuations include evaluating assets such as long-lived assets and non-amortizing intangible assets for impairment; allocating value to assets in an acquired asset group; and applying accounting for business combinations and derivatives.
We use the fair value measurement framework to value these assets and report the fair values in the periods in which they are recorded or written down.
The fair value measurement framework includes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes observable and unobservable inputs used to measure fair values in their broad levels. These levels from highest to lowest priority are as follows:
● Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical assets or liabilities;
● Level 2: Quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or liabilities or observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data; and
● Level 3: Unobservable inputs or valuation techniques that are used when little or no market data is available.
The determination of fair value and the assessment of a measurement’s placement within the hierarchy requires judgment. Level 3 valuations often involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity. Level 3 valuations may require the use of various cost, market, or income valuation methodologies applied to unobservable management estimates and assumptions. Management’s assumptions could vary depending on the asset or liability valued and the valuation method used. Such assumptions could include estimates of prices, earnings, costs, actions of market participants, market factors, or the weighting of various valuation methods. We may also engage external advisors to assist us in determining fair value, as appropriate.
Although we believe that the recorded fair value of our financial instruments is appropriate at December 31, 2020, these fair values may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the liability method of accounting for income taxes, which requires recognition of temporary differences between financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities, measured by enacted tax rates. A valuation allowance will be recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when necessary.
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and certain state jurisdictions. The tax years that could be subject to federal audit are 2017, 2018, and 2019.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as outlined in the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers, which requires that five basic criteria be met before revenue can be recognized: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identity the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price; and (v) recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfied a performance obligation.
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with U.S. GAAP as outlined in the FASB ASC 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers, which requires that five steps be completed to determine when revenue can be recognized: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identity the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price; and (v) recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company records revenue under ASC 606 when control is transferred to the customer, which is consistent with past practice. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
The Company uses a standard pricing model for the types of cellular therapy treatments that is offered to its patients. The transaction price accounts for medical, surgical, facility, and office services rendered by LHI for consented procedures and is recorded as revenue. The Company recognizes revenue when the terms of a contract with a patient are satisfied.
The Company offers two types of cellular therapy treatments to their patients.
1) The first type of treatment includes medical services rendered typically over a two-day period in which the patient receives cellular therapy. For this treatment type, revenue is recognized in full at time of service.
2) The Company also offers a four-day treatment in which medical services are rendered typically over a two-day period and then again, approximately three months later, medical services are rendered for an additional two days of treatment. Payment is collected in full for both service periods at the time the first treatment is rendered. Revenue is recognized when services are performed based on the estimated stand-alone selling price for each session of treatment. The Company has deferred recognition of revenue amounting to approximately $634,000 and $1,046,000 at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Management performed an analysis of its customer refund history for refunds issued related to prior year’s revenue. Management used the results of this historical refund analysis to record a reserve for anticipated future refunds related to recognized revenue. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the estimated allowance for refunds was approximately $77,000 and $63,000, respectively and is recorded as a contra revenue account.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Regulation S-K Item 303(a)(4) during the periods presented, investments in special-purpose entities or undisclosed borrowings or debt. Additionally, we are not a party to any derivative contracts or synthetic leases.
Consulting Agreements
The Company entered into an agreement with Jesse Crowne, a former Director and Co-Chairman of the Board of the Company, to provide business development consulting services for a fee of $5,000 per month. Additionally, 62,500 shares of common stock at $0.29 per share was issued in connection with a separate agreement on August 29, 2019. The Company incurred expense of approximately $10,000 and $83,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to these agreements.
The Company entered into a consulting agreement with LilyCon Investments, LLC effective February 1, 2019 for services related to evaluation and negotiation of future acquisitions, joint ventures, and site evaluations/lease considerations. The duration of the consulting agreement is for a period of twelve months in the amount of $12,500 per month with a $15,000 signing bonus. Either party may terminate this agreement with or without cause upon 30 days written notice. The agreement also provides LilyCon Investments with $35,000 in stock (to be calculated using an annual variable weighted average price from February 2019 through January 2020) to be granted on the one-year anniversary of this agreement, if the agreement has not been terminated prior to that date. For years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company expensed a total of approximately $65,000 and $153,000, respectively, in compensation to LilyCon Investments. In February 2020, the Company issued LilyCon Investments $35,000 in shares of H-CYTE stock at an average share price of $0.31 per share for a total of 106,061 shares per the terms of the agreement. In March 2020, this agreement was modified to lower the monthly payment amount to $5,000. This agreement was terminated effective April 1, 2020.
The Company entered into a consulting agreement with Goldin Solutions, effective August 4, 2019, for media engagement and related efforts, including both proactive public relations and crisis management services. The agreement has a minimum term of six months, with a $34,650 monthly fee plus expenses payable each month, with the exception of a first month discount of $12,600. For year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company expensed $99,000 and $162,000, respectively. The Company terminated this agreement in March 2020.
The Company entered into a consulting agreement with Tanya Rhodes of Rhodes & Associates, Inc, effective June 15, 2020, to serve as the Chief Technology Officer (Research) of the Company. The agreement has a minimum term of six months with an average fee of $20,000 per month plus expenses which increases 5% per month on January 1 of each calendar year unless an alternative retainer amount is negotiated and agreed upon by both parties. The Company extended the contract on January 1, 2021, resulting in monthly expenses of $22,500 plus expenses for services rendered. Ms. Rhodes is a meaningful member of the management group and serves as the Company’s Chief Technology Officer (Research). Ms. Rhodes is an innovative, growth-oriented leader in healthcare with a broad base of international experience in all aspects of operational business including R&D, clinical and regulatory, strategic marketing and business development. She brings a demonstrated track record for bringing new technologies from concept through commercialization, and brings an in-depth knowledge of biological tissues, enzymes, stem cells, antimicrobials and natural products. Prior to joining H-Cyte Ms. Rhodes held numerous C-level positions in many sectors including wound care, dermatology, aesthetics and plastic surgery, and was the VP Innovation for Smith & Nephew and a global executive team member driving $450M business. Ms. Rhodes completed her PhD in molecular orbital computational chemistry in the UK and then a Masters Degree in the Management of Technology in the US.
Departure of Directors and Certain Officers, Election of Directors, Appointment of New Board Members and Officers
On February 29, 2020, the Company accepted the resignations of Briley Cienkosz, Chief Marketing Officer and Gary Mancini, Chief Relationship Officer for personal reasons and not as a result of any disputes or disagreements.
On May 7, 2020, William Horne, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and Chairman tendered his resignation as CEO effective when the Company finds a suitable replacement with more FDA experience. Until such successor is retained, Mr. Horne will remain as the CEO. Mr. Horne’s resignation does not pertain to his position as Chairman of the Board or as a Director. The resignation was not as a result of any disagreement with the Company or its policies and practices.
On September 28, 2020, the Company appointed Robert Greif as its CEO and President. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Greif was the Chief Commercial Officer and business development Leader at Atox Bio, Inc. from February 2019 to November 2019. At Atox, Mr. Greif built the North American commercial organization in preparation for the launch of a first-in-class immunomodulatory. Prior to joining Atox, Mr. Greif led the commercial operations of rEvo Biologics, Inc., an orphan disease biotechnology company from May 2011 to February 2019. He also held a variety of business unit and commercial leadership roles at United Health Group Incorporated, Boehringer Ingelheim Group, and Sanofi SA. The Company believes that Mr. Greif’s strong track record leading high-growth pharmaceutical and biotech businesses makes him qualified to serve in his role with the Company.
On September 29, 2020, Ann Miller resigned as the Company’s Chief Operating Officer.
On September 29, 2020, with the Company’s appointment of Robert Greif as CEO and President, Mr. William Horne resigned as the CEO and President. There are no family relationships between any director or executive officer of the Company and any other director or executive officer of the Company, or any person nominated or chosen by the Company to become a director or executive officer.
On January 12, 2021, Mr. William Horne stepped down as Chairman of the board of directors (the “Board”) of H-Cyte, Inc. (the “Company”). Mr. Horne will remain a member of the Board.
On January 12, 2021, Mr. Raymond Monteleone, a member of the Board, was appointed the new Chairman of the Board.
Indemnification
We have agreements whereby we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving, at our request, in such capacity, to the maximum extent permitted under the laws of the State of Nevada.
The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited. However, we maintain directors and officers insurance coverage that may contribute, up to certain limits, a portion of any future amounts paid for indemnification of directors and officers. We believe the estimated fair value of these indemnification agreements in excess of applicable insurance coverage is minimal. Historically, we have not incurred any losses or recorded any liabilities related to performance under these types of indemnities.
Additionally, in the normal course of business, we have made certain guarantees, indemnities and commitments under which we may be required to make payments in relation to certain transactions. These indemnities include intellectual property and other indemnities to our customers and distribution network partners in connection with the sales of our products and therapies, and indemnities to various lessors in connection with facility leases for certain claims arising from such facility or lease.
It is not possible to determine the maximum potential loss under these guarantees, indemnities and commitments due to our limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular provision.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standard Board (“FASB”) established Topic 842, Leases, by issuing Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02 (as amended), which requires lessees to recognize leases on the balance sheet and disclose key information about leasing arrangements. The new standard establishes a right-of-use (“ROU”) model that requires a lessee to recognize a ROU asset and lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases with a term longer than twelve months. Leases will be classified as finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern and classification of expense recognition in the statement of operations.
The Company has not entered into significant lease agreements in which it is the lessor. For the lease agreements in which the Company is the lessee, under Topic 842, lessees are required to recognize a lease liability and right-of-use asset for all leases (except for short-term leases) at the lease commencement date. Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted this guidance, applied the modified retrospective transition method and elected the transition option to use the effective date as the date of initial application. The Company recognized the cumulative effect of the transition adjustment on the consolidated balance sheet as of the effective date and did not provide any new lease disclosures for periods before the effective date. With respect to the practical expedients, the Company elected the package of transitional-related practical expedients and the practical expedient not to separate lease and non-lease components.
In June 2018, FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718)-Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”). ASU 2018-07 expands the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The Company adopted ASU 2018-07 in the first quarter of 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740), Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which amends the approaches and methodologies in accounting for income taxes during interim periods and makes changes to certain income tax classifications. The new standard allows exceptions to the use of the incremental approach for intra-period tax allocation, when there is a loss from continuing operations and income or a gain from other items, and to the general methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, when a year-to date loss exceeds the anticipated loss for the year. The standard also requires franchise or similar taxes partially based on income to be reported as income tax and the effects of enacted changes in tax laws or rates to be included in the annual effective tax rate computation from the date of enactment. Lastly, in any future acquisition, the Company would be required to evaluate when the step-up in the tax basis of goodwill is part of the business combination and when it should be considered a separate transaction. The standard will be effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2021, with early adoption of the amendments permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact from the adoption of ASU 2019-12 on its consolidated financial statements.