ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels and liquidity sources, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Objective
The objective of our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is to provide users of our financial statements with the following:
· A narrative explanation from the perspective of management of our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results;
· Useful context to the financial statements; and
· Information that allows assessment of the likelihood that past performance is indicative of future performance.
Overview
Health Discovery Corporation (the “Company”) is a pattern recognition company that uses advanced mathematical techniques to analyze large amounts of data to uncover patterns that might otherwise be undetectable. We operate primarily in the field of molecular diagnostics where such tools are critical to scientific discovery. The terms artificial intelligence (“AI”) and machine learning are sometimes used to describe pattern recognition tools.
Our principal asset is our intellectual property, which includes advanced mathematical algorithms called Support Vector Machines (“SVM”), as well as biomarkers that we discovered by applying our SVM techniques to complex genetic and proteomic data. Biomarkers are biological indicators or genetic expression signatures of certain disease states. While our historical foundation lies in the molecular diagnostics field, where we have made a number of discoveries that play a role in developing more personalized approaches to the diagnosis and treatment of certain diseases, our SVM assets in particular have broad applicability in many other fields. Intelligently applied, our pattern recognition technology can be a portal between enormous amounts of otherwise undecipherable data and truly meaningful discovery.
Our business model has evolved over time to respond to business trends that intersect with our technological expertise and our capacity to professionally manage these opportunities. Today, our commercialization efforts include utilization of our discoveries and knowledge to help develop diagnostic and prognostic predictive tests; licensing of the SVM technologies directly to diagnostic companies; and the potential formation of new ventures with domain experts in other fields where our pattern recognition technology holds commercial promise.
The Company markets its technology and related developmental expertise to prospects in the healthcare, biotech, and life sciences industries. Given the scope of some of these prospects, the sales cycle can be quite long, but management believes that these marketing efforts may produce favorable results in the future.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,000. The revenue earned during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to the NeoGenomics arbitration award in April 2019.
In April 2019, we were awarded $1.5 million from NeoGenomics, related to the decision by the arbitration panel for its conclusion that NeoGenomics’ SmartFlow infringes a Valid Patent Claim and internal use by NeoGenomics is subject to Milestone and Royalty payments (as defined under the Master License Agreement, or MLA).
We were awarded an additional $5.1 million based on the Panel’s conclusion that NeoGenomics failed to use its best efforts with respect to the development and commercialization of SVM-CYTO, and the Panel further held that the MLA was terminated with the exception of certain obligations including NeoGenomics’ obligations to make payment of any sum due to the Company pursuant to Article 3 of the MLA, license fees and royalty payments. The $5.1 million payment was received in the second quarter of 2019 and recorded to other income as further discussed below.
Operating and Other Expenses
Amortization expense was zero for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $153,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our patent assets were fully amortized as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and as a result, no further amortization is expected.
Professional and consulting fees were $266,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $84,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to higher accounting fees related to bringing the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission current.
Legal fees were $425,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $87,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Legal fees in the 2020 related primarily to the lawsuit brought by Quirk and Bear and our litigation against Intel. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $216,000 and $139,000 related to the Quirk and Bear and Intel matters, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a $66,000 decrease in corporate legal fees in the current year.
Compensation expense was $456,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $371,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to additional personnel and increased salaries.
Other general and administrative expense decreased to $596,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $745,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to lower directors’ stock-based compensation, partially offset by expenses related to our annual shareholder meeting and higher rent. Through December 31, 2020, we leased approximately 600 square feet of office space in Atlanta, Georgia, for $2,539 per month, pursuant to a short-term lease as of August 1, 2019. In 2020, we also leased an office in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania for $1,078 per month until June 30, 2020, pursuant to a short-term lease as of November 1, 2019. The lease for the office in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania was renewed for a six-month period from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020 at a rate of $1,540 per month. Prior to August 2019, we leased approximately 200 square feet of office space in Atlanta, Georgia, for $600 per month.
Loss from Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.7 million compared to income from operations of $79,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant decrease in the year-to-date period was primarily due to a reduction in revenue from arbitration.
Other Income and Expense. As previously disclosed, the Company was awarded $5.1 million in a litigation settlement related to the NeoGenomics litigation in the second quarter of 2019, and recorded net of $3.6 million in related expenses.
The Company recorded a decrease in the common stock warrants liability of $992,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 and reclassified the common stock warrants liability to equity, as our shareholders approved the necessary increase in authorized share capital at our annual shareholder meeting held in May 2020.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $759,000 compared to net income of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due primarily to the decrease in proceeds from arbitration, partially offset by the decrease in the fair value of common stock warrants liability.
Diluted loss per share was $0.002 in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to diluted earnings per share of $0.004 in the year ended December 31, 2019. See discussion regarding net loss and earnings, above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Introduction
We have relied primarily on equity and debt financing for liquidity, and most recently, proceeds from intellectual property litigation or arbitration. The Company produced sales, licensing, and developmental revenue starting in late 2005 and must increase revenues in order to generate sufficient cash to continue operations. Our plan to have sufficient cash to support operations is comprised of:
· generating revenue through licensing our patent portfolio;
· providing services related to those patents;
· protecting our proprietary technology against infringers; and
· obtaining additional equity or debt financing.
We are pursuing licensing activity and collaborations to increase revenue. Additionally, we are evaluating options to secure funding for infringement activities to protect our proprietary technology or other forms of fund-raising either in the debt or equity markets. None of these options are definitive and there is no guarantee we will be successful in these fund-raising efforts. In addition, while the potential economic impact brought by and the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, it has already caused, and is likely to result in further, significant disruption of global financial markets, which may reduce our ability to access capital either at all or on favorable terms. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $917,000 in cash and total current liabilities of $557,000. We estimate cash will be depleted by the first quarter of 2022 unless we are able to increase revenues or raise additional capital.
Short-term borrowings
Our principal commitments consist of our obligations under our operating leases which are short-term in nature. In addition, in June 2020, we settled accrued wages in the amount of $212,000 through the issuance of a convertible promissory note in the same amount with our chief executive officer. The note bears interest at an 8% annual interest rate and is convertible at the option of the holder into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $0.0138 per share of common stock. See further discussion in Note 8 - Convertible Debt.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that provide financing, liquidity, market or credit risk support or involve leasing, hedging or research and development services for our business or other similar arrangements that may expose us to liability that is not expressly reflected in the financial statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgements on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates are the most critical.
Common Stock Warrants Liability
The Company has, from time to time beginning in 2014, issued convertible preferred stock, preferred stock warrants, common stock, common stock warrants, and fully vested options to purchase shares of common stock in excess of its available shares of underlying stock to be issued.
In the event the number of shares or warrants of common stock granted exceeds the number of shares available if the holders exercised all of the previously issued outstanding options and warrants, the Company accounts for this excess as a common stock warrants liability, which is adjusted to fair value at the end of each reporting period. If and when the Company authorizes sufficient shares of common stock and preferred stock, the common stock warrants liability is reclassified to equity at the fair value of the liability at the date of reclassification. The Company accounts for the reclassification from equity to liability (or vice versa) similar to a modification of a share-based payment award.
See further discussion in Note 6 - Statement of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit) and Note 7- Common Stock Warrants Liability.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period using the straight-line method.
Valuation and Amortization Method - The fair value of stock awards that do not contain a market condition target are estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of options that contain a market condition, such as a specified hurdle price, is estimated on the grant date using a probability weighted fair value model similar to a lattice valuation model. Both the Black-Scholes and the probability weighted valuation models require assumptions and estimates of expected volatility, expected life, expected dividend yield and expected risk-free interest rates.
Expected Term - The expected term of the award represents the period that the Company’s stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and was determined based on historical experience, giving consideration to the contractual terms of the stock-based awards, vesting schedules, and forfeitures due to departure prior to the end of the vesting schedule.
Expected Volatility - Volatility is a measure of the amounts by which a financial variable such as stock price has fluctuated (historical volatility) or is expected to fluctuate (expected volatility) during a period. The Company uses the historical volatility, employing a prior period equivalent to the expected term to estimate expected volatility
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The Company bases the risk-free interest rate used in the Black-Scholes valuation method on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equivalent to the expected term of a stock award.
We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 11 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements to the financial statements.