ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
HEI and Hawaiian Electric (in the case of Hawaiian Electric, only the information related to Hawaiian Electric and its subsidiaries):
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes that appear in Item 8 of this report. For information on factors that may cause HEI’s and Hawaiian Electric’s actual future results to differ from those currently contemplated by the relevant forward-looking statements, see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the front of this report and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A. The general discussion of HEI’s consolidated results should be read in conjunction with the Electric utility and Bank segment discussions that follow.
HEI Consolidated
Executive overview and strategy. HEI is a holding company with operations primarily focused on Hawaii’s electric utility and banking sectors. In 2017, HEI formed Pacific Current to make investments in non-regulated renewable energy and sustainable infrastructure projects. HEI has three reportable segments-Electric utility, Bank, and Other.
Electric utility. Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric (Utilities) are regulated operating electric public utilities engaged in the production, purchase, transmission, distribution and sale of electricity on the islands of Oahu; Hawaii; and Maui, Lanai and Molokai, respectively.
Bank. ASB is a full-service community bank serving both consumer and commercial customers in the State of Hawaii and has 42 branches on the islands of Oahu (29), Maui (6), Hawaii (4), Kauai (2), and Molokai (1).
Other. The Other segment comprises the results of Pacific Current, which invests in non-regulated clean energy and sustainable infrastructure in the State of Hawaii to help reach the state’s sustainability goals, and HEI’s corporate-level operating, general and administrative expenses.
A major focus of HEI’s financial strategy is to grow core earnings/profitability at the Utilities, Bank and Pacific Current in a controlled risk manner and improve operating, capital and tax efficiencies in order to support its dividend and deliver shareholder value. Together, HEI’s unique combination of power, sustainable investments, and financial services companies provides the Company with a strong balance sheet and the financial resources to invest in the strategic growth of its subsidiaries, while providing an attractive dividend for investors.
Recent developments-COVID-19. The Company’s Incident Management Team, composed of senior executives across the Company, continues to monitor and manage issues related to COVID-19’s impact on the Company and the community. Regular updates are provided to the boards of directors of the Company and its subsidiaries to discuss key focus areas, including employee and customer safety, operations, liquidity, cybersecurity, and internal controls over financial reporting. The Company’s top priority remains unchanged, which is to ensure the safety and well-being of our customers, our employees, their families and the community, while at the same time continuing to deliver essential electric and banking services. To protect its employees and customers and minimize community spread of the coronavirus, the Company’s moratorium on non-essential business travel and a mandatory work-from-home policy for all personnel that can perform their work remotely remains in effect to ensure social distancing. Such work-from-home mandates have not impaired the Company’s ability to maintain effective internal controls over financial reporting and related disclosures. For personnel that cannot perform their work remotely, the Company has taken steps to protect these employees, including implementing practices related to employee and facilities hygiene, in order to ensure the reliability and resilience of its operations.
The Company has extended various programs to support its customers and the community during this difficult and challenging time. For example, Hawaiian Electric has suspended, through March 31, 2021, customer disconnections for nonpayment and is working closely with impacted customers on payment plans. At ASB, borrowers that are experiencing financial hardship may be eligible to receive a loan forbearance, deferment or extension. Additionally, late fee waivers were granted for up to three months and ATM fees were waived through July 1, 2020. ASB has also secured loans totaling more than $370 million for affected businesses under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Through the PPP, which was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and implemented by the United States Small Business Association, ASB has helped approximately 4,100 small businesses, which support roughly 40,000 jobs that contribute to economic activity in Hawaii. See “Recent Developments-COVID-19” in the Bank section below.
In light of the ongoing global COVID-19 vaccination effort, the Company expects that the Hawaii economy will continue to improve in 2021. The improvement in economic conditions is expected to result in an increase in kWh sales in 2021 at the Utility, compared to 2020, which would not affect Utility revenues due to decoupling, but may lower the price per kWh paid by customers, and improved credit quality of the loan portfolio at the Bank. However, the extent and pace of any economic recovery is dependent on a number of factors, including the real-world efficacy and availability of vaccines, as well as the pace and the proportion of the population that is vaccinated. For further discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our
subsidiaries see “Recent Developments-COVID-19” in the Electric Utility and Bank sections below. There has been no material impact on the “Other” segment and Pacific Current as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as the primary businesses of Pacific Current are supported by PPAs that provide for contractual cash flows with credit-worthy counterparties.
For a discussion regarding the impact of the economic conditions caused by the pandemic on the Company’s liquidity and capital resources, see discussion under “Financial Condition-Liquidity and capital resources,” contained in each of the “HEI Consolidated,” “Electric utility” and “Bank” sections of this MD&A.
Environmental, Social & Governance. At HEI, environmental, social and governance (ESG) principles and sustainability have long been fundamental values embedded within all aspects of the Company’s activities. With all of its operations in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, the Company’s long-term health, and ability to deliver sustainable value for all stakeholders-including shareholders-is inextricably linked to the well-being of its employees, communities, economy, and environment. That is why the Company sees its mission of being a catalyst for a better Hawaii as advancing the Company’s long-term financial sustainability. The Company has focused on ensuring ESG considerations are appropriately integrated into its governance structures, strategies and risk management. This includes:
•Integration of Board oversight of important ESG matters into its existing governance structures and processes. This includes full Board review of ESG-related strategies, Audit & Risk Committee oversight of ESG risks, Compensation Committee responsibility for ESG-related compensation matters and Nominating & Corporate Governance Committee responsibility for human capital management and for ensuring an appropriate board governance framework is in place with respect to ESG.
•Robust ESG expertise among board members, including directors with direct experience in renewable energy, climate change policy and strategy, environmental management and sustainable investing.
•Expanded ESG goals as part of HEI and utility executive incentive compensation.
•ESG considerations explicitly woven into strategic planning efforts and enterprise risk management processes.
The Company is committed to transparency and providing information to allow customers, community leaders, investors and other stakeholders understand how the Company’s strategies and operations advance ESG objectives and contribute to long-term value creation.
The Company issued its first ESG report in September 2020. This report encompasses ESG policies, principles and results reported during 2019 across the Company’s two primary operating subsidiaries, Hawaiian Electric and ASB. This report is aligned with Sustainability Accounting Standards Board guidance-using the electric utilities standard for Hawaiian Electric, and the commercial banks, commercial finance, and mortgage finance standards for ASB. In future reports, the Company intends to incorporate disclosures relating to climate change based on recommendations from the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. The Company’s ESG report can be found at www.hei.com/esg.
HEI consolidated results of operations.
In 2020, net income for HEI common stock decreased (9)% to $198 million ($1.81 diluted earnings per share), compared to $218 million ($1.99 diluted earnings per share) in 2019, due to $(31) million lower net income at ASB and $(1) million higher net loss at the “other” segment, partially offset by $13 million higher net income at the Utilities. The decrease in ASB’s 2020 net income compared to 2019 was primarily due to COVID-19’s impact on the local and national economy, which resulted in higher provision for credit losses and lower net interest income due to a lower yield curve. Additionally, 2020 results were lower than 2019 since 2019 benefited from a gain on sale of properties exited in connection with ASB’s move to its new campus. The increase in the Utilities’ 2020 net income compared to 2019 was principally due to higher RAM and higher MPIR
revenues, lower O&M expenses, and lower interest expenses, partially offset by higher depreciation and lower allowance for funds used during construction (AFUDC). See “Electric utility,” “Bank,” and “HEI Consolidated-Other segment” sections below for additional information on year-to-year fluctuations.
The Company’s effective tax rate (combined federal and state income tax rates) was lower at 17% in 2020, compared to 19% in 2019, primarily due to higher amortization in 2020 of the Utilities’ regulatory liability related to certain excess deferred income taxes resulting from the Tax Act’s decrease in the federal income tax rate and an increase in excess tax benefits related to vesting of share-based awards.
For a discussion of 2018 results, please refer to the “HEI consolidated results of operations” section in Item 7, “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-HEI Consolidated,” in the Company’s 2019 Form 10-K.
Other segment. The “other” business segment (loss)/income includes results of the stand-alone corporate operations of HEI, ASB Hawaii, Inc. (ASB Hawaii), and Pacific Current, LLC.
1 Hamakua Energy’s sales to Hawaii Electric Light (a regulated affiliate) are eliminated in consolidation.
Economic conditions. The statistical data in this section is from public third-party sources that management believes to be reliable (e.g., Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (DBEDT), University of Hawaii Economic Research Organization (UHERO), U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR), Hawaii Tourism Authority (HTA), Honolulu Board of REALTORS® and national and local news media).
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the virus strain SARS-CoV-2, and the resulting disease COVID-19, to be a pandemic. In response, the Governor of the State of Hawaii issued a number of emergency and supplementary proclamations to limit the spread of the virus. Hawaii’s economy began to weaken in the latter part of March 2020, due to a forced statewide stay-at-home, work-from-home declaration that began on March 25, 2020. The restrictions shuttered many businesses, including hotels, restaurants, bars, and other gathering places, and led to an overwhelming surge in unemployment claims and impacted the tourism industry with a significant reduction to visitor arrivals.
The most recent interim forecast by UHERO, which was issued on December 11, 2020, forecasts full year 2020 real GDP contraction of 10.2%, decline in total visitor arrivals of 74.3%, increase in real personal income of 4.3%, and an unemployment rate of 12.7%. However, federal fiscal and monetary policy response is expected to cushion the economic impact of the pandemic.
The CARES Act was passed by Congress and signed into law on March 27, 2020. The economic relief package totals more than $2 trillion and provides direct economic support to businesses and individuals. On December 27, 2020, the President signed into law the $900 billion economic stimulus package that provides, among others, direct payments to qualifying individuals, extended unemployment benefits, and additional small business aid. Hawaii has received a significant amount of funds through these various federal assistance programs, including the CARES Act, that will help attenuate the impact to Hawaii’s economy.
In September 2020, the City and County of Honolulu announced a framework for reducing the spread of COVID-19 on Oahu, which tracks metrics that dictate the extent of restrictions on businesses and activities. There are four tiers with Tier 1 being the most restrictive. The minimum amount of time spent in each tier is four weeks. In order to move to the next higher tier, the last two weeks of a tier must meet the higher tier’s criteria. If a lower tier’s average daily case count is realized for two weeks in a row, the county will move back to the lower tier for a minimum of four weeks. On October 22, 2020, the county of Honolulu moved from Tier 1 to Tier 2. Due to the uncertainty surrounding the timing and effectiveness of efforts to contain the spread of the virus while reopening the economy, the pace and the extent of the recovery cannot be predicted at this time.
See “Recent Developments-COVID-19” in the “Electric utility” and “Bank” sections below for further discussion of the economic impact caused by the pandemic.
Hawaii’s tourism industry, a significant driver of Hawaii’s economy, suffered dramatically with total visitors declining by nearly 74% to 2.7 million visitors in 2020 down from 10.4 million visitors in 2019, primarily due to travel restrictions amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Effective March 26, 2020, a mandatory 14-day self-quarantine was ordered for all travelers, both residents and visitors, to the islands including inter-island travelers. The mandatory quarantine for inter-island travel was lifted on June 16, 2020, but on August 20, 2020, a mandatory 14-day quarantine for travelers arriving on islands other than Oahu was reinstated. The mandatory quarantine for all travelers from outside the state was lifted, effective October 15, 2020, provided travelers test negative for COVID-19 within 72 hours of flight departure to the State and present valid documentation (additional restrictions may be required to travel to specific islands). In response to the rise in cases on the mainland during November, the island of Kauai temporarily opted out of the program on December 2, 2020. Following new guidelines from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the mandatory quarantine was reduced to 10 days on December 17, 2020.
Since October 15, 2020, after which the mandatory quarantine was no longer in effect if travelers tested negative for COVID-19 within 72 hours of flight departure to the State, the daily passenger counts improved, averaging over 7,000 passengers per day in December 2020, compared to an average of below 2,000 passengers per day in September 2020, the last full month preceding the change in the mandatory quarantine requirement.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency use authorization for a vaccine on December 11, 2020 and subsequently issued a second emergency use authorization for a second vaccine on December 18, 2020. The State began its vaccination efforts on December 15, 2020 and has gradually increased the distribution of vaccines to first responders, senior citizens, and front-line essential workers.
Due to the effects of the measures to contain the COVID-19 pandemic, initial unemployment claims filed with the State increased from 62,639 in 2019 to 438,709 during 2020. Hawaii’s seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in December 2020 was 9.3%, which was substantially higher compared to the December 2019 rate of 2.7%. The national unemployment rate in December 2020 was 6.7% compared to 3.6% in December 2019. Hawaii’s unemployment rate is expected to improve over time now that restrictions on travel have been reduced significantly and as the vaccine rollout accelerates.
Hawaii real estate activity through December 2020, as indicated by Oahu’s home resale market, resulted in an increase in the median sales price of 2.4% for condominiums and 5.2% for single family homes during the same period in 2019. The number of closed sales was down 13.0% for condominiums and up 2.3% for single family residential homes for full year 2020 compared to full year 2019.
Hawaii’s petroleum product prices reflect supply and demand in the Asia-Pacific region and the price of crude oil in international markets. The price of crude oil decreased dramatically since the first quarter of 2020 and has remained at levels lower than last year. Lower fuel prices will benefit customers in the form of lower bills given the high proportion of fuel cost in the cost per kWh, comprising approximately 20% of kWh cost on Oahu, but the benefit will be realized over time as existing inventory levels procured at higher cost are drawn down.
At its January 26-27, 2021 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to maintain the federal funds rate target range of 0%-0.25%. The FOMC plans to continue to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the long run. The Federal Reserve stated that it will increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the FOMC’s maximum employment and price stability goals. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
The Company expects that if economic conditions worsen from current levels or remain depressed for an extended period of time, it could have a material unfavorable impact on the Company’s net revenues or income from continuing operations in 2021.
Liquidity and capital resources. As of December 31, 2020, HEI and Hawaiian Electric had approximately $65 million and nil of commercial paper outstanding, respectively, and Hawaiian Electric had $47 million of cash and cash equivalents.
As of December 31, 2020, there was no balance on HEI’s revolving credit facility and the available committed capacity under the revolving credit facility was $150 million (see Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements). As of December 31, 2020, there was no balance on Hawaiian Electric’s revolving credit facilities and the available committed capacity under the revolving credit facilities was $275 million. As of December 31, 2020, ASB’s unused FHLB borrowing capacity was approximately $2.1 billion and had unpledged investment securities of $1.6 billion.
The Company expects that its liquidity will continue to be moderately impacted due to COVID-19. For the Utilities, the high level of unemployment in the state and the moratorium on customer disconnections (which moratorium is currently in place through March 31, 2021) are expected to result in higher accounts receivable balances, bad debt expense and write-offs. Additionally, lower kWh sales generally result in delayed timing of cash flows, resulting in higher working capital requirements (see “Recent Developments-COVID-19” in the Electric utility section below). At ASB, liquidity remains at satisfactory levels, with cash increasing year-over-year, largely due to U.S. economic stimulus programs implemented as a result of COVID-19 that led to an increase in customer deposits. ASB’s cash and cash equivalents was $293 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $178 million as of December 31, 2019. ASB remains well above the “well capitalized” level, but there continues to be significant uncertainty regarding COVID-19’s impact on loan performance and the allowance for credit losses (see “Recent Developments - COVID-19” in the Bank section below).
To preserve and enhance the Company’s liquidity position and address higher working capital requirements, in light of the significant and ongoing uncertainty regarding the potential scale and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the global, national and local economy, the Company completed a number of financing actions in 2020.
•On April 20, 2020, HEI borrowed $65 million under a 364-day term loan to refinance the outstanding amounts under its revolving credit facility, which increased the available committed borrowing capacity under its revolving credit facility.
•On April 20, 2020, the Utilities added an incremental $75 million in committed revolving credit capacity at Hawaiian Electric with a 364-day revolving credit facility. Additionally, $50 million of an existing 364-day term loan was refinanced with a new $50 million term loan maturing in April 2021 (see Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements).
•On May 14, 2020, the Utilities closed on a $160 million private placement of taxable debt, the proceeds of which were used to finance capital expenditures, repay short-term debt used to finance or refinance capital expenditures, and reimburse funds for payment of capital expenditures.
•On October 29, 2020 the Utilities executed a $115 million private placement of taxable debt with a delayed draw feature. On January 14, 2021, the Utilities received proceeds from the private placement and used the funds to finance their capital expenditures and/or to reimburse funds used for the payment of capital expenditures.
•On September 11, 2020, HEI executed a $50 million private placement utilizing a delayed draw feature, which allowed HEI to draw the funds on December 29, 2020. The proceeds of the draw were used to repay $50 million of HEI’s $65 million 364-day term loan. The notes bear interest at 2.98% and mature on December 15, 2030.
•On November 17, 2020, HEI executed a $75 million private placement, utilizing a delayed draw feature with two tranches, to be used in part to refinance $50 million of long-term debt maturing in March 2021. The first tranche of $46 million was drawn on January 28, 2021 and was used to repay the remaining balance of $15 million on the $65 million 364-day term loan, with the remainder used to pay down commercial paper balances and prefund maturing debt. The second tranche of $29 million can be drawn at any time on or before April 16, 2021. The notes bear interest at a weighted average rate of 3.04% and mature on April 17, 2028 ($24 million) and January 28, 2031 ($51 million).
As of December 31, 2020 the total amount of available borrowing capacity (net of commercial paper outstanding) under the Company’s committed lines of credit was approximately $360 million, which was an increase of approximately $146 million compared to December 31, 2019.
In addition to the foregoing financing transactions, in order to further enhance the Company’s liquidity position, the Company has deferred, pursuant to section 2302 of the CARES Act, the payment of the applicable employer portion of Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance payroll tax deposits that are due in 2020, but arose subsequent to the enactment of the CARES Act. The total amount of payroll taxes deferred was approximately $13 million at December 31, 2020. Fifty percent of the deferred payroll taxes will be paid in each of December 2021 and December 2022. The Company had also deferred approximately $6 million per month in planned monthly pension contributions through August 2020 to further strengthen its liquidity position, but elected to fund such deferred contributions in September 2020 in order to deduct the contributions on its 2019 tax return. If further liquidity is necessary, which is not contemplated at this time, the Utilities could also reduce the pace of capital spending related to non-essential projects. Additionally, the Company has the option to issue new shares rather than purchase currently outstanding shares on the open market to satisfy share issuances under its Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan (DRIP) program. The estimated amount of equity capital that could be raised by issuing new shares, rather than utilizing open market purchases, is estimated to be approximately $30 million on an annual basis, based on historical demand, but such future amount is dependent on a number of factors, including, without limitation, future share prices, number of shares/participants in the DRIP program, and the amount of new investment in HEI’s stock by DRIP participants.
The Company believes that its ability to generate cash, both internally from electric utility and banking operations and externally from issuances of equity and debt securities, as well as bank borrowings, is adequate to maintain sufficient liquidity to fund its contractual obligations and commercial commitments, its forecasted capital expenditures and investments, its expected retirement benefit plan contributions and other cash requirements. However, the COVID-19 pandemic is an evolving situation, and the Company cannot predict the extent or duration of the outbreak, the future effects that it will have on the global, national or local economy, including the impact on the Company’s cost of capital and its ability to access additional capital, or the future impacts on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in Part I for further discussion of risks and uncertainties.
The consolidated capital structure of HEI (excluding deposit liabilities and other bank borrowings) was as follows:
HEI’s commercial paper borrowings and line of credit facility were as follows:
Note: This table does not include Hawaiian Electric’s separate commercial paper issuances and line of credit facilities and draws, which are disclosed below under “Electric utility-Liquidity and capital resources” below. The maximum amount of HEI’s short-term commercial paper borrowings in 2020 was $99 million.
HEI utilizes short-term debt, typically commercial paper, to support normal operations, to refinance commercial paper, to retire long-term debt, to pay dividends and for other temporary requirements, including short-term financing needs of its subsidiaries. HEI also periodically makes short-term loans to Hawaiian Electric to meet Hawaiian Electric’s cash requirements, including the funding of loans by Hawaiian Electric to Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, but no such short-term loans to Hawaiian Electric were outstanding as of December 31, 2020. HEI periodically utilizes long-term debt, historically unsecured indebtedness, to fund investments in and loans to its subsidiaries to support their capital improvement or other requirements, to repay long-term and short-term indebtedness and for other corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, HEI’s debt maturities in 2021 include $50 million of long-term debt that matures in March 2021 and $15 million related to a 364-day term loan that matures in April 2021. HEI has prefunded these maturities through the $50 million and $75 million private placements. See Notes 5 and 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a brief description of the Company’s loans.
The rating of HEI’s commercial paper and debt securities could significantly impact the ability of HEI to sell its commercial paper and issue debt securities and/or the cost of such debt. As of February 12, 2021, the Fitch, Moody’s and S&P ratings of HEI were as follows:
* Moody’s long-term debt rating was withdrawn because HEI does not currently have any outstanding, publicly traded debt. Moody’s continues to rate Hawaiian Electric’s long-term debt. See ‘Electric utility-Liquidity and capital resources’ below.
Note: The above ratings reflect only the view, at the time the ratings are issued or affirmed, of the applicable rating agency, from whom an explanation of the significance of such ratings may be obtained. Such ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold any securities; such ratings may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating agencies; and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
There were no new issuances of common stock through the HEI DRIP, HEIRSP or the ASB 401(k) Plan in 2020, 2019, or 2018 and HEI satisfied the share purchase requirements of the DRIP, HEIRSP and ASB 401(k) Plan through open market purchases of its common stock.
Operating activities provided net cash of $429 million in 2020 and $512 million in 2019. Investing activities used net cash of $1,414 million in 2020 and $542 million in 2019. In 2020, net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to purchases of available-for-sale investment securities, capital expenditures, net increase in loans held for investment and
purchases of held-to-maturity investment securities and stock from Federal Home Loan Bank, partly offset by receipt of repayments from available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investment securities, redemption of stock from Federal Home Loan Bank and proceeds from sale of available-for-sale investment securities. In 2019, net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to capital expenditures, net increase in loans held for investment, purchases of available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investment securities and stock from Federal Home Loan Bank and contributions to low-income housing investments, partly offset by receipt of repayments from available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investment securities, redemption of stock from Federal Home Loan Bank and proceeds from sale of available-for-sale investment securities and real estate held for sale.
Financing activities provided net cash of $1,116 million in 2020 and $88 million in 2019. In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities included net increases in deposits and proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, short-term debt and other bank borrowings, partly offset by payment of common and preferred stock dividends, repayment of long-term debt, short-term debt and other bank borrowings and net decreases in short-term borrowings and other bank borrowing with original maturities of three months or less. In 2019, net cash provided by financing activities included proceeds from issuance of long-term debt and short-term debt, net increases in deposits and short-term borrowings, partly offset by payment of common and preferred stock dividends, repayment of long-term debt and funds transferred for redemption of long -term debt and repayment of short-term debt.
For a discussion of 2018 operating, investing and financing activities, please refer to the “Liquidity and capital resources” section in Item 7, “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-HEI Consolidated,” in the Company’s 2019 Form 10-K.
Other than capital contributions from their parent company, intercompany services (and related intercompany payables and receivables), Hawaiian Electric’s periodic short-term borrowings from HEI (and related interest) and the payment of dividends to HEI, the electric utility and bank segments are largely autonomous in their operating, investing and financing activities. (See the electric utility and bank segments’ discussions of their cash flows in their respective “Liquidity and capital resources” sections below.) During 2020, Hawaiian Electric, ASB (through ASB Hawaii) and Hamakua Energy paid cash dividends to HEI of $107 million, $31 million and $7 million, respectively.
A portion of the net assets of Hawaiian Electric and ASB is not available for transfer to HEI in the form of dividends, loans or advances without regulatory approval. In the absence of an unexpected material adverse change in the financial condition of the electric utilities or ASB, such restrictions are not expected to significantly affect the operations of HEI, its ability to pay dividends on its common stock or its ability to meet its debt or other cash obligations. See Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
HEI’s material cash requirements include: capital expenditures, O&M expenses, fuel and purchase power costs, and debt payments at the Utilities; investments in loans and investment securities at the Bank; and shareholder dividends and debt payments at HEI. Forecasted HEI consolidated “net cash used in investing activities” (excluding “investing” cash flows from ASB) for 2021 through 2023 consists primarily of the net capital expenditures of the Utilities principally related to maintaining and modernizing the grid to allow for the integration of more renewable energy, improved customer reliability, and greater system efficiency. The Utilities’ capital expenditures are estimated to range from $1.0 billion to $1.3 billion over the next three years and are expected to be funded primarily through a combination of retained earnings and proceeds from debt issuance, and if required, contributions of equity from HEI (see also discussion regarding other material cash requirements under “Financial Condition-Liquidity and capital resources,” contained in the “Electric utility” and “Bank” sections below). In addition to the funds required for the Utilities’ construction programs and debt maturities, with respect to HEI, approximately $50 million will be required in 2021, $150 million in 2022, and $50 million in 2023 to repay HEI-issued private placement notes and a bank term note, which are expected to be repaid with the proceeds from the issuance of commercial paper, bank borrowings, other medium- or long-term debt, issuance of common stock and/or dividends from subsidiaries. Additional debt and/or equity financing may be utilized to invest in the Utilities, Bank or Pacific Current; to pay down commercial paper or other short-term borrowings; or to fund unanticipated expenditures not included in the 2021 through 2023 forecast, such as increases in the costs of, or an acceleration of, the construction of capital projects of the Utilities or unanticipated utility capital expenditures. In addition, existing debt may be refinanced prior to maturity with additional debt or equity financing (or both).
Selected short-term and long-term contractual obligations and commitments. Information about payments under the specified contractual obligations and commercial commitments of HEI and its subsidiaries was as follows:
1Includes contractual obligations and commitments for capital expenditures and expense amounts.
The table above does not include other categories of obligations and commitments, such as deferred taxes, trade payables, amounts that will become payable in future periods under collective bargaining and other employment agreements and employee benefit plans, and potential refunds of amounts collected from ratepayers (e.g., under the earnings sharing mechanism). As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the assets held in trusts to satisfy the obligations of the Company’s retirement benefit plans did not exceed the retirement benefit plans’ benefit obligation. Minimum funding requirements for retirement benefit plans have not been included in the tables above; however, see Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for 2021 estimated contributions.
See Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of fuel and power purchase commitments. See Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of ASB’s commitments.
Off-balance sheet arrangements. Although the Company and the Utilities have certain off-balance sheet arrangements, management has determined that it has no off-balance sheet arrangements that either have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on the Company’s and the Utilities’ financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors, including the following types of off-balance sheet arrangements:
1.obligations under guarantee contracts,
2.retained or contingent interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity or similar arrangements that serve as credit, liquidity or market risk support to that entity for such assets,
3.obligations under derivative instruments, and
4.obligations under a material variable interest held by the Company or the Utilities in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the Company or the Utilities, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with the Company or the Utilities.
Material estimates and critical accounting policies. In preparing financial statements, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Material estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant change include the amounts reported for pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; contingencies and litigation; income taxes; regulatory assets and liabilities; electric utility unbilled revenues; allowance for credit losses; fair value; goodwill impairment; and asset retirement obligations (AROs). Management considers an accounting estimate to be material if it requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the
time the estimate was made and changes in the assumptions selected could have a material impact on the estimate and on the Company’s results of operations or financial condition.
In accordance with SEC Release No. 33-8040, “Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies,” management has identified the accounting policies it believes to be the most critical to the Company’s financial statements-that is, management believes that the policies discussed below are both the most important to the portrayal of the Company’s results of operations and financial condition, and currently require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. The policies affecting both of the Company’s two principal segments are discussed below and the policies affecting just one segment are discussed in the respective segment’s section of “Material estimates and critical accounting policies.” Management has reviewed the material estimates and critical accounting policies with the HEI Audit & Risk Committee and, as applicable, the Hawaiian Electric Audit & Risk Committee.
For additional discussion of the Company’s accounting policies, see Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements and for additional discussion of material estimates and critical accounting policies, see the electric utility and bank segment discussions below under the same heading.
Pension and other postretirement benefits obligations. The Company’s reported costs of providing retirement benefits are dependent upon numerous factors resulting from actual plan experience and assumptions about future experience. For example, retirement benefits costs are impacted by actual employee demographics (including age and compensation levels), the level of contributions to the plans, earnings and realized and unrealized gains and losses on plan assets, and changes made to the provisions of the plans. Costs may also be significantly affected by changes in key actuarial assumptions, including the expected return on plan assets, the discount rate and mortality. The Company’s accounting for retirement benefits under the plans in which the employees of the Utilities participate is also adjusted to account for the impact of decisions by the PUC. Changes in obligations associated with the factors noted above may not be immediately recognized as costs on the income statement, but generally are recognized in future years over the remaining average service period of plan participants.
Based on various assumptions in Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements, sensitivities of the projected benefit obligation (PBO) and accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO) as of December 31, 2020, associated with a change in certain actuarial assumptions, were as follows and constitute “forward-looking statements”:
Also, see Notes 1 and 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingencies and litigation. The Company is subject to proceedings (including PUC proceedings), lawsuits and other claims. Management assesses the likelihood of any adverse judgments in or outcomes of these matters as well as potential ranges of probable losses, including costs of investigation. A determination of the amount of reserves required, if any, for these contingencies is based on an analysis of each individual case or proceeding often with the assistance of outside counsel. The required reserves may change in the future due to new developments in each matter or changes in approach in dealing with these matters, such as a change in settlement strategy.
In general, environmental contamination treatment costs are charged to expense, unless it is probable that the PUC would allow such costs to be recovered through future rates, in which case such costs would be capitalized as regulatory assets. Also, environmental costs are capitalized if the costs extend the life, increase the capacity, or improve the safety or efficiency of property; the costs mitigate or prevent future environmental contamination; or the costs are incurred in preparing the property for sale.
See Notes 1, 3 and 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are established for the temporary differences between the financial reporting bases and the tax bases of the Company’s assets and liabilities using tax rates expected to be in effect when such deferred tax assets or liabilities are realized or settled. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible.
Management evaluates its potential exposures from tax positions taken that have or could be challenged by taxing authorities. These potential exposures result because taxing authorities may take positions that differ from those taken by
management in the interpretation and application of statutes, regulations and rules. Management considers the possibility of alternative outcomes based upon past experience, previous actions by taxing authorities (e.g., actions taken in other jurisdictions) and advice from its tax advisors. Management believes that the Company’s provision for tax contingencies is reasonable. However, the ultimate resolution of tax treatments disputed by governmental authorities may adversely affect the Company’s current and deferred income tax amounts.
See Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Following are discussions of the electric utility and bank segments. Additional segment information is shown in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The discussion concerning Hawaiian Electric should be read in conjunction with its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
Electric utility
Executive overview and strategy. The Utilities provide electricity on all the principal islands in the state, other than Kauai, to approximately 95% of the state’s population, and operate five separate grids. The Utilities’ mission is to provide innovative energy leadership for Hawaii, to meet the needs and expectations of customers and communities, and to empower them with affordable, reliable and clean energy. The goal is to create a modern, resilient, flexible, and dynamic electric grid that enables an optimal mix of distributed energy resources, such as private rooftop solar, demand response, and grid-scale resources to enable the creation of smart, sustainable, resilient communities and achieve the statutory goal of 100% renewable energy by 2045.
Recent developments-COVID-19. See also Recent developments-COVID-19 in HEI’s MD&A.
Economic conditions in Hawaii continue to be severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Statewide daily passenger counts, while improving, remain depressed, and unemployment stood at 9.3% as of December 31, 2020. As a consequence of the significant decline in economic activity, the demand for electricity remains adversely impacted. In the fourth quarter and for the full year 2020, kWh sales were down 6.5% and 7.1%, respectively, compared with the fourth quarter and full year 2019, respectively. The Utilities expect kWh sales to gradually improve throughout 2021 as the COVID-19 vaccine is more widely distributed and administered, which would allow the economy in Hawaii to fully reopen.
While the Utilities’ electric energy revenues have not been significantly impacted due to the decoupling mechanism, which allows recovery of the difference between PUC approved target revenues and recorded adjusted revenues regardless of the level of kWh sales, the timing of customer collections would be delayed (or accelerated) if the level of kWh sales decreases below (or increases above) the estimated kWh sales. See “Current Decoupling” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of decoupling. Annually, the Utilities submit a decoupling filing to the PUC, which requests recovery by the utility (or refund to customers) of the difference between recorded adjusted revenues and target revenues under the RBA. The difference is collected or refunded through an adjustment to customer rates in the following year based on estimated sales, starting on June 1st of that following year, which has an impact on the timing of the Utilities’ cash flow. Additionally, although the Utilities’ decoupling mechanism allows for collection under the RBA, the RBA balance accrues interest only at the short-term debt rate from the last rate case (1.75% and 2.5%, starting November 1, 2020, for Hawaiian Electric, 3.75% for Hawaii Electric Light and 3.0% for Maui Electric). As of December 31, 2020, the RBA balance related to decoupling revenues was approximately $7.6 million, compared to a credit balance of $16.4 million as of December 31, 2019. While the billed accounts receivable balances, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, as of December 31, 2020 of $148 million is 3.2% lower than the billed accounts receivable balances as of December 31, 2019, due in part to lower fuel prices resulting in lower bills, the past due accounts receivable balance has increased by $24 million or 75% since December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily driven by the statewide restrictions imposed during 2020, the pandemic’s impact on the tourism industry, resulting in a higher unemployment rate, the moratorium on customer disconnections (which moratorium is currently in place through March 31, 2021) and, for certain customers, the inability to make payment on their accounts. To address the financing requirement related to the delayed timing of cash flows collected under the decoupling mechanism through the RBA and the modest slowing or reduction in accounts receivable collections from customers, the Utilities have completed a number of steps to enhance their liquidity position. See “Financial Condition-Liquidity and capital resources” for additional information.
The Utilities provide an essential service to the State of Hawaii, and have continued to operate to protect the health and safety of employees and customers and to ensure system reliability, and have been following the Governor’s directive that the Utilities take necessary measures to ensure they can operate in the normal course. The Utilities have also implemented certain aspects of their business continuity plans, which includes the activation of its Incident Management Team to closely manage the response to the pandemic and have implemented practices related to employee and facilities hygiene in order to ensure the reliability and resilience of their operations.
In the second quarter of 2020, the PUC approved the deferral of certain COVID-19 related costs, such as higher bad debt expense, higher financing costs, non-collection of late payment fees, increased personal protective equipment costs, and sequestration costs for mission-critical employees. As of December 31, 2020, these costs, which have been deferred and recorded as a regulatory asset, totaled approximately $18 million (see also discussion under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and
“Regulatory assets for COVID-19 costs” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements). Looking forward, while the distribution and administration of the COVID vaccine is expected to hasten the reopening of the Hawaii economy, the prolonged impact of COVID-19 could adversely affect the ability of the Utilities’ contractors, suppliers, IPPs, and other business partners to perform or fulfill their obligations, or require modifications to existing contracts, which could adversely affect the Utilities’ business, increase expenses, and impact the Utilities’ ability to achieve their RPS goals beyond 2020. Additionally, while the state’s aggressive response to the pandemic has dramatically reduced the spread of the coronavirus, the measures taken have had a severe economic impact on the state’s businesses and residents, which may influence the PUC’s actions regarding future rate increases. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in Part II for additional discussion of risks.
For a discussion regarding the impact of the economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic on the Utilities’ liquidity and capital resources, see discussion under “Financial Condition-Liquidity and capital resources.”
Performance-based regulations. On December 23, 2020, the PUC issued a D&O (PBR D&O) approving a new performance-based regulation framework (PBR Framework). See “Regulatory proceedings” under “Commitments and contingencies” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Transition to renewable energy. The Utilities are fully committed to a 100 percent renewable energy future for Hawaii and are partnering with the State of Hawaii in achieving their Renewable Portfolio Standard goal of 100% renewable energy by 2045. Hawaii’s RPS law requires electric utilities to meet an RPS of 30%, 40%, 70% and 100% by December 31, 2020, 2030, 2040 and 2045, respectively.
The Utilities have made significant progress on the path to clean energy and have been successful in adding significant amounts of renewable energy resources to their electric systems and exceeded the 2015 RPS goal two years early. The Utilities’ RPS for 2020 was 34.5%, which was in excess of the statutory goal of 30%. The Utilities will continue to actively procure additional renewable energy post-2020 and expect to meet or exceed the next statutory RPS goal of 40% in advance of the 2030 compliance year. (See “Developments in renewable energy efforts” below).
If the Utilities are not successful in meeting the RPS targets as mandated by law, the PUC could assess a penalty of $20 for every megawatthour (MWh) that an electric utility is deficient. Based on the level of electricity sales in 2020, a 1% shortfall in meeting the 2030 RPS requirement of 40% would translate into a penalty of approximately $1.6 million. The PUC has the discretion to reduce the penalty due to events or circumstances that are outside an electric utility’s reasonable control, to the extent the event or circumstance could not be reasonably foreseen and ameliorated. In addition to penalties under the RPS law, failure to meet the mandated RPS targets would be expected to result in a higher proportion of fossil fuel-based generation than if the RPS target had been achieved, which in turn would be expected to subject the Utilities to limited commodity fossil fuel price exposure under a fuel cost risk-sharing mechanism. The fuel cost risk-sharing mechanism apportions 2% of the fuel cost risk to the utilities (and 98% to ratepayers) and has a maximum exposure (or benefit) of $3.7 million.
The Utilities are fully aligned with, and supportive of, state policy to achieve a 100% renewable energy future and have made significant progress in its transformation. This alignment with state policy is reflected in management compensation programs and the Utilities’ long-range plans, which include aspirational targets in order to catalyze action and accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels at a pace more rapid than dictated by current law. The long-range plans, including aspirational targets, serve as guiding principles in the Utilities’ continued transformation, and are updated regularly to adapt to changing technology, costs and other factors. While there is no financial penalty for failure to achieve the Utilities’ long-range aspirational objectives, the Utilities recognize that there is an environmental and social cost from the continued use of fossil fuels.
The State of Hawaii’s policy is supported by the regulatory framework and includes a number of mechanisms designed to maintain the Utilities’ financial stability during the transition toward the State’s 100% renewable energy future. Under the sales decoupling mechanism, the Utilities are allowed to recover from customers, target test year revenues, independent of the level of kWh sales, which have generally declined (with the exception of 2019), as privately-owned distributed energy resources have been added to the grid and energy efficiency measures have been put into place. Other regulatory mechanisms reduce regulatory lag, such as the rate adjustment mechanism to provide revenues for escalation in certain O&M expenses and rate base changes between rate cases, and the major project interim recovery mechanism, which allow the Utilities to recover and earn on certain approved major capital projects placed into service in between rate cases. Certain mechanism are replaced or modified under the new PBR framework. See “Regulatory proceedings” under “Commitments and contingencies” and “Current Decoupling” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Integrated Grid Planning. Achieving 100% renewable energy will require modernizing the grid through coordinated energy system planning in partnership with local communities and stakeholders. To accomplish this, the Utilities filed their Integrated Grid Planning (IGP) Report with the PUC on March 1, 2018, which provides an innovative systems approach to energy planning intended to yield the most cost-effective renewable energy pathways that incorporates customer and stakeholder input.
In March 2019, the PUC accepted the Utilities’ IGP Work plan submitted on December 14, 2018, which describes the timing and scope of major activities that will occur in the IGP process. The IGP utilizes an inclusive and transparent Stakeholder Engagement model to provide an avenue for interested parties to engage with the Utilities and contribute meaningful input throughout the IGP process. The IGP Stakeholder Council, Technical Advisory Panel and Working groups have been established and meet regularly to provide feedback and input on specific issues and process steps in the IGP. In March 2020, the Utilities launched a broad public engagement program, which consisted of a combination of in-person and online engagement. This provided customers opportunities to connect with the IGP team. The Utilities submitted an updated IGP work plan to the PUC in January 2021, marking the significant progress made through the stakeholder engagement phase of the IGP process. The Utilities will use the stakeholder feedback and input as it enters the next phase of the process which includes the development of long-range integrated grid plans and the acquisition of new resources.
Demand response programs. Pursuant to PUC orders, the Utilities are developing an integrated Demand Response (DR) Portfolio Plan that will enhance system operations and reduce costs to customers. The reduction in cost for the customer will take the form of either rates or incentive-based programs that will compensate customers for their participation individually, or by way of engagements with turnkey service providers that contract with the Utilities to aggregate and deliver various grid services on behalf of participating customers and their distributed assets.
In October 2017, the PUC approved the Utilities’ request made in December 2015 to defer and recover certain computer software and software development costs for a DR Management System in an amount not to exceed $3.9 million, exclusive of allowance for funds used during construction (AFUDC), through the Renewable Energy Infrastructure Program (REIP) Surcharge. The Utilities placed the DR Management System in service in the first quarter of 2019. On October 30, 2019, the Utilities filed the final cost report, reflecting total project costs of $3.7 million. On February 27, 2020, the PUC approved the Utilities’ request to recover deferred and other related costs of the DR Management System through the REIP Surcharge effective March 1, 2020 until such costs are included in determining base rates. On June 26, 2020, the Utilities submitted an updated REIP rate effective August 1, 2020 to the PUC.
On January 25, 2018, the PUC approved the Utilities’ revised DR Portfolio tariff structure. The PUC supported the approach of working with aggregators to implement the DR portfolio. In 2019, the Utilities signed a multi-year Grid Services Purchase Agreement (GSPA) with a third party aggregator. These contracts pay service providers to aggregate grid-supporting capabilities from customer-sited Distributed Energy Resources. The first of these five-year contracts has been executed (PUC approval obtained on August 9, 2019) and is expected to deliver not only benefits through efficient grid operations, but also avoided fuel costs over that 5-year period. The Utilities selected the next set of aggregators in the first quarter of 2020, commenced GSPA contract negotiations, and filed two executed contracts on July 9, 2020. This complements the Utilities’ transformation and supports customer choice. The GSPA contracts were approved by the PUC on December 31, 2020.
Grid modernization. The overall goal of the Grid Modernization Strategy is to deploy modern grid investments at an appropriate priority, sequence and pace to cost-effectively maximize flexibility, minimize the risk of redundancy and obsolescence, deliver customer benefits and enable greater distributed energy resources and renewable energy integration. Under the Grid Modernization Strategy, the Utilities expects that new technology will help increase adoption of private rooftop solar and make use of rapidly evolving products, including storage and advanced inverters. The Utilities have begun work to implement the Grid Modernization Strategy Phase 1, which received PUC approval on March 25, 2019. The estimated cost for this initial phase is approximately $86 million and is expected to be incurred over five years. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $16 million has been incurred to date under Phase 1. The Utilities submitted a proportional advanced meter opt-out deployment filing on September 30, 2020 in an effort toward broader and faster deployment.
The Utilities filed an application with the PUC on September 30, 2019 for an Advanced Distribution Management System (ADMS) as part of the second phase of their Grid Modernization Strategy implementation. The estimated cost for the implementation over five years of the Advanced Distribution Management System, which includes capital, deferred and O&M costs, is $46 million. However, on December 30, 2019, the PUC suspended the Utilities’ application for the Advanced Distribution Management System pending the Utilities’ filing of a supplemental application for the broad deployment of field devices. This Phase 2 field devices application will be filed at the end of first quarter of 2021, at which time the ADMS filing could be resumed and unsuspended.
The Utilities acquired spectrum licenses in the Federal Communications Commission Citizens Broadband Radio Service Auction which concluded in August. The licenses represent the first step in facilitating the development of a Private LTE (PLTE) communications network that provides another option for the growing demand of connectivity to all parts of the electric grid in order to better serve our customers, and facilitate Grid Modernization and our renewable goals. Use cases for an PLTE network include backhaul for advanced metering infrastructure, switches, monitoring devices, falling conductor protection systems, surveillance equipment, mobile radios, and supervisory control and data acquisition systems. With respect to the Grid Modernization strategy, PLTE provides optionality to ubiquitously connect devices that are in less densely congregated service areas and/or not accessible with existing telecommunications infrastructure.
Community-based renewable energy. In December 2017, the PUC adopted a community-based renewable energy (CBRE) program framework which allows customers who cannot, or chose not to, take advantage of private rooftop solar to receive the benefits of renewable energy to help offset their monthly electric bills and support clean energy for Hawaii. The program has two phases.
The first phase, which commenced in July 2018, totals 8 MW of solar photovoltaic (PV) only with one credit rate for each island closed on April 9, 2020.
By PUC order, CBRE Phase 2 commenced on April 9, 2020 with the goal to develop a robust CBRE market with competitive pricing anticipating that clean energy projects and programs, such as CBRE, can meaningfully contribute to the State’s recovery from the COVID-19 emergency. CBRE Phase 2 capacity is substantially larger than Phase 1 and allows up to 235 MW across all Hawaiian Electric service territories in two tranches. The capacities are allocated by island and allow for small (under 250 kW) and large system sizes to encourage a variety of system sizes. In addition to the first-come, first-served process offered in Phase 1, the majority of the 235 MW will be awarded to projects selected through a competitive process. To provide opportunities for low- to moderate-income (LMI) customers to participate in the program, separate project proposals may be submitted specifically targeting LMI customers.
Eight request for proposals (RFPs) were required by order: one each for Oahu, Maui, Hawaii Island, Molokai, and Lanai, and LMI-specific RFPs for Oahu, Maui, and Hawaii Island. Draft RFPs for the three LMI RFPs and the RFPs for Molokai, and Lanai were filed on July 9, 2020, along with a revised tariff and associated contract models. LMI projects do not have a size cap nor do they decrease the 235 MW capacity available to other projects. In addition to its administrative role, the Utilities and their affiliates are eligible to participate in the solicitations, with the exception of the LMI-specific RFPs, where the PUC will only consider a utility self-build option if there are no successful competitive bids for an LMI project on one island or more. The Utilities will also have opportunities to earn based on shared savings mechanisms for specific solicitations. Comments were received during and after a Technical Conference hosted by the PUC on July 28, 2020. Proposed final drafts of the RFPs, tariff, and contracts were filed on September 8, 2020. Pending PUC approval, the Utilities anticipate issuing these RFPs during the first quarter of 2021.
For Lanai, the Utilities proposed to combine the previously issued Variable Renewable Dispatchable Generation Paired with Energy Storage RFP and the CBRE RFP to optimize the benefits of procuring renewable energy, spurring development and increasing the likelihood of success of the CBRE Program on Lanai. As proposed, the Lanai CBRE RFP allows the Utilities to continue collaborating with the majority landowner, Pulama Lanai, who has designated a new larger predetermined site to facilitate expeditious development of a renewable energy project that meets the objectives of both RFPs, while reducing the cost of a project by leveraging economies of scale and coordinating interconnection to the grid.
Drafts of the remaining RFPs on Oahu, Maui, and Hawaii Island were filed on October 9, 2020. A technical conference was held on October 28, 2020 and proposed final drafts were filed on December 1, 2020. Pending PUC approval, the Utilities anticipate issuing these RFPs during the first quarter of 2021.
For small CBRE projects less than 250 kW in size, the Utilities are planning to accept projects over a four-month period on a first-come, first served basis as soon as the PUC approves the Utilities’ final tariff and contracts, filed on September 8, 2020. The PUC reserved 30 MW as well as a small amount of unallocated capacity from Phase 1 for small projects in Phase 2 on Oahu, Maui and Hawaii Island. If applications exceed the program capacity for that island, then a reverse auction process called Competitive Credit Rate Procurement will be triggered to allocate project capacity and determine the credit rate. The Utilities have developed a CBRE Portal where customers can subscribe to a project once the Subscriber Organization has added their project to the portal.
Microgrid services tariff proceeding. In July 2018, the PUC originally issued an order instituting a proceeding to investigate establishment of a microgrid services tariff, pursuant to Act 200 of 2018. The PUC granted motions to intervene in the docket by eight parties (there are currently four parties) and completed its initial procedural schedule in March 2019. In August 2019, the PUC issued an order stating that the focus for the remainder of the docket is to facilitate the ability of microgrids to disconnect from the grid and provide backup power to customers and critical energy uses during contingency events.
The PUC also required the parties to form two Working Groups: (1) a Market Facilitation Working Group to recommend draft tariff language for the Microgrid Services Tariff; and (2) an Interconnection Standards Working Group to develop a new section of Rule 14H specific to interconnection and islanding/reconnection of microgrids. The Utilities filed a Draft Microgrid Services Tariff and updated language for various distributed energy resources Rules on March 30, 2020. Parties to the docket filed comments on and proposed revisions to the Draft Tariff on April 27, 2020.
On November 30, 2020, the PUC convened a technical conference to present its proposed redlines to Utilities’ Draft Microgrid Services Tariff and related documents. On December 10, 2020, the PUC issued its guidance to reconvene the Working Groups as often as necessary to work collaboratively to deliver a Microgrid Services Draft Tariff and related
documents within forty-five days (January 25, 2021). On January 22, 2021, the PUC granted the Consumer Advocate’s requested revisions to the schedule. The requested revisions to the schedule includes the Microgrid Services Draft Tariff and related documents to be submitted on February 1, 2021. The revised schedule also allows for the parties to file their positions on areas of disagreements on February 10, 2021, and to file comments on the parties’ areas of disagreement positions on February 17, 2021.
Decoupling. See “Current Decoupling” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of decoupling.
As part of decoupling, the Utilities also track their rate-making ROACEs as calculated under the earnings sharing mechanism, which includes only items considered in establishing rates. At year-end, each utility’s rate-making return on average common equity (ROACE) is compared against its ROACE allowed by the PUC to determine whether earnings sharing has been triggered. The D&O in the PBR proceeding modified the earnings sharing mechanism to a symmetric arrangement. Effective with annual earnings for 2021, the earnings sharing will be triggered for actual ROACE outside of a 300 basis points dead band above and below a target ROE of 9.5%, which is the current authorized ROE for each of the Utilities. Earnings sharing credits or recoveries will be included in the annual decoupling filing for the following year. Results for 2020, 2019 and 2018 did not trigger the earnings sharing mechanism for the Utilities.
Regulated returns. Actual and PUC-allowed returns, as of December 31, 2020, were as follows:
* Based on recorded operating income and average rate base, both adjusted for items not included in determining electric rates.
** Recorded net income divided by average common equity.
*** ROACE adjusted to remove items not included by the PUC in establishing rates, such as incentive compensation.
The gap between PUC-allowed ROACEs and the ROACEs actually achieved have been primarily due to the consistent exclusion of certain expenses from rates (for example, incentive compensation and charitable contributions), the recognition of annual RAM revenues on June 1 annually rather than on January 1, and O&M increases and return on capital additions since the last rate case in excess of indexed escalations.
Results of operations.
2020 vs. 2019
1The rate schedules of the electric utilities currently contain ECRCs (changed from ECACs in 2019) through which changes in fuel oil prices and certain components of purchased energy costs are passed on to customers.
2The rate schedules of the electric utilities currently contain PPACs through which changes in purchase power expenses (except purchased energy costs) are passed on to customers.
3kWh sales were lower when compared to prior year largely due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the unprecedented reduction to visitor arrivals due to the State’s mandatory travel quarantine significantly impacted Hawaii’s economy throughout much of the year, sales slowly rebound as the year progressed but remained at levels lower than the prior year.
Hawaiian Electric’s effective tax rate (combined federal and state income tax rates) in 2020 and 2019 was comparable at 19%, primarily due to higher 2020 amortization of the Utilities’ regulatory liability related to certain excess deferred income taxes resulting from the Tax Act’s decrease in the federal income tax rate and an increase in excess tax benefits, offset by the tax effect of a decrease in AFUDC.
For a discussion of 2018 results, please refer to the “Results of operations” section in Item 7, “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Electric utility,” in the Company’s 2019 Form 10-K.
The net book value (cost less accumulated depreciation) of utility property, plant and equipment (PPE) as of December 31, 2020 amounted to $4.7 billion, of which approximately 27% related to generation PPE, 64% related to transmission and
distribution PPE, and 9% related to other PPE. Approximately 9% of the total net book value relates to generation PPE that has been deactivated or that the Utilities plan to deactivate or decommission.
Most recent rate proceedings. Unless otherwise agreed or ordered, each electric utility was previously required by PUC order to initiate a rate proceeding every third year (on a staggered basis) to allow the PUC and the Consumer Advocate to regularly evaluate decoupling and to allow the utility to request electric rate increases to cover rising operating costs and the cost of plant and equipment, including the cost of new capital projects to maintain and improve service reliability and integrate more renewable energy. The PUC may grant an interim increase within 10 to 11 months following the filing of an application, but there is no guarantee of such an interim increase and interim amounts collected are refundable, with interest, to the extent they exceed the amount approved in the PUC’s final decision and order (D&O). The timing and amount of any final increase is determined at the discretion of the PUC. The adoption of revenue, expense, rate base and cost of capital amounts (including the ROACE and RORB) for purposes of an interim rate increase does not commit the PUC to accept any such amounts in its final D&O.
Note: The “Request” date reflects the application filing date for the rate proceeding. The date of “Interim Decision and Order” or “Final Decision and Order” reflects the issuance date of PUC order.
1A final D&O issued on October 22, 2020 ordered final rates for the 2020 test year to remain at current effective rates, which provides for no increase to base rates. Hawaiian Electric’s proposed RBA provision tariff and ECRC tariff submitted on November 6, 2020 were approved by the PUC on December 11, 2020. The proposed RBA provision tariff and ECRC tariff took effect on January 1, 2021.
2 A final D&O issued on July 28, 2020 ordered final rates for the 2019 test year to remain at current effective rates, such that there is a zero increase in rates. The proposed final tariffs and PIM tariffs took effect on November 1, 2020, and the ECRC tariff became effective on January 1, 2021.
See also “Most recent rate proceedings” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
On December 23, 2020, the PBR D&O was issued, establishing a new PBR Framework. The PBR Framework implemented a five-year multi-year rate period (MRP), during which there will be no general rate case applications. In the fourth year of the MRP, the PUC will comprehensively review the PBR Framework to determine if any modifications or revisions are appropriate.
Developments in renewable energy efforts. Developments in the Utilities’ efforts to further their renewable energy strategy include renewable energy projects discussed in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements and the following:
New renewable PPAs.
•In December 2014, the PUC approved a PPA for Renewable As-Available Energy dated October 3, 2013 between Hawaiian Electric and Na Pua Makani Power Partners, LLC (NPM) for a proposed 24-MW wind farm on Oahu. In August 2020, the project was energized and commissioning of all wind turbines was completed. However, the project was paused due to a conductor deficiency. Hawaiian Electric reconductored the 46kV circuit and in December 2020, the project reached commercial operation.
NPM received its Incidental Take Permit from the Department of Fish and Wildlife Service on September 7, 2018. Keep the North Shore Country (KNSC) has appealed this decision and the case has been transferred to the Hawaii Supreme Court. On June 17, 2020, KNSC filed a Motion for Stay Upon Appeal. On August 10, 2020, KNSC’s Motion for Stay Upon Appeal was denied. KNSC and Kahuku Community Association (KCA) have also petitioned to appeal NPM’s Conditional Use Permits. On August 6, 2020, the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) granted NPM’s Motions to Dismiss the Appeal Petitions of KNSC and KCA.
Life of the Land (LOL) filed a Motion for Relief to argue the PUC’s approval for NPM PPA was invalid and should be revised. Hawaiian Electric and the Consumer Advocate filed an opposition to this motion for relief. A hearing on the motion for relief was held on November 22, 2019. On April 16, 2020, the PUC issued an order denying LOL’s Motion for Relief. On April 27, 2020, LOL filed a Notice of Appeal of the PUC’s order with the Supreme Court of the State of Hawaii. Hawaiian Electric filed its Answering Brief with the Supreme Court of the State of Hawaii on November 12, 2020. The Court has yet to set a date for oral arguments.
•On December 31, 2019, Hawaii Electric Light and PGV entered into an Amended and Restated Power Purchase Agreement (ARPPA), subject to approval by the PUC. The ARPPA extends the term of the existing PPA by 25 years to 2052, expands the firm capacity of the facility to 46 MW and delinks the pricing for energy delivered from the facility from fossil fuel prices to reduce cost to customers. The existing PPA (except for lower-tiered pricing for certain energy dispatched above 30 MW) will remain in effect until it is superseded by the ARPPA when the expanded capacity is in commercial operation.
Tariffed renewable resources.
•As of December 31, 2020, there were approximately 513 MW, 111 MW and 124 MW of installed distributed renewable energy technologies (mainly PV) at Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, respectively, for tariff-based private customer generation programs, namely Standard Interconnection Agreement, Net Energy Metering, Net Energy Metering Plus, Customer Grid Supply, Customer Self Supply, Customer Grid Supply Plus and Interim Smart Export. As of December 31, 2020, an estimated 31% of single-family homes on the islands of Oahu, Hawaii and Maui have installed private rooftop solar systems, and approximately 19% of the Utilities’ total customers have solar systems.
•The Utilities began accepting energy from feed-in tariff projects in 2011. As of December 31, 2020, there were 43 MW, 2 MW and 5 MW of installed feed-in tariff capacity from renewable energy technologies at Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, respectively.
Biofuel sources.
•In July 2018, the PUC approved Hawaiian Electric’s 3-year biodiesel supply contract with Pacific Biodiesel Technologies, LLC (PBT) to supply 2 million to 4 million gallons of biodiesel at Hawaiian Electric’s Schofield Generating Station and the Honolulu International Airport Emergency Power Facility (HIA Facility) and any other generating unit on Oahu, as necessary. The PBT contract became effective on November 1, 2018. Hawaiian Electric also has a spot buy contract with PBT to purchase additional quantities of biodiesel at or below the price of diesel. Some purchases of “at parity” biodiesel have been made under the spot purchase contract, which was extended through June 2022.
•Hawaiian Electric has a contingency supply contract with REG Marketing & Logistics Group, LLC to also supply biodiesel to any generating unit on Oahu in the event PBT is not able to supply necessary quantities. This contingency contract has been extended to November 2021, and will continue with no volume purchase requirements.
Requests for renewable proposals, expressions of interest, and information.
•Under a request for proposal process governed by the PUC and monitored by independent observers, in February 2018, the Utilities issued RFPs for 220 MW of renewable generation on Oahu, 50 MW of renewable generation on Hawaii Island, and 60 MW of renewable generation on Maui. The Utilities selected a final award group for Hawaii Island in August 2018 and for Maui and Oahu in September 2018.
In December 2018, the Utilities executed a total of seven renewable generation PPAs utilizing photovoltaic technology paired with a battery storage system for a total of 262 MW, of which six PPAs were approved by the PUC in March 2019 and one PPA for Maui Electric was approved on October 5, 2020. In February 2019, Hawaiian Electric filed an additional PPA for a proposed 12.5 MW PV plus battery storage project, which was approved by the PUC on August 20, 2019. Summarized information for a total of 8 PPAs, including the one most recently approved for Maui Electric, is as follows:
The Utilities have received PUC approvals to recover the total projected annual payment of $62.6 million for the eight PPAs through the PPAC to the extent such costs are not included in base rates.
•In continuation of its February 2018 request for proposal process, the Utilities issued its Stage 2 Renewable RFPs for Oahu, Maui and Hawaii Island and Grid Services RFP on August 22, 2019. This procurement plan sought approximately 900 MW of renewable energy, including 594 MW on Oahu, 135 MW on Maui and a range between 32 to 203 MW on Hawaii Island. This second phase, as approved by the PUC, was open to all renewable and storage resources, including efforts to add more renewable generation, renewable plus storage, standalone storage and grid services. The scope of these RFPs has been expanded to accelerate renewable energy procurement beyond the remainder of the 2022 targets identified in Stage 1 to include the energy requirement associated with the planned retirement of the Kahului Power Plant on Maui and the upcoming expiration of the agreement for the AES Hawaii facility on Oahu. For the Grid Services RFP, the targets had been expanded in alignment with the Renewable RFPs. Utility proposals were submitted on November 4, 2019. Proposals from third parties for these RFPs were submitted on November 5, 2019. Final awards for the renewable projects were made on May 8, 2020. Final awards for the grid services projects were made starting in January 2020. On Oahu, seven solar-plus-storage projects and one standalone storage project totaling approximately 281 MW of generation and 1.8 GWh of storage were selected. On Maui Island, three solar-plus-storage projects and one standalone storage project totaling approximately 100 MW of generation and 560 MWh of storage were selected. On Hawaii Island, two solar-plus-storage projects and one standalone storage project totaling approximately 72 MW of generation and 492 MWh of storage were selected. Two Utility Self-Build projects were among those selected; a 40-MW, 160-MWh standalone energy storage system on Maui and a 12-MW, 12-MWh storage system on Hawaii Island. Since selection, three renewable plus storage projects have voluntarily withdrawn from the process for various reasons, including change in circumstances for the developer and a misunderstanding of contract requirements. To date, the Utilities have filed 10 PPAs, 2 grid services purchase agreements (GSPA) and 2 applications for commitments of funds for capital expenditures for approval of the utility self-build projects with the PUC.
A summary of the 10 PPAs that were filed with the PUC, is as follows:
A summary of the GSPAs that were filed with the PUC is as follows:
A summary of the utility self-build projects that were filed with the PUC is as follows:
On December 31, 2020, the PUC approved three solar-plus-storage PPAs for a total of 210MW. Through these approvals, the Utilities received PUC approval to recover the total projected annual payment of $54 million for three PPAs through the PPAC to the extent such costs are not included in base rates. The above-mentioned other projects remain with the PUC for decision making.
•On November 27, 2019, the Utilities issued RFPs for renewable generation paired with energy storage on the islands of Lanai and Molokai. The Utilities were seeking PV paired with storage or small wind (specified as 100 kW turbines or smaller) on Molokai and PV paired with storage on Lanai. Proposals for the Molokai RFP were received on February 14, 2020. The Lanai RFP was temporarily postponed, while the Utilities reevaluated the system needs. The Utilities filed an update to the Lanai RFP on March 10, 2020. In light of a PUC order issued on April 9, 2020 in the CBRE docket, the Utilities proposed in their July 9, 2020 filing to combine the previously issued Lanai RFP with the CBRE RFP described in the order to optimize the benefits of procuring renewable energy, spurring development and increasing the likelihood of success of the CBRE program on Lanai. The proposed combined Lanai RFP is before the PUC for approval. On October 15, 2020, the Utilities selected one project from the Molokai RFP for a total of 4.5 MW of solar and 24 MWh of storage. The developer, however, declined to accept the award. The Utilities are currently evaluating next steps.
Legislation and regulation. Congress and the Hawaii legislature periodically consider legislation that could have positive or negative effects on the Utilities and their customers. Also see “Environmental regulation” in “Item 1. Business” and Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fuel contracts. The fuel contract entered into in January 2019, by the Utilities and PAR Hawaii Refining, LLC (PAR Hawaii), for the Utilities’ low sulfur fuel oil (LSFO), high sulfur fuel oil (HSFO), No. 2 diesel, and ultra-low sulfur diesel (ULSD) requirements was approved by the PUC, and became effective on April 28, 2019 and terminates on December 31, 2022. This contract is a requirement contract with no minimum purchases. If PAR is unable to provide LSFO, HSFO, diesel and/or ULSD the contract allows the Utilities to purchase LSFO, HSFO, diesel and/or ULSD from another supplier. The contract will automatically renew upon the conclusion of the original term for successive terms of 1 year beginning on January 1, 2023 unless a party gives written termination notice at least 120 days before the beginning of an extension. The costs incurred under the contract with PAR Hawaii are recovered in the Utilities’ respective ECRCs.
On June 9, 2020, the Utilities and Par Hawaii entered into a First Amendment to the fuel contract. The First Amendment amends only the pricing to create a two-tiered structure based on volume, with all tier-1 LSFO up to the tier-1 maximum to be purchased exclusively from PAR at the established pricing, and purchases in excess of that volume (tier-2) either from PAR at the established pricing, or from an alternative supplier. On August 4, 2020, the PUC approved the First Amendment, which has an effective date of July 15, 2020, on an interim basis. The PUC’s approval order allows the recovery of such costs associated with the First Amendment through the ECRC to the extent that the costs are not recovered in base rates. The PUC intends to review whether the First Amendment is reasonable and in the public interest in the final decision, but it will not subject the recovery of the costs between the interim decision and the final decision to retroactive disallowances.
Army privatization. On October 30, 2020, the PUC approved Hawaiian Electric’s 50-year contract with the U.S. Army to own, operate and maintain the electric distribution system serving the U.S. Army’s 12 installations on Oahu, including Schofield Barracks, Wheeler Army Airfield, Tripler Army Medical Center, Fort Shafter, and Army housing areas. Hawaiian Electric will acquire the Army’s existing distribution system for a purchase price of $16.3 million and will pay the Army in the form of a monthly credit against the monthly utility services charge over the 50-year term of the contract.
Hawaiian Electric will take ownership and all responsibilities for operation and maintenance of the system in late 2021 for a 50-year term, after a one-year transition period. Under the contract, Hawaiian Electric will make initial capital upgrades over the first six years of the contract and replacements of aging infrastructure over the 50-year term. In addition to its regular monthly electricity bill, the Army will pay Hawaiian Electric a monthly utility services charge to cover operations and maintenance expenses and provide recovery for capital upgrades, capital replacements, and the existing distribution system based on a rate of return determined by the PUC for regulated utility investments, as well as depreciation expense. A preliminary assessment estimated the capital needs of approximately $40 million in the first six years of the contract. The PUC requires Hawaiian Electric to file regular periodic reports on the activities and investments in fulfillment of the contract and will review the major projects planned on behalf of the Army. The annual impact on Hawaiian Electric’s earnings is not expected to be material and will depend on a number of factors, including the amount and timing of capital upgrades and capital replacement.
Liquidity and capital resources. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding on Hawaiian Electric’s revolving credit facilities and under its commercial paper program and the total amount of available borrowing capacity under the Utilities’ committed lines of credit was $275 million.
To preserve and enhance the Utilities’ liquidity position, given the significant and ongoing uncertainty regarding the potential scale and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Utilities have taken a number of steps. First, on April 20, 2020, Hawaiian Electric added an incremental $75 million in committed revolving credit capacity with a 364-day revolving credit facility (see Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements). The Utilities also issued $160 million of notes through a private placement of taxable debt in May 2020, the proceeds of which were used to finance capital expenditures, repay short-term debt
used to finance or refinance capital expenditures and/or reimburse funds for payment of capital expenditures. Secondly, $50 million of an existing 364-day term loan was refinanced with a new $50 million term loan maturing in April 2021. In addition, the Utilities executed a $115 million private placement of taxable debt on October 29, 2020, to finance their capital expenditures and/or to reimburse funds used for the payment of capital expenditures. The private placement had a delayed draw feature, which allowed the Utilities to draw the funds on or before January 15, 2021. As a result, on January 14, 2021, the Utilities drew the funds and on the next day, paid off the $50 million term loan as required by the term loan agreement.
In addition to the foregoing financing transactions, in order to further enhance the Utilities’ liquidity position, the Utilities have deferred, pursuant to section 2302 of the CARES Act, the payment of the applicable employer portion of Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance payroll tax deposits that were due in 2020, but arose subsequent to the enactment of the CARES Act. The total amount of payroll taxes deferred was approximately $13 million at December 31, 2020. Fifty percent of the deferred payroll taxes will be paid in each of December 2021 and December 2022. Starting in the second quarter of 2020, the Utilities also deferred approximately $5.7 million per month in planned monthly pension contributions to further strengthen their liquidity position. The Utilities paid all deferred contributions by December 31, 2020. If further liquidity is necessary, the Utilities could also reduce the pace of capital spending related to non-essential projects.
The Utilities believe that their ability to generate cash, both internally from operations and externally from issuances of equity and debt securities, as well as bank borrowings, is adequate to maintain sufficient liquidity to fund their contractual obligations and commercial commitments, their forecasted capital expenditures and investments, their expected retirement benefit plan contributions and other cash requirements. However, the COVID-19 pandemic is a rapidly evolving situation, and the Utilities cannot predict the extent or duration of the outbreak, the future effects that it will have on the global, national or local economy, including the impacts on the Utilities’ ability, as well as the cost, to access additional capital, or the future impacts on the Utilities’ financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in Part I for further discussion of risks and uncertainties.
Hawaiian Electric’s consolidated capital structure was as follows:
1 Short-term borrowings as of December 31, 2019 reflect the impact of funding for a senior note of $82 million included in long-term debt, net, which was paid off on January 1, 2020.
Information about Hawaiian Electric’s commercial paper borrowings, borrowings from HEI, and line of credit facility were as follows:
1The maximum amount of external short-term borrowings by Hawaiian Electric during 2020 was approximately $200 million. At December 31, 2020, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric had short-term borrowings from Hawaiian Electric of $18.8 million and $7.9 million, respectively, which intercompany borrowings are eliminated in consolidation. In addition to the short-term borrowings above, on May 19, 2020, Hawaiian Electric paid off and terminated the $100 million term loan facility dated as of December 23, 2019 and entered into a 364-day, $50 million term loan facility as of May 19, 2020. Hawaiian Electric drew $50 million on May 19, 2020 and on January 15, 2021, Hawaiian Electric paid off the $50 million term loan (see Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Hawaiian Electric utilizes short-term debt, typically commercial paper, to support normal operations, to refinance short-term debt and for other temporary requirements. Hawaiian Electric also borrows short-term from HEI for itself and on behalf of Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, and Hawaiian Electric may borrow from or loan to Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric on a short-term basis. The intercompany borrowings among the Utilities, but not the borrowings from HEI, are eliminated in the consolidation of Hawaiian Electric’s financial statements. The Utilities periodically utilize long-term debt, borrowings of the proceeds of special purpose revenue bonds (SPRBs) issued by the State of Hawaii Department of Budget and Finance (DBF) and the issuance of privately placed unsecured senior notes bearing taxable interest, to finance the Utilities’
capital improvement projects, or to repay short-term borrowings used to finance such projects. The PUC must approve issuances, if any, of equity and long-term debt securities by the Utilities.
Hawaiian Electric has a $200 million line of credit facility and a $75 million 364-day revolving credit facility with no amounts outstanding at December 31, 2020. See Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Credit ratings. Moody’s and S&P (Rating Agencies) revised Hawaiian Electric’s rating outlook to “positive” from “stable” on October 21, 2019 and February 20, 2020, respectively. The revision to the rating outlook was primarily based on the progress of regulatory reform for the Utilities. The Rating Agencies indicated that future upgrades or downgrades in ratings action are dependent on a variety of factors, including changes in its cash flow from operations ratios and improvements in the regulatory environment, specifically, a credit-supportive decision in the performance-based regulation proceeding. See “Performance-based regulation framework” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of February 12, 2021, the Fitch, Moody’s and S&P ratings of Hawaiian Electric were as follows:
* Not rated.
** On February 20, 2020, S&P revised Utilities’ outlook to positive and affirmed Utilities’ issuer credit and commercial paper ratings.
Note: The above ratings reflect only the view, at the time the ratings are issued or affirmed, of the applicable rating agency, from whom an explanation of the significance of such ratings may be obtained. Such ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold any securities; such ratings may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating agencies; and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
SPRBs. SPRBs have been issued by the DBF to finance (and refinance) capital improvement projects of Hawaiian Electric and its subsidiaries, but the sources of their repayment are the non-collateralized obligations of Hawaiian Electric and its subsidiaries under loan agreements and notes issued to the DBF, including Hawaiian Electric’s guarantees of its subsidiaries’ obligations.
On May 24, 2019, the PUC approved the Utilities’ request to issue SPRBs in the amounts of up to $70 million, $2.5 million and $7.5 million for Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, respectively, prior to June 30, 2020, to finance the Utilities’ capital improvement programs. Pursuant to this approval, on October 10, 2019, the DBF issued, at par, Series 2019 SPRBs in the aggregate principal amount of $80 million with a maturity of October 1, 2049. As of December 31, 2020, Hawaiian Electric had $16 million of undrawn funds remaining with the trustee. Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric had no undrawn funds as of December 31, 2020.
On June 10, 2019, the Hawaii legislature authorized the issuance of up to $700 million of SPRBs ($400 million for Hawaiian Electric, $150 million for Hawaii Electric Light and $150 million for Maui Electric), with PUC approval, prior to June 30, 2024, to finance the Utilities’ multi-project capital improvement programs (2019 Legislative Authorization).
On February 9, 2021, the PUC approved the Utilities’ request to issue SPRBs (up to $100 million, $35 million and $45 million for Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, respectively) through 2022, with the proceeds to be used to finance the Utilities’ multi-project capital improvement programs. The PUC also approved the use of the expedited approval procedure to request the issuance and sale of the remaining/unused amount of SPRBs authorized by the 2019 Legislative Authorization (i.e., total not to exceed up to $400 million for Hawaiian Electric, up to $150 million for Hawaii Electric Light, and up to $150 million for Maui Electric) during the period January 1, 2023 through June 30, 2024.
Bank loans. On May 19, 2020, Hawaiian Electric paid off and terminated the $100 million term loan credit agreement dated as of December 23, 2019. In addition, Hawaiian Electric entered into a 364-day, $50 million term loan credit agreement that matures on April 19, 2021. Hawaiian Electric drew the full $50 million on May 19, 2020. On January 15, 2021, Hawaiian Electric paid off the $50 million term loan.
Taxable debt. On January 31, 2019, the Utilities received PUC approval (January 2019 Approval) to issue the remaining authorized amounts under the PUC approval received in April 2018 (April 2018 Approval) in 2019 through 2020 (Hawaiian Electric up to $205 million and Hawaii Electric Light up to $15 million of taxable debt), as well as a supplemental increase to authorize the issuance of additional taxable debt to finance capital expenditures, repay long-term and/or short term debt used to finance or refinance capital expenditures, and/or to reimburse funds used for payment of capital expenditures, and to refinance the Utilities’ 2004 junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures (QUIDS) prior to maturity. In addition, the January 2019 Approval authorized the Utilities to extend the period to issue additional taxable
debt from December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2022. The new total “up to” amounts of taxable debt requested to be issued through December 31, 2022 are $410 million, $150 million and $130 million for Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, respectively.
Pursuant to the approval, on May 14, 2020, the Utilities issued through a private placement, $160 million of unsecured senior notes bearing taxable interest ($110 million for Hawaiian Electric, $10 million for Hawaii Electric Light and $40 million for Maui Electric) to finance their capital expenditures and/or to reimburse funds used for the payment of capital expenditures. See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. On September 30, 2020, the Utilities received PUC approval to issue, prior to December 31, 2021, $115 million of unsecured senior notes bearing taxable interest (Hawaiian Electric up to $60 million, Hawaii Electric Light up to $30 million and Maui Electric up to $25 million) to finance capital expenditures, repay long-term and/or short term debt used to finance or refinance capital expenditures, and/or to reimburse funds used for payment of capital expenditures.
Pursuant to this approval, on October 29, 2020, the Utilities executed through a private placement, $115 million of unsecured senior notes bearing taxable interest ($60 million for Hawaiian Electric, $30 million for Hawaii Electric Light and $25 million for Maui Electric) to finance their capital expenditures and/or to reimburse funds used for the payment of capital expenditures. The private placement had a delayed draw feature, which allowed the Utilities to draw the funds on or before January 15, 2021. As a result, on January 14, 2021, the Utilities drew all of the funds. See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of October 29, 2020, Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light, and Maui Electric have $135 million, $85 million, and $45 million, respectively, of remaining taxable debt to issue prior to December 31, 2022. See summary table below.
Equity. In October 2018, the Utilities received PUC approval for the supplemental increase to issue and sell additional common stock in the amounts of up to $280 million for Hawaiian Electric and up to $100 million each for Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, with the new total “up to” amounts of $430 million for Hawaiian Electric and $110 million each for Hawaii Electric Light and Maui Electric, and to extend the period authorized by the PUC to issue and sell common stock from December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, Hawaiian Electric, Hawaii Electric Light, and Maui Electric have $275.8 million, $102.5 million, and $87.8, respectively, of remaining common stock to issue prior to December 31, 2022. See summary table below.
Cash flows. The following table reflects the changes in cash flows for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020
compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019:
Net cash provided by operating activities: The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by higher cash paid for accounts payable due to timing, and lower cash receipts from customers due to the impact of the pandemic and decreased customer bills as a result of lower fuel prices.
Net cash used in investing activities: The decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily driven by a decrease in capital expenditures related to construction activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities: The increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily driven by lower repayment of long-term debt.
For a discussion of 2018 operating, investing and financing activities, please refer to the “Liquidity and capital resources” section in Item 7, “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Electric utility,” in the Company’s 2019 Form 10-K.
Material cash requirements of the Utilities include O&M expenses, fuel and purchase power costs, debt payments and capital expenditures. The cash requirements for O&M, fuel and purchase power costs, and debt payments are generally funded through the collection of the Utilities’ revenue requirement established in the last rate case and other mechanisms established under the regulatory framework. The cash requirements for capital expenditures are generally funded through retained earnings, the issuance of debt, and contributions of equity from HEI.
Forecast capital expenditures. For the three-year period 2021 through 2023, the Utilities forecast up to $1.2 billion of net capital expenditures, which could change over time based upon external factors such as the timing and scope of environmental regulations and/or unforeseen delays in permitting and timing of PUC decisions. Proceeds from the issuance of equity and long-term debt, cash flows from operating activities, temporary increases in short-term borrowings and existing cash and cash equivalents are expected to provide the funds needed for the net capital expenditures, to pay down commercial paper or other short-term borrowings, as well as to fund any unanticipated expenditures not included in the 2021 to 2023 forecast (such as increases in the costs or acceleration of capital projects, or unanticipated capital expenditures that may be required by new environmental laws and regulations).
Management periodically reviews capital expenditure estimates and the timing of construction projects. These estimates may change significantly as a result of many considerations, including changes in economic conditions, changes in forecasts of kWh sales and peak load, the availability of purchased power and changes in expectations concerning the construction and ownership of future generation units, the availability of generating sites and transmission and distribution corridors, the need for fuel infrastructure investments, the ability to obtain adequate and timely rate increases, escalation in construction costs, the effects of opposition to proposed construction projects and requirements of environmental and other regulatory and permitting authorities.
Selected short-term and long-term contractual obligations and commitments. The following table presents aggregated information about total payments due from the Utilities during the indicated periods under the specified contractual obligations and commitments:
1 Includes contractual obligations and commitments for capital expenditures and expense amounts.
The table above does not include other categories of obligations and commitments, such as deferred taxes, trade payables, amounts that will become payable in future periods under collective bargaining and other employment agreements and employee benefit plans and potential refunds of amounts collected from ratepayers (e.g., under the earnings sharing mechanism). As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the assets held in trusts to satisfy the obligations of the Utilities’ retirement benefit plans did not exceed the retirement benefit plans’ benefit obligation. Minimum funding requirements for retirement benefit plans have not been included in the table above. See Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for retirement benefit plan obligations and estimated contributions for 2021.
See “Biofuel sources” in the “Developments in renewable energy efforts” section above for additional information for fuel oil purchase obligation. See Notes 3 and 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of power purchase commitments and operating leases obligations, respectively.
Competition. Although competition in the generation sector in Hawaii is moderated by the scarcity of generation sites, various permitting processes and lack of interconnections to other electric utilities, the PUC has promoted a more competitive electric industry environment through its decisions concerning competitive bidding and distributed generation. An increasing amount of generation is provided by IPPs and customer distributed generation.
Competitive bidding. In December 2006, the PUC issued a decision that included a final competitive bidding framework, which became effective immediately. The final framework states, among other things, that: (1) a utility is required to use competitive bidding to acquire a future generation resource or a block of generation resources unless the PUC finds bidding to be unsuitable; (2) the framework does not apply in certain situations identified in the framework; (3) waivers from competitive bidding for certain circumstances will be considered; (4) the utility is required to select an independent observer from a list approved by the PUC whenever the utility or its affiliate seeks to advance a project proposal (i.e., in competition with those offered by bidders); (5) the utility may consider its own self-bid proposals in response to generation needs identified in its RFP; and (6) for any resource to which competitive bidding does not apply (due to waiver or exemption), the utility retains its traditional obligation to offer to purchase capacity and energy from a Qualifying Facility (QF) at avoided cost upon reasonable terms and conditions approved by the PUC.
Technological developments. New emerging and breakthrough technological developments (e.g., the commercial development of energy storage, grid support utility interactive inverters, fuel cells, distributed generation, grid modernization, electrification of transportation, implement predictive analytics using artificial intelligence machine learning algorithms to help assess the state of health of utility assets and prevent premature failure, and the diversification of generation from renewable sources) may impact the Utilities’ future competitive position, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. The Utilities continue to seek prudent opportunities to develop and implement advanced technologies that align with its technical and business plans and will support a more reliable, flexible and resilient utility grid.
Environmental matters. See “Electric utility-Regulation-Environmental regulation” under “Item 1. Business” and “Environmental regulation” in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Commitments and contingencies. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, and Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of important commitments and contingencies.
Off-balance sheet arrangements. See “Off-balance sheet arrangements” above in HEI Consolidated section.
Material estimates and critical accounting policies. Also see “Material estimates and critical accounting policies” above in HEI Consolidated section.
Regulatory assets and liabilities. The Utilities are regulated by the PUC. In accordance with accounting standards for regulatory operations, the Company’s and the Utilities’ financial statements reflect assets, liabilities, revenues and costs of the Utilities based on current cost-based rate-making regulations. The actions of regulators, including the PBR Framework, can affect the timing of recognition of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities.
Regulatory liabilities represent amounts collected from customers for costs that are expected to be incurred in the future, or amounts collected in excess of costs incurred that are refundable to customers. Regulatory assets represent incurred costs that have been deferred because their recovery in future customer rates is probable. As of December 31, 2020, the consolidated regulatory liabilities and regulatory assets of the Utilities amounted to $960 million and $767 million, respectively, compared to $972 million and $715 million as of December 31, 2019, respectively. Regulatory liabilities and regulatory assets are itemized in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory environment. Because current rates include the recovery of regulatory assets existing as of the last rate case and rates in effect allow the Utilities to earn a reasonable rate of return, management believes that the recovery of the regulatory assets as of December 31, 2020 is probable. This determination assumes continuation of the current political and regulatory climate in Hawaii and is subject to change in the future.
Management believes that the operations of the Utilities, including the impact of the newly approved PBR Framework, currently satisfy the criteria for regulatory accounting. If events or circumstances should change so that those criteria are no longer satisfied, the Utilities expect that their regulatory assets, net of regulatory liabilities, would be charged to the statement of income in the period of discontinuance, which may result in a material adverse effect on the Company’s and the Utilities’ results of operations, financial condition and liquidity.
Revenues. Electric utility revenues are based on rates authorized by the PUC and include revenues applicable to estimated energy consumed in the accounting period, but not yet billed to customers (Unbilled revenues), and RBA revenues or refunds for the difference between PUC-approved target revenues and recorded adjusted revenues, which delinks revenues from kWh sales. Unbilled revenues represent an estimate of energy consumed by customers subsequent to the date of the last meter reading to the end of the current reporting period. As of December 31, 2020, Unbilled revenues, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, amounted to $101 million and the RBA revenue recognized in 2020 amounted to $35 million.
Asset retirement obligations. The Utilities recognize AROs at present value of expected costs to retire long-lived assets from service, which is estimated using a discounted cash flow model that relies on significant estimates and assumptions about future decommissioning costs, inflationary rates, and the estimated date of decommissioning. The estimated future cash flows are discounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free rate to reflect the risk associated with decommissioning the assets. The Utilities have not recorded AROs for assets that are expected to operate indefinitely or where the Utilities cannot estimate a settlement date (or range of potential settlement dates.) As such, ARO liabilities are not recorded for certain asset retirement activities, including various Utility-owned generating facilities and certain electric transmission, distribution and telecommunication assets resulting from easements over property not owned by the Utilities.
Changes in estimated costs, timing of decommissioning or other assumptions used in the calculation could cause material revision on the recorded liabilities. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Utilities’ AROs totaled $10.7 million and $10.3 million, respectively.
Bank
Executive overview and strategy. ASB, headquartered in Honolulu, Hawaii, is a full-service community bank serving both consumer and commercial customers. ASB is one of the largest financial institutions in Hawaii and ended 2020 with assets of $8.4 billion and net income of $58 million, compared to assets of $7.2 billion and net income of $89 million in 2019.
ASB provides a wide range of financial products and services, and in order to remain competitive and continue building core franchise value, ASB is focused on making banking easier for the customer and developing and introducing new products and services in order to meet market needs. Additionally, the banking industry is constantly changing and ASB is making the investments in people and technology necessary to adapt and remain competitive, facilitate process improvements in order to deliver a continuously better experience for its customers, and be a more efficient bank. ASB’s continued focus has been on efficient growth to maximize profitability and capital efficiency, as well as control expenses. The current economic crisis from the COVID-19 pandemic altered the strategies ASB set out to achieve. Key strategies to drive organic growth include:
1.deepening customer relationships through the redesign of branch-centric approaches as transactions and engagement migrate to other channels;
2.building out product and service offerings to open new segments;
3.online and remotely-assisted account opening capabilities as there is a much more rapid and pervasive adoption of remote banking by Hawaii banking customers; and
4.prioritizing efficiency actions to gain earnings leverage on organic growth.
The interest rate environment and the quality of ASB’s assets will continue to influence its financial results. A lowering of interest rates across the yield curve as a result of the pandemic’s impact on the economy has negatively affected ASB’s net interest margin and credit losses. The potential for further compression of ASB’s net interest margin if interest rates continue to decrease is a risk that is actively managed.
As part of its interest rate risk management process, ASB uses simulation analysis to measure net interest income sensitivity to changes in interest rates (see “