Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the financial position of H&E Equipment Services, Inc. and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020, and its results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, and should be read in conjunction with the Selected Financial Data and our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains, in addition to historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties (see discussion of “Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those factors set forth under Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the United States of America and the world, including in the primary regions we operate. Many State Governors issued temporary Executive Orders in 2020, which continue to remain effective in most states that, among other stipulations, effectively limit in-person work activities for most industries and businesses having the effect of suspending or severely curtailing operations. While we are considered an essential business pursuant to the various Executive Orders, if repercussions of the outbreak are prolonged, it could have a significant adverse impact to the underlying industries of some of our customers or in some or all of the primary markets in which we operate, including our customers in the oil and gas industry. To date, our branch locations remain operational and we have not incurred any significant interruptions to our day-to-day operations or supply chain, except most of our corporate employees are working remotely. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we proactively implemented certain measures to strengthen cash flow, manage costs, strengthen liquidity and enhance employee safety. These measures included the reduction of payroll costs, a reduction in capital expenditures and other discretionary spending, the elimination of most business travel and restriction of visitors to our corporate office, enhanced cleaning and disinfection procedures at our corporate office and branch locations, promotion of social distancing and the wearing of face coverings (masks) at our corporate office and branch locations, and requirements for employees to work from home where possible.
As the impact of COVID-19 became more widespread in March 2020, our equipment rental utilization and sales volumes began to decline from February 2020 levels and this decline continued through mid-April, where we began to see utilization and sales levels improve and stabilize for the remainder of the year and into early 2021, as adjusted for normal seasonality. Even with these recent sequential improvements, our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, were 13.3% lower than those of the year ended December 31, 2019. The timing and the extent of any continued recovery, or subsequent contraction, in our equipment rental utilization and sales volumes cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. As such, the extent of the ultimate impact of the pandemic on the Company's operational and financial performance will depend on various developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, the impact on capital and financial markets, governmental limitations on business operations generally, and its and their impact on potential customers, employees, vendors and distribution partners, all of which cannot be reasonably predicted at this time. For a discussion of liquidity, see Liquidity and Capital Resources below.
Background
As one of the largest integrated equipment services companies in the United States focused on heavy construction and industrial equipment, we rent, sell and provide parts and services support for four core categories of specialized equipment: (1) hi-lift or aerial work platform equipment; (2) cranes; (3) earthmoving equipment; and (4) material handling equipment. By providing equipment rental, sales, on-site parts, repair and maintenance functions under one roof, we are a one-stop provider for our customers’ varied equipment needs. This full service approach provides us with multiple points of customer contact, enables us to maintain a high quality rental fleet, as well as an effective distribution channel for fleet disposal and provides cross-selling opportunities among our new and used equipment sales, rental, parts sales and services operations.
As of February 10, 2021, we operated 97 full-service facilities throughout the Intermountain, Southwest, Gulf Coast, West Coast, Southeast and Mid-Atlantic regions of the United States. Our work force includes distinct, focused sales forces for our new and used equipment sales and rental operations, highly skilled service technicians, product specialists and regional and district managers. We focus our sales and rental activities on, and organize our personnel principally by, our four core equipment categories. We believe this allows us to provide specialized equipment knowledge, improve the effectiveness of our rental and sales force and strengthen our customer relationships. In addition, we have branch managers for each location who are responsible for managing their assets and financial results. We believe this fosters accountability in our business and strengthens our local and regional relationships.
Through our predecessor companies, we have been in the equipment services business for approximately 60 years. H&E L.L.C. was formed in June 2002 through the business combination of Head & Engquist, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gulf Wide, and ICM. Head & Engquist, founded in 1961, and ICM, founded in 1971, were two leading regional, integrated equipment service companies operating in contiguous geographic markets. In connection with our initial public offering in February 2006, we converted H&E LLC into H&E Equipment Services, Inc., a Delaware corporation.
Effective January 1, 2018, we completed the acquisition of CEC, a privately-held company focused on non-residential construction equipment rentals serving the greater Denver, Colorado area out of three branch locations. Effective April 1, 2018, we completed the acquisition of Rental, Inc., a privately-held equipment rental and distribution company with five branch locations in Alabama and Florida. Effective February 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of WRI, a privately-held equipment rental company with six branch locations in Central Texas.
Business Segments
We have five reportable segments because we derive our revenues from five principal business activities: (1) equipment rentals; (2) new equipment sales; (3) used equipment sales; (4) parts sales; and (5) repair and maintenance services. These segments are based upon how we allocate resources and assess performance. In addition, we also have non-segmented revenues and costs that relate to equipment support activities.
•
Equipment Rentals. Our rental operation primarily rents our four core types of construction and industrial equipment. We have a well-maintained rental fleet and our own dedicated sales force, focused by equipment type. We actively manage the size, quality, age and composition of our rental fleet based on our analysis of key measures such as time utilization (which we analyze as equipment usage based on: (1) a percentage of original equipment cost, and (2) the number of rental equipment units available for rent), rental rate trends and targets, rental equipment dollar utilization and maintenance and repair costs, which we closely monitor. We maintain fleet quality through regional quality control managers and our parts and services operations.
•
New Equipment Sales. Our new equipment sales operation sells new equipment in all of our four core product categories. We have a retail sales force focused by equipment type that is separate from our rental sales force. Manufacturer purchase terms and pricing are managed by our product specialists.
•
Used Equipment Sales. Our used equipment sales are generated primarily from sales of used equipment from our rental fleet, as well as from sales of inventoried equipment that we acquire through trade-ins from our equipment customers and through selective purchases of high quality used equipment. Used equipment is sold by our dedicated retail sales force. Our used equipment sales are an effective way for us to manage the size and composition of our rental fleet and provide a profitable distribution channel for disposal of rental equipment.
•
Parts Sales. Our parts business sells new and used parts for the equipment we sell and also provides parts to our own rental fleet. To a lesser degree, we also sell parts for equipment produced by manufacturers whose products we neither rent nor sell. In order to provide timely parts and services support to our customers as well as our own rental fleet, we maintain an extensive parts inventory.
•
Services. Our services operation provides maintenance and repair services for our customers’ equipment and to our own rental fleet at our facilities as well as at our customers’ locations. As the authorized distributor for numerous equipment manufacturers, we are able to provide service to that equipment that will be covered under the manufacturer’s warranty.
Our non-segmented revenues and costs for the periods presented in the Annual Report on Form 10-K relate to equipment support activities that we provide, such as transportation, hauling, parts freight and damage waivers, and are not generally allocated to reportable segments.
You can read more about our business segments in note 18 of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Sources
We generate all of our total revenues from our five business segments and our non-segmented equipment support activities. Equipment rentals and new equipment sales account for more than half of our total revenues.
The pie charts below illustrate a breakdown of our revenues and gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 by business segment (see note 18 to our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our business segments):
The equipment that we sell, rent and service is principally used in the construction industry, as well as by companies for commercial and industrial uses such as plant maintenance and turnarounds, as well as in the petrochemical and energy sectors. As a result, our total revenues are affected by several factors including, but not limited to, the demand for and availability of rental equipment, rental rates and other competitive factors, the demand for new and used equipment, the level of construction and industrial activities, spending levels by our customers, adverse weather conditions and general economic conditions.
Equipment Rentals. Our rental operation primarily rents our four core types of construction and industrial equipment. We have a well-maintained rental fleet and our own dedicated sales force, focused by equipment type. We actively manage the size, quality, age and composition of our rental fleet based on our analysis of key measures such as time utilization (which we analyze as equipment usage based on: (1) a percentage of original equipment cost, and (2) the number of rental equipment units available for rent), rental rate trends and targets, rental equipment dollar utilization and maintenance and repair costs, which we closely monitor. We maintain fleet quality through regional quality control managers and our parts and services operations.
New Equipment Sales. We seek to optimize revenues from new equipment sales by selling equipment through a professional in-house retail sales force focused by product type. While sales of new equipment are impacted by the availability of equipment from the manufacturer, we believe our status as a leading distributor for some of our key suppliers improves our ability to obtain equipment. New equipment sales are an important component of our integrated model due to customer interaction and service contact and new equipment sales also lead to future parts and services revenues.
Used Equipment Sales. We generate the majority of our used equipment sales revenues by selling equipment from our rental fleet. The remainder of our used equipment sales revenues comes from the sale of inventoried equipment that we acquire through trade-ins from our equipment customers and selective purchases of high-quality used equipment. Our policy is not to offer specified price trade-in arrangements on equipment for sale. Sales of our rental fleet equipment allow us to manage the size, quality, composition and age of our rental fleet, and provide us with a profitable distribution channel for the disposal of rental equipment.
Parts Sales. We generate revenues from the sale of new and used parts for equipment that we rent or sell, as well as for other makes of equipment. Our product support sales representatives are instrumental in generating our parts revenues. They are product specialists and receive performance incentives for achieving certain sales levels. Most of our parts sales come from our extensive in-house parts inventory. Our parts sales provide us with a relatively stable revenue stream that is generally less sensitive to the economic cycles that tend to affect our rental and equipment sales operations.
Services. We derive our services revenues from maintenance and repair services to customers for their owned equipment. In addition to repair and maintenance on an as-needed or scheduled basis, we also provide ongoing preventative maintenance services to industrial customers. Our after-market service provides a high-margin, relatively stable source of revenue through changing economic cycles.
Our non-segmented other revenues for the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K relate primarily to ancillary charges associated with equipment maintenance and repair services, and are not generally allocated to reportable segments.
Principal Costs and Expenses
Our largest expenses are the costs to purchase the new equipment we sell, the costs associated with the used equipment we sell, rental expenses, rental depreciation and costs associated with parts sales and services, all of which are included in cost of revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our total cost of revenues was approximately $766.5 million. Our operating expenses consist principally of selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our SG&A expenses were $289.3 million. In addition, we have interest expense related to our debt instruments. Operating expenses and all other income and expense items below the gross profit line of our consolidated statements of operations are not generally allocated to our reportable segments.
We are also subject to federal and state income taxes. Future income tax examinations by state and federal agencies could result in additional income tax expense based on probable outcomes of such matters.
Cost of Revenues:
Rental Depreciation. Depreciation of rental equipment represents the depreciation costs attributable to rental equipment. Estimated useful lives vary based upon type of equipment. Generally, we depreciate cranes and aerial work platforms over a ten year estimated useful life, earthmoving over a five year estimated useful life with a 25% salvage value, and material handling equipment over a seven year estimated useful life. Attachments and other smaller type equipment are depreciated over a three year estimated useful life. We periodically evaluate the appropriateness of remaining depreciable lives assigned to rental equipment.
Rental Expense. Rental expense represents the costs associated with rental equipment, including, among other things, the cost of repairing and maintaining our rental equipment, property taxes on our fleet and other miscellaneous costs of owning rental equipment.
Rental Other. Rental other expenses consist primarily of equipment support activities that we provide our customers in connection with renting equipment, such as hauling services, damage waiver policies, environmental fees and other recovery fees.
New Equipment Sales. Cost of new equipment sold primarily consists of the equipment cost of the new equipment that is sold, net of any amount of credit given to the customer towards the equipment for trade-ins.
Used Equipment Sales. Cost of used equipment sold consists of the net book value of rental equipment for used equipment sold from our rental fleet, the equipment costs for used equipment we purchase for sale or the trade-in value of used equipment that we obtain from customers in equipment sales transactions.
Parts Sales. Cost of parts sales represents costs attributable to the sale of parts directly to customers.
Services Support. Cost of services revenues represents costs attributable to service provided for the maintenance and repair of customer-owned equipment and equipment then on-rent by customers.
Our non-segmented other expenses include costs associated with ancillary charges associated with equipment maintenance and repair services.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses:
Our SG&A expenses include sales and marketing expenses, payroll and related benefit costs, including stock compensation expense, insurance expenses, legal and professional fees, rent and other occupancy costs, property and other taxes, administrative overhead, depreciation associated with property and equipment (other than rental equipment) and amortization expense associated with intangible assets. These expenses are not generally allocated to our reportable segments.
Interest Expense:
Interest expense for the periods presented represents the interest on our outstanding debt instruments, including aggregate amounts outstanding under our revolving Credit Facility, senior unsecured notes and our finance lease obligations. Interest expense also includes interest on our outstanding manufacturer flooring plans payable, which are used to finance inventory and rental equipment purchases. Non-cash interest expense related to the amortization cost of deferred financing costs and the accretion/amortization of note discount/premium are also included in interest expense.
Principal Cash Flows
We generate cash primarily from our operating activities and, historically, we have used cash flows from operating activities, manufacturer floor plan financings and available borrowings under the Credit Facility as the primary sources of funds to purchase inventory and to fund working capital and capital expenditures, growth and expansion opportunities (see also “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below). Our management of our working capital is closely tied to operating cash flows, as working capital can be significantly impacted by, among other things, our accounts receivable activities, the level of new and used equipment inventories,
which may increase or decrease in response to current and expected demand, and the size and timing of our trade accounts payable payment cycles.
Rental Fleet
A substantial portion of our overall value is in our rental fleet equipment. The net book value of our rental equipment at December 31, 2020 was $1.0 billion, or approximately 51.9% of our total assets. Our rental fleet as of December 31, 2020 consisted of 39,389 units having an original acquisition cost (which we define as the cost originally paid to manufacturers) of approximately $1.8 billion. As of December 31, 2020, our rental fleet composition was as follows (dollars in millions):
Determining the optimal age and mix for our rental fleet equipment is subjective and requires considerable estimates and judgments by management. We constantly evaluate the mix, age and quality of the equipment in our rental fleet in response to current economic and market conditions, competition and customer demand. The mix and age of our rental fleet, as well as our cash flows, are impacted by sales of equipment from the rental fleet, which are influenced by used equipment pricing at the retail and secondary auction market levels, and the capital expenditures to acquire new rental fleet equipment. In making equipment acquisition decisions, we evaluate current economic and market conditions, competition, manufacturers’ availability, pricing and return on investment over the estimated useful life of the specific equipment, among other things. As a result of our in-house service capabilities and extensive maintenance program, we believe our rental fleet is well-maintained.
The original acquisition cost of our gross rental fleet decreased by approximately $179.1 million, or 9.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, largely reflective of the decrease in rental capital expenditures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on equipment rental demand. The average age of our rental fleet equipment increased by approximately 4.6 months for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our average rental rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately 2.6% lower than the year ended December 31, 2019 (see further discussion on rental rates in “Results of Operations” below).
The rental equipment mix among our four core product lines for the year ended December 31, 2020 was largely consistent with that of the prior year comparable period as a percentage of total units available for rent and as a percentage of original acquisition cost.
Principal External Factors that Affect our Businesses
We are subject to a number of external factors that may adversely affect our businesses. These factors, and other factors, are discussed below and under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements,” and in Item 1A - Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•
Economic downturns. The demand for our products is dependent on the general economy, the stability of the global credit markets, the industries in which our customers operate or serve, and other factors. Downturns in the general economy or in the construction and manufacturing industries, as well as adverse credit market conditions, can cause demand for our products to materially decrease.
•
Spending levels by customers. Rentals and sales of equipment to the construction industry and to industrial companies constitute a significant portion of our total revenues. As a result, we depend upon customers in these businesses and their ability and willingness to make capital expenditures to rent or buy specialized equipment. Accordingly, our business is impacted by fluctuations in customers’ spending levels on capital expenditures and by the availability of credit to those customers.
•
Adverse weather. Adverse weather in a geographic region in which we operate may depress demand for equipment in that region. Our equipment is primarily used outdoors and, as a result, prolonged adverse weather conditions may prohibit our customers from continuing their work projects. Adverse weather also has a seasonal impact in parts of our Intermountain region, particularly in the winter months.
•
Regional and Industry-Specific Activity and Trends. Expenditures by our customers may be impacted by the overall level of construction activity in the markets and regions in which they operate, the price of oil and other commodities and other general economic trends impacting the industries in which our customers and end users operate. As our customers adjust their activity and spending levels in response to these external factors, our rentals and sales of equipment to those customers will be impacted. For example, high levels of industrial activity in our Gulf Coast and Intermountain regions have been a meaningful driver of recent growth in our revenues. Conversely, declines in oil and natural gas prices and the related downturn in oil industry activities can result in a significant decrease in our new equipment sales, primarily the sale of new cranes, due to lower demand. Most recently, in the first quarter of 2020, worldwide crude oil and natural gas prices sharply declined as a result of the lack of agreement on production levels by members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil- and gas-producing countries, which resulted in production outstripping the demand for oil and gas. Additionally, the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak, has decreased demand for oil and gas products as companies and other organizations have suspended or curtailed operations and travel. Although worldwide crude oil and natural gas prices have partially recovered from the 2020 first quarter decline, we believe the uncertainty regarding future oil and natural gas prices continues to impact customer capital expenditure decisions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The application of many accounting principles requires us to make assumptions, estimates and/or judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These assumptions, estimates and/or judgments, however, are often subjective and they and our actual results may change based on changing circumstances or changes in our analyses. If actual amounts are ultimately different from our estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts first become known. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates and/or judgments. See also note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Useful Lives of Rental Equipment and Property and Equipment. We depreciate rental equipment and property and equipment over their estimated useful lives (generally three to ten years), after giving effect to an estimated salvage value ranging from 0% to 25% of cost. The useful life of rental equipment is determined based on our estimate of the period the asset will generate revenues, and the salvage value is determined based on our estimate of the minimum value we could realize from the asset after such period. We periodically review the assumptions utilized in computing rates of depreciation. We may be required to change these estimates based on changes in our industry or other changing circumstances. If these estimates change in the future, we may be required to recognize increased or decreased depreciation expense for these assets.
The amount of depreciation expense we record is highly dependent upon the estimated useful lives and the salvage values assigned to each category of rental equipment. Generally, we assign estimated useful lives to our rental fleet ranging from a three-year life, five-year life with a 25% salvage value, seven-year life and a ten-year life. Depreciation expense on our rental fleet for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $233.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the estimated impact of a change in estimated useful lives for each category of equipment by two years was as follows:
For purposes of the sensitivity analysis above, we elected not to decrease the useful lives of other equipment, which are primarily three-year estimated useful life assets; rather, we have held the depreciation expense constant at the actual amount of depreciation expense. We believe that decreasing the life of the other equipment by two years is an unreasonable estimate and would potentially lead to the decision to expense, rather than capitalize, a significant portion of the subject asset class. In general terms, a one-year increase in the estimated life across all classes of our rental equipment will give rise to an approximate decrease in our annual depreciation expense of approximately $21.8 million. Additionally, a one-year decrease in the estimated life across all classes of our rental equipment (with the exception of other equipment as discussed above) will give rise to an approximate increase in our annual depreciation expense of approximately $42.7 million.
Another significant assumption used in our calculation of depreciation expense is the estimated salvage value assigned to our earthmoving equipment. Based on our recent experience, we have used a 25% factor of the equipment’s original cost to estimate its salvage value. This factor is subjective and subject to change in the future based upon actual results at the time we dispose of the equipment. A change of 5%, either increase or decrease, in the estimated salvage value would result in a change in our annual depreciation expense of approximately $4.3 million.
Acquisition Accounting. We have made significant acquisitions in the past and we intend to make additional acquisitions in the future that meet our selection criteria that solidify our presence in the contiguous regions where we operate with an objective of increasing our revenues, improving our profitability, and strengthening our competitive position. Pursuant to Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, we record as goodwill the excess of the consideration transferred plus the fair value of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date over the fair values of the identifiable net assets acquired. Such fair market value assessments require judgments and estimates that can be affected by various factors over time, which may cause final amounts to differ materially from original estimates.
Long-lived assets (principally rental equipment), goodwill and other intangible assets generally represent the largest component of our acquisitions. Historically, virtually all of the rental equipment that we have acquired through business combinations have been classified as “To be Used,” rather than as “To be Sold.” Equipment that we acquire and classify as “To be Used” is recorded at fair value. Any significant inventories of new and used equipment acquired in the transaction are valued at fair value, which should approximate a market participant’s estimated selling price adjusted for (1) costs in the selling effort and (2) a reasonable profit allowance.
In addition to long-lived fixed assets, we also acquire other assets and assume liabilities. These other assets and liabilities typically include, but are not limited to, parts inventory, accounts receivable, accounts payable and other working capital items. Because of their short-term nature, the fair values of these assets and liabilities generally approximate the carrying values reflected on the acquired entities balance sheets. However, when appropriate, we adjust these carrying values for factors such as collectibility and existence. The intangible assets that we have acquired generally consist primarily of the goodwill recognized. Depending upon the applicable purchase agreement and the particular facts and circumstances of the business acquired, we may identify other intangible assets, such as trade names or trademarks, non-compete agreements and customer-related intangibles (specifically, customer relationships). A trademark has a fair value equal to the present value of the royalty income attributable to it. The royalty income attributable to a trademark represents the hypothetical cost savings that are derived from owning the trademark instead of paying royalties to license the trademark from another owner. When specifically negotiated by the parties in the applicable purchase agreements, we base the value of non-compete agreements on the amounts assigned to them in the purchase agreements as these amounts represent the amounts negotiated in an arm’s length transaction. When not negotiated by the parties in the applicable purchase agreements, the fair value of non-compete agreements is estimated based on an income approach since their values are representative of the current and future revenue and profit erosion protection they provide. Customer relationships are generally valued based on an excess earnings or income approach with consideration to projected cash flows.
Evaluation of Goodwill Impairment. We have made acquisitions in the past that resulted in the recognition of goodwill. Goodwill is the excess of the consideration transferred plus the fair value of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date over the fair values of the identifiable net assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently if triggering events occur or other impairment indicators arise which might impair recoverability.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including: the identification of reporting units; assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units; assignment of goodwill to reporting units; determination of the fair value of each reporting unit; and an assumption as to the form of the transaction in which the reporting unit would be acquired by a market participant (either a taxable or nontaxable transaction). Impairment of goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment (i.e., before aggregation or combination), or one level below an operating segment (i.e., a component). A component of an operating segment is a reporting unit if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component. We have identified two components within our Rental operating segment (Equipment Rentals Component 1 and Equipment Rentals Component 2) and have determined that each of our other four operating segments (New Equipment, Used Equipment, Parts, and Service segments) represents a reporting unit, resulting in six total reporting units.
As of December 31, 2020, our goodwill was comprised of the following carrying values for our six reporting units (amounts in thousands):
During 2018, we performed, as of October 1, our annual impairment testing date, a Step 0 qualitative assessment and determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of each of our reporting units was not less than its carrying value and, therefore, did not perform the prescribed quantitative Step 1 goodwill impairment test. We considered various factors in performing the qualitative test, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, the overall financial performance of our reporting units, the Company’s stock price and the excess amount or “cushion” between our reporting unit’s fair value and carrying value as indicated on our most recent quantitative assessment.
We performed a Step 1 quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment as of October 1, 2019, our annual impairment test date. Based on this quantitative test, we determined that the New Equipment Sales and Service Revenues reporting units were less than the carrying value of each reporting unit, resulting in a goodwill impairment totaling $12.2 million, or $10.7 million and $1.5 million for the New Equipment Sales and Service Revenues reporting units, respectively. The New Equipment Sales reporting unit 2019 impairment was largely due to a sharp decline in our 2019 fourth quarter new equipment sales revenues as over 75% of our full-year new equipment sales decline occurred in the fourth quarter. The fourth quarter new equipment sales decline was primarily driven by lower new crane sales, which were down 28.7%, or $12.0 million. As noted elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that demand for cranes is impacted by oil prices and while oil prices have partially recovered from their low point in 2016, which represented a 13-year low at the time, there remains considerable uncertainty regarding future oil prices and this uncertainty impacts customer capital expenditure decisions. This fourth quarter decline in new equipment sales, combined with our new equipment sales revenues growth rate and operating results assumptions for the forecast period under the income approach, resulted in a fair value determination, that when combined with the weighted fair value of the reporting unit determined under the market approach, was less than the reporting unit’s carrying value as of October 1, 2019, resulting in a $10.7 million impairment charge.
The impairment of the Service Revenues reporting unit was largely due to our service revenues growth rate and operating results assumptions for the forecast period under the income approach, which resulted in a fair value determination, that when combined with the weighted fair value of the reporting unit determined under the market approach, was less than the reporting unit’s carrying value as of October 1, 2019, resulting in a $1.5 million impairment charge. The impairment charges are non-cash items and does not affect our cash flows, liquidity or borrowing capacity under the senior credit facility, and the charges are excluded from our financial results in evaluating our financial covenant under the Credit Facility.
Based on our evaluation of the impact to our business in the first quarter of 2020 from the COVID-19 pandemic, we identified triggering events requiring an interim impairment test as of March 31, 2020. These triggering events included a deterioration in macroeconomic conditions, declines in business volume in our industry, a decline in our actual revenue and earnings compared with our planned revenue and earnings, and a sustained decrease in our stock price. For the interim impairment test as of March 31, 2020, we determined that our Equipment Rental Component 2 reporting unit had a fair value less than its carrying value, resulting in a $62.0 million impairment charge. The impairment was largely due to Equipment Rental Component 2’s forecasted declines in 2020 rental revenues, which was driven by the decrease in equipment rental demand that began in March 2020 as COVID-19’s impact became more widespread across our geographic footprint, combined with our revenue growth rate and cash flow assumptions as of March 31, 2020, for the remaining forecast period under the income approach, and the decline in the fair value of Equipment Rental Component 2 based on the market approach from declining business enterprise values of comparable companies in our industry, resulting in a decrease in revenue and EBITDA multiples of those companies. The impairment charge is a non-cash item and does not affect our cash flows, liquidity or borrowing capacity under the senior credit facility, and the charge is excluded from our financial results in evaluating our financial covenant under the Credit Facility.
We performed a Step 1 quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment as of October 1, 2020, our annual impairment test date. For all reporting units, we compared the carrying values of each reporting unit, inclusive of goodwill and definite-lived intangible assets, to its fair value. We estimated the fair value of these reporting units by weighting results from the income approach and the market approach, as further described below. Based on this quantitative test, we determined that our Equipment Rental Component 1, Used Equipment Sales and Parts Sales reporting units were not impaired as of the October 1, 2020 annual impairment testing date as their respective fair values exceeded their respective carrying values by approximately 44%, 90% and 33%, respectively.
For purposes of performing the quantitative impairment test described above, we estimate the fair value of our reporting units by utilizing fair value techniques consistent with the income approach and market approach. When performing the income approach for each reporting unit, we use a discounted cash flow analysis based on our internal projected results of operations, weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”) and terminal value assumptions. Our cash flow projections are based on ten-year financial forecasts developed by management that include revenue projections, capital spending trends, and investment in working capital to support anticipated revenue growth. The WACC is an estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise and represents the expected cost of new capital likely to be used by market participants. The WACC is used to discount our combined future cash flows. The inputs and variables used in determining the fair value of a reporting unit require management to make certain assumptions regarding the impact of operating and macroeconomic changes, as well as estimates of future cash flows. Our estimates regarding future cash flows are based on historical experience and projections of future operating performance, including revenues, margins and operating expenses. We also make certain forecasts about future economic conditions, interest rates and other market data. Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates may change in future periods. Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the estimate of a reporting unit’s fair value, and therefore could affect the likelihood and amount of potential impairment. Under the market approach, we compare the reporting units to selected reasonably similar (or "guideline") publicly-traded companies. Under this method, valuation multiples are: (i) derived from the operating data of selected guideline companies; (ii) evaluated and adjusted based on the strengths and weaknesses of our reporting unit relative to the selected guideline companies; and (iii) applied to the operating data of our reporting unit to arrive at an indication of value. The application of the market approach results in an estimate of the price reasonably expected to be realized from the sale of the reporting unit.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets (Excluding Goodwill). Our long-lived assets principally consist of rental equipment and property and equipment. We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In reviewing for impairment, the carrying value of such assets is compared to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. If such cash flows are not sufficient to support the asset’s recorded value, an impairment charge is recognized to reduce the carrying value of the asset to its estimated fair value. The determination of future cash flows as well as the estimated fair value of long-lived and intangible assets involves significant estimates and judgment on the part of management. Our estimates and assumptions may prove to be inaccurate due to factors such as changes in economic conditions, changes in our business prospects or other changing circumstances.
In support of our review for indicators of impairment, we perform a review of our long-lived assets at the branch level relative to branch performance and conclude whether indicators of impairment exist associated with our long-lived assets, including our rental and non-rental equipment and right-of-use assets. Based on our most recently completed quarterly reviews, there were no indications of impairment associated with our long-lived assets (excluding goodwill).
Income Taxes. The Company files a consolidated federal income tax return with its wholly-owned subsidiaries. The Company is a C-Corporation under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. We utilize the asset and liability approach to measure deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences existing at each balance sheet date using currently enacted tax rates. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rate is recognized as income or expense in the period that includes the enactment date of that tax rate.
The Company recognizes the effect of an income tax position only if it is more likely than not (a likelihood of greater than 50%) that such position will be sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. The Company recognizes both interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in net other income (expense).
Our deferred tax calculation requires management to make certain estimates about future operations. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Our U.S. federal tax returns for 2017 and subsequent years remain subject to examination by tax authorities. We are also subject to examination in various state jurisdictions for 2013 and subsequent years.
Results of Operations
The tables included in the period-to-period comparisons below provide summaries of our revenues and gross profits for our business segments and non-segmented revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The period-to-period comparisons of our financial results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Our prior year discussion for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 can be found here, in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues.
Total Revenues. Our total revenues were $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $179.2 million, or 13.3%. Revenues of all reportable segments and non-segmented other revenues are further discussed below.
Equipment Rental Revenues. Our total revenues from equipment rentals for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $103.4 million, or 13.5%, to $663.0 million from $766.4 million in 2019. The decrease in equipment rental revenues was largely due to decreased demand from the impact of the COVID-19 economic downturn.
Rentals: Rental revenues decreased $96.1 million, or 13.8%, to $598.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $694.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Rental revenues from aerial work platform equipment decreased $36.1 million, material handling equipment rental revenues decreased $21.7 million, and rental revenues from earthmoving equipment decreased $14.3 million. Other equipment rental revenues and crane rental revenues decreased $13.9 million and $5.4 million, respectively, as compared to the prior period. The product line equipment rental revenue fluctuations above do not include the impact of legacy WRI equipment rental revenues of $4.7 million for February 2019 through April 2019.
Our average rental rates, based on the American Rental Association’s calculation methodology, for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 2.6% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our average rental rates for the year ended December 31, 2019 do not include the impact of legacy WRI equipment rental revenues for February 2019 through April 2019.
Rental equipment dollar utilization (annual rental revenues divided by the average original rental fleet equipment costs) for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 4.2% to 32.1% from 36.3% in 2019. The decrease in comparative rental equipment dollar utilization was primarily the result of the decrease in equipment rental rates as noted above and a decrease in rental equipment time utilization. Rental equipment time utilization as a percentage of original equipment cost was approximately 63.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 70.4% in the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 7.2%, largely attributable to the decrease in demand due to the economic downturn surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
Rentals Other: Our rentals other revenues consist primarily of equipment support activities that we provide to customers in connection with renting equipment, such as hauling charges, damage waiver policies, environmental and other recovery fees. Rental other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $64.6 million compared to $71.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $7.2 million, or 10.1%, primarily due to the decrease in equipment rental revenues as described above.
New Equipment Sales Revenues. Our new equipment sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $72.0 million, or 30.1%, to $167.1 million from $239.1 million in 2019. This decrease, as noted below, was driven primarily by decreased sales of new cranes from continuing uncertainty related to oil and gas prices, and decreases in sales of our other product lines as customers have delayed, and in some cases, canceled large capital purchases due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. Sales of new cranes decreased $53.4 million. Sales of new material handling equipment, earthmoving equipment and aerial work platform
equipment decreased $14.5 million, $5.8 million and $2.9 million, respectively. Partially offsetting these decreases, sales of new other equipment sales increased $4.7 million.
Used Equipment Sales Revenues. Our used equipment sales increased $13.8 million, or 9.9%, to $153.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $139.3 million for the same period in 2019. This increase in used equipment sales reflects some downsizing of our rental fleet in response to COVID-19’s impact on rental demand combined with improved customer demand for used equipment. Sales of used earthmoving equipment, used material handling equipment and other used equipment sales increased $12.2 million, $3.5 million and $2.6 million, respectively. Partially offsetting these increases were decreases of used cranes and used aerial work platform equipment of $3.1 million and $1.4 million, respectively.
Parts Sales Revenues. Our parts sales revenues decreased $13.3 million, or 10.7%, to $110.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $123.9 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in parts sales was largely attributable to decreases in equipment parts sales across all product lines, reflecting the COVID-19 impacts on our parts business.
Services Revenues. Our services revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $3.7 million, or 5.4%, to $64.3 million from $67.9 million in the same period last year. The decrease in service revenues was largely attributable to decreases in earthmoving equipment, aerial work platforms and material handling equipment services.
Non-Segmented Other Revenues. Our non-segmented other revenues relate to equipment support activities that we provide to customers in connection with new and used equipment sales and parts and services revenues and are generally not allocated to our reportable segments. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our other revenues were $11.0 million, a decrease of approximately $0.8 million, or 6.6%, from $11.8 million in 2019.
Gross Profit.
Total Gross Profit. Our total gross profit was $402.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $499.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $96.6 million, or 19.3%. Total gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 34.4%, a decrease of 2.6% from the 37.0% gross profit margin for the same period in 2019. Gross profit and gross margin for all reportable segments and non-segmented other revenues are further described below.
Equipment Rentals Gross Profit. Our total gross profit from equipment rentals for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $83.0 million, or 23.9%, to approximately $263.9 million from $346.9 million in 2019. Total gross profit margin from equipment rentals for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 39.8% compared to 45.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 5.5%. See Rentals and Rentals Other below for additional information.
Rentals: Rental revenue gross profit decreased $81.1 million to $264.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $345.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in equipment rentals gross profit was the result of a $96.1 million decrease in equipment rental revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to last year, which was partially offset by a $10.0 million decrease in rental equipment depreciation expense and $5.0 million decrease in rental expenses. The decreases in rental equipment depreciation expense and rental expenses are primarily due to a smaller fleet size in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the decrease in capital expenditures in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross profit margin on equipment rentals for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 44.2% compared to 49.8% in 2019, a decrease of 5.6%. As a percentage of equipment
rental revenues, rental expenses were 16.7% and 15.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of 1.6%. Depreciation expense was 39.1% of equipment rental revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 35.1% for the same period in 2019, an increase of 4.0%. These increases are primarily the result of decreases in rental revenues.
Rentals Other: Our rentals other consist primarily of equipment support activities that we provide to customers in connection with renting equipment, such as hauling charges, damage waiver policies, environmental and other recovery fees. Rental other revenues gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.6 million compared to a gross profit of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.8 million. Gross loss margin was 1.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gross profit margin of 1.7% for the same period last year, a decrease of 2.7%.
New Equipment Sales Gross Profit. Our new equipment sales gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $9.7 million, or 34.8%, to $18.1 million compared to $27.7 million in 2019 on a decrease in total new equipment sales of $72.0 million. Gross profit margin on new equipment sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 10.8%, a decrease of 0.8% from 11.6% in 2019. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily due to the mix of new equipment sold combined with lower gross margins on new crane sales and new earthmoving equipment sales.
Used Equipment Sales Gross Profit. Our used equipment sales gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased approximately $1.2 million, or 2.6%, to $48.6 million from $47.3 million in 2019, on a used equipment sales increase of $13.8 million. Gross profit margin on used equipment sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 31.7%, down 2.3% from 34.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of lower gross margins on all product lines.
Our used equipment sales from the rental fleet, which comprised approximately 92.4% and 91.5% of our used equipment sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were approximately 150.8% and 157.6% of net book value for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Parts Sales Gross Profit. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our parts sales revenue gross profit decreased $4.5 million, or 13.5%, to $28.4 million from $32.9 million for the same period in 2019, on a $13.3 million decrease in parts sales revenues. Gross profit margin on parts sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 25.7%, a decrease of approximately 0.8% from 26.6% in the same period in 2019, resulting from the mix of parts sold.
Services Revenues Gross Profit. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our services revenues gross profit decreased $2.9 million, or 6.3%, to $43.1 million from $46.0 million for the same period in 2019, on a $3.7 million decrease in services revenues. Gross profit margin on services revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 67.0% and 67.7%, respectively, a decrease of 0.7%, as a result of services revenues mix.
Non-Segmented Other Gross Profit (Loss). Our non-segmented other revenues relate to equipment support activities that we provide to customers in connection with new and used equipment sales and parts and services revenues and are not generally allocated to our reportable segments. Our non-segmented other gross profit was approximately $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gross loss of $1.6 million for the same period last year, an increase of $2.2 million.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. SG&A expenses decreased approximately $21.8 million, or 7.0%, to $289.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $311.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The net decrease in SG&A expenses was attributable to several factors. Employee salaries, wages, payroll taxes and related employee benefit and other employee expenses decreased $22.2 million, primarily as a result of lower commissions and incentive pay combined with headcount reductions and reduced employee hours in response to COVID-19’s impact to our business. Promotional expenses decreased $2.1 million. Bad debt expense decreased $1.7 million and supplies expense decreased $1.2 million. Non-real estate lease operating expenses decreased $1.5 million and fuel and utilities costs decreased $0.7 million. These decreases were partially offset by a $6.4 million increase in liability insurance costs, a $0.7 million increase in depreciation and amortization expenses and a $0.6 million increase in legal and professional fees.
Approximately $4.4 million of incremental SG&A expenses were attributable to branches opened since January 1, 2019 with less than a full year of comparable operations in either or both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As a percentage of total revenues, SG&A expenses were 24.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 23.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately 1.7%.
Impairment of Goodwill. Impairment of goodwill incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $62.0 million, compared to $12.2 million in 2019. The 2020 impairment related to one reporting unit, Equipment Rental Component 1. The 2019 impairment
related to two of our six reporting units, New Equipment Sales and Service Revenues. See note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Gain on Sales of Property and Equipment, Net. During the year ended December 31, 2020, gain on sales of property and equipment, net amounted to $11.0 million for the period, compared to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $6.3 million. This increase is primarily due to a gain on a sale-leaseback transaction in the first quarter of 2020, a gain on a company-owned closed branch location in the second quarter of 2020 and gains on sales in the normal course of business.
Other Income (Expense). For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net other expenses increased approximately $38.9 million to $103.2 million compared to $64.3 million for the same period in 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $44.6 million loss due to the early extinguishment of our Old Notes. For additional information regarding the extinguishment of our Old Notes and the issuance of our New Notes, see note 9 to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest expense decreased approximately $6.5 million to $61.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $68.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest costs related to the Credit Facility decreased $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period last year. The decrease in Credit Facility interest costs is largely due to lower borrowings in 2020 compared to 2019.
Other income, net, decreased $0.8 million to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to proceeds from a favorable litigation settlement in 2019.
Income Taxes. We recorded an income tax benefit of $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an income tax expense of approximately $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 21.1% compared to 24.7% for the same period last year, a decrease of 3.6%. The decrease in our effective tax rate is primarily due to the net change in permanent differences in relation to profit before tax. Our rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes the impact of $2.6 million income tax expense related to nondeductible goodwill impairment.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The income tax related provisions of the CARES Act did not have a material impact to our recorded income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020. See note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the CARES Act’s favorable cash impact to our liquidity. We are continuing to evaluate any further impact that the CARES Act may have on the Company’s future operations, financial position and liquidity.
Based on available evidence, both positive and negative, we believe it is more likely than not that our federal deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 are fully realizable through future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences and future taxable income. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a valuation allowance of $6.4 million for certain state tax credits that may not be realized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow from Operating Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the cash provided by our operating activities was $286.0 million. Our reported net loss of $32.7 million, when adjusted for non-cash income and expense items, such as depreciation and amortization (including net amortization (accretion) of note discount (premium)), deferred income taxes, non-cash operating lease expense, amortization of finance lease right-of-use assets, provision for losses on accounts receivable, provision for inventory obsolescence, stock-based compensation expense, goodwill impairment, loss on early extinguishment of debt and net gains on the sale of long-lived assets, provided positive cash flows of $296.2 million. These cash flows from operating activities were positively impacted by a $9.3 million decrease in receivables and a $31.0 million increase in accounts payable. Partially offsetting these positive cash flows were a $23.2 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities, a $9.5 million increase in inventories, and a $15.6 million decrease in manufacturing flooring plans payable. Additionally, prepaid expenses and other assets increased $0.1 million and deferred compensation payable decreased $2.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the cash provided by our operating activities was $319.2 million. Our reported net income of $87.2 million, when adjusted for non-cash income and expense items, such as depreciation and amortization (including net amortization (accretion) of note discount (premium)), deferred income taxes, non-cash operating lease expense, amortization of finance lease right-of-use assets, provision for losses on accounts receivable, provision for inventory obsolescence, stock-based compensation expense, goodwill impairment and net gains on the sale of long-lived assets, provided positive cash flows of $375.5 million. These cash flows from operating activities were positively impacted by a $9.2 million decrease in receivables. Also, prepaid expenses and other assets decreased $0.3 million. Additionally, manufacturing flooring plans payable and deferred compensation
increased $1.5 million and $0.1 million, respectfully. Partially offsetting these positive cash flows were a $19.6 million increase in inventories, a $43.4 million decrease in accounts payable and a $4.4 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by our investing activities were approximately $21.1 million. The purchases of rental and non-rental equipment totaled approximately $135.0 million and proceeds from the sale of rental and non-rental equipment were approximately $156.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our cash provided by our investing activities was exceeded by our cash used in our investing activities, resulting in net cash used in our investing activities of approximately $325.9 million. The acquisition of WRI totaled approximately $106.7 million (net of cash acquired) and purchases of rental and non-rental equipment totaled approximately $352.8 million, which were partially offset by proceeds from the sale of rental and non-rental equipment of approximately $133.6 million.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash provided by our financing activities was exceeded by our cash used in financing activities, resulting in net cash used in our financing activities of $10.5 million. Net payments under our Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $216.9 million, dividends paid were $39.6 million, or $1.10 per common share, treasury stock purchases were approximately $1.4 million, and payments on finance lease obligations were $0.2 million. In connection with the issuance of our New Notes, gross proceeds were $1.25 billion, which were primarily used to tender and redeem our Old Notes totaling $990.9 million, representing aggregate principal payments of $950.0 million and tender and redemption premiums totaling approximately $40.9 million. Deferred financing costs paid in connection with the issuance of the New Notes totaled $11.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by our financing activities was $4.3 million. Net borrowings under our Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $46.1 million, which was partially offset by dividends paid totaling $39.4 million, or $1.10 per common share, treasury stock purchases totaling approximately $1.7 million, payments on finance lease obligations of $0.2 million and payments of deferred financing costs of $0.6 million.
Senior Unsecured Notes
On December 14, 2020, we completed the offering of our $1.25 billion, 3.875% senior unsecured notes due 2028 (the “New Notes”), and the settlement of a cash tender offer and redemption notice to repurchase or redeem all of our previously outstanding $950 million, 5.625% senior unsecured notes due 2025 (the “Old Notes”). No principal payments on the New Notes are due until their scheduled maturity date (December 15, 2028).
The New Notes were issued by H&E Equipment Services, Inc. (the parent company) and are guaranteed by GNE Investments, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries Great Northern Equipment, Inc., H&E Equipment Services (California), LLC, H&E California Holding, Inc., H&E Equipment Services (Mid-Atlantic), Inc. and H&E Finance Corp (collectively, the guarantor subsidiaries). The guarantees, made on a joint and several basis, are full and unconditional (subject to subordination provisions and subject to a standard limitation which provides that the maximum amount guaranteed by each guarantor will not exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed without making the guarantee void under fraudulent conveyance laws). There are no restrictions on H&E Equipment Services, Inc.’s ability to obtain funds from the guarantor subsidiaries by dividend or loan. There are no registration rights associated with the New Notes or the subsidiary guarantees.
For additional information regarding our senior unsecured notes, see note 9 to our consolidated financial statements.
Senior Secured Credit Facility
We and our subsidiaries are parties to a $750.0 million Credit Facility with Wells Fargo Capital Finance, LLC as Agent, and the lenders named therein.
On December 22, 2017, we amended, extended and restated the Credit Facility by entering into the Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”). On February 1, 2019, we further amended and extended the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with the First Amendment to the Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “First Amendment”). The First Amendment, among other things, (i) extends the maturity date of the credit facility to February 1, 2024, and (ii) lowers the interest rate in the case of LIBOR revolving loans, to LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 1.25% to 1.75%, depending on the Average Availability and (iii) lowers the interest rate in the case of Base Rate loans, to the Base Rate (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) plus an applicable margin of 0.25% to 0.75%, depending on the Average Availability.
At December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Credit Facility and we could borrow up to $741.3 million and remain in compliance with the debt covenants under the Company’s credit facility. At February 10, 2021, we had $741.3 million of available
borrowings under our Credit Facility, net of an $8.7 million outstanding letter of credit. We do not anticipate any near-term impacts to our liquidity under the Credit Facility as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, nor do we anticipate any covenant violations related to the Credit Facility. See also Cash Requirements Related to Operations below.
For additional information regarding our senior secured credit facility, see note 10 to our consolidated financial statements.
Cash Requirements Related to Operations
Our principal sources of liquidity have been from cash provided by operating activities and the sales of new, used and rental fleet equipment, proceeds from the issuance of debt, and borrowings available under the Credit Facility. Our principal uses of cash have been to fund operating activities and working capital (including new and used equipment inventories), purchases of rental fleet equipment and property and equipment, fund payments due under facility operating leases and manufacturer flooring plans payable, fund acquisitions and to meet debt service requirements. In the future, we may pursue additional strategic acquisitions and seek to open new start-up locations, the frequency of which could be tempered depending on the depth and duration of the current COVID-19 pandemic.
The amount of our future capital expenditures will depend on a number of factors including general economic conditions and growth prospects. In response to changing economic conditions, we believe we have the flexibility to modify our capital expenditures by adjusting them (either up or down) to match our actual performance. Our gross rental fleet capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $138.7 million and $349.1 million, respectively, including $22.4 million and $39.5 million, respectively, of non-cash transfers from new and used equipment to rental fleet inventory. Our gross property and equipment capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $18.7 million and $43.1 million, respectively. The above comparative capital expenditures are reflective of the significant decreases in our capital expenditures as a result of the downturn in our business and continuing economic uncertainty related to COVID-19.
To service our debt, we will require a significant amount of cash. Our ability to pay interest and principal on our indebtedness (including the Credit Facility, the New Notes and our other indebtedness), will depend upon our future operating performance and the availability of borrowings under the Credit Facility and/or other debt and equity financing alternatives available to us, which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions and conditions in the global credit and capital markets, as well as financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. Based on our current level of operations and given the current state of the capital markets, we believe our cash flow from operations, available cash and available borrowings under the Credit Facility will be adequate to meet our future liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. At December 31, 2020, we have cash on hand of approximately $310.9 million. At December 31, 2020, we had available borrowings of $741.3 million, net of $8.7 million of outstanding letters of credit, compared to $525.4 million at December 31, 2019, net of $7.7 million of outstanding letters of credit. At February 10, 2021, we had $741.3 million of available borrowings under the Credit Facility, net of an $8.7 million of outstanding letters of credit. These sequential improvements in the amounts we have available for borrowing under the Credit Facility since December 31, 2019 are substantially due to the decrease in capital expenditures as noted in the preceding paragraph. We do not expect our liquidity to be materially negatively impacted by the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Quarterly Dividend
On each of February 14, 2020, May 20, 2020, August 11, 2020 and November 10, 2020, the Company announced a quarterly dividend of $0.275 per share to stockholders of record, which were paid on March 13, 2020, June 12, 2020, September 11, 2020 and December 11, 2020, respectively, totaling approximately $39.6 million. On February 11, 2021, the Company announced a quarterly dividend of $0.275 per share to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 26, 2021, which is to be paid on March 12, 2021.
The Company intends to continue to pay regular quarterly cash dividends; however, the declaration of any subsequent dividends is discretionary and will be subject to a final determination by the Board of Directors each quarter after its review of, among other things, business and market conditions.
Certain Information Concerning Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
An off-balance sheet arrangement is any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement involving an unconsolidated entity under which a company has (1) made guarantees, (2) a retained or a contingent interest in transferred assets, (3) an obligation under derivative instruments classified as equity or (4) any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the Company, or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development arrangements with the Company.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as described above. Further, we do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We are, therefore, not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships. We have also evaluated our relationships with related parties and determined that none of the related party interests represent variable interest entities pursuant to Topic 810, Consolidation.
Contractual and Commercial Commitments
Our contractual obligations and commercial commitments principally include obligations associated with our outstanding indebtedness and interest payments as of December 31, 2020.
(1)
See note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our New Notes.
(2)
Future interest payments are calculated based on the assumption that all of the senior unsecured notes remain outstanding until maturity.
(3)
This represents fees associated with the unused portion of the senior secured credit facility’s line of credit, and assumes all amounts under the senior secured credit facility remain undrawn.
(4)
This includes a real estate finance lease for which the related liability has been recorded (including interest) at the present value of future minimum lease payments due under the leases.
(5)
This includes total minimum operating lease rental payments having initial or remaining non-cancelable lease terms longer than one year, including interest.
(6)
Represents total minimum operating lease rental payments for leases executed but not commenced as of December 31, 2020, including interest.
(7)
Represents amounts due on manufacturer flooring plans payable, which are used to finance certain purchases of new equipment inventory and rental equipment.
As of December 31, 2020, we had standby letters of credit issued under our Credit Facility totaling $8.7 million that expire in May 2021. The Company expects to renew those letters of credit under similar terms upon their expiration.
Inflation
Although we cannot accurately anticipate the effect of inflation on our operations, we believe that inflation has not had for the three most recent fiscal years ended, and is not likely in the foreseeable future to have, a material impact on our results of operations.
Acquisitions and Start-up Facilities
We periodically engage in evaluations of potential acquisitions and start-up facilities. We intend to continue to evaluate and pursue, on an opportunistic basis, acquisitions that meet our selection criteria, and we are focused on identifying and acquiring rental companies to complement our existing business, broaden our geographic footprint, and increase our density in existing markets.
Effective January 1, 2018, we completed the acquisition of CEC, a privately-held company focused on non-residential construction equipment rentals serving the greater Denver, Colorado area out of three branch locations. Effective April 1, 2018, we completed the acquisition of Rental Inc., an equipment rental and distribution company with five branch locations in Alabama and Florida. Effective February 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of WRI, an equipment rental company with six branch locations in Central Texas. See note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on these acquisitions.
The success of our growth strategy depends, in part, on selecting strategic acquisition candidates at attractive prices and identifying strategic start-up locations. We expect to face competition for acquisition candidates, which may limit the number of acquisition opportunities and lead to higher acquisition costs. We may not have the financial resources necessary to consummate any acquisitions or to successfully open any new facilities in the future or the ability to obtain the necessary funds on satisfactory terms. For further information regarding our risks related to acquisitions, see Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.