ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with and our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report. All amounts in this report are in U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted.
Business Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company headquartered in Edison, New Jersey, focused on the development of drug therapy for treatment of chronic liver diseases. This therapeutic approach targets fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (“HCC”) associated with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (“NASH”), viral hepatitis, and other liver diseases. Our cyclophilin inhibitor, CRV431, is being developed to offer benefits to address these multiple complex pathologies. CRV431 is a cyclophilin inhibitor that targets multiple pathologic pathways involved in the progression of liver disease. Preclinical studies with CRV431 in NASH models demonstrated consistent reductions in liver fibrosis and additional reductions in inflammation and cancerous tumors in some studies. CRV431 additionally showed in vitro antiviral activity towards hepatitis B, C, and D viruses which also trigger liver disease. Preclinical studies also have shown potentially therapeutic activities of CRV431 in experimental models of acute lung injury, platelet activation, and SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus replication.
NASH is the form of liver disease that is triggered by what has come to be known as the “Western diet”, characterized especially by high-fat, high-sugar, and processed foods. Among the effects of a prolonged Western diet is fat accumulation in liver cells (steatosis) which is described as NAFLD and can predispose cells to injury. NAFLD may evolve into NASH when the fatty liver begins to progress through stages of cell injury, inflammation, fibrosis, and carcinogenesis. People who develop NASH often have additional predisposing conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, but the exact biochemical events that trigger and maintain the progression are not well known. Many people in the early stages of disease do not have significant clinical symptoms and therefore do not know that they have it. NASH becomes evident and a major concern when the liver becomes fibrotic and puts the individual at increased risk of developing cirrhosis and other complications. Individuals with advanced liver fibrosis have significantly higher risk of developing liver cancer, although cancer may also arise in some patients before significant hepatitis or fibrosis. NASH is increasing worldwide at an alarming rate due to the spread of the Western diet, obesity, and other related conditions. Approximately 4-5% of the global population is estimated to have NASH, including the USA. NASH is the leading reason for individuals requiring a liver transplant in the USA. Considering the serious outcomes linked to advancing NASH, the economic and social burden of the disease is enormous. There are no simple blood tests to diagnose or track the progression of NASH, and no drugs are approved to specifically treat the disease.
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
We have created a proprietary AI tool called, “AI-POWRTM to optimize the outcomes of our current clinical programs and to potentially identify novel indications for CRV431 and possibly identify new targets and new drug molecules to broaden our pipeline.
AI-POWR™ is our acronym for Artificial Intelligence - Precision Medicine; Omics that include genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, transcriptomics, and lipidomics; World database access; and Response and clinical outcomes. AI-POWR™ allows for the selection of novel drug targets, biomarkers, and appropriate patient populations. AI-POWR™ is used to identify responders from big data sources using our multi-omics approach, while modelling inputs and scenarios to increase response rates. The components of AI-POWR™ include access to publicly available databases, and in-house genomic and multi-omic big data, processed via machine learning algorithms. We believe AI outputs will allow for improved response outcomes through enhanced patient selection, biomarker selection and drug target selection. We believe AI outputs will help identify responders a priori and reduce the need for large sample sizes through study design enrichment.
We intend to use AI-POWR™ to help identify which NASH patients will best respond to CRV431. It is anticipated that applying this proprietary platform to our drug development program will ultimately save time, resources
and money. In so doing, we believe that AI-POWR™ is a risk-mitigation strategy that should reap benefits all the way through from clinical trials to commercialization.
We believe that NASH is a heterogenous disease and we need to have a better understanding of interactions among proteins, genes, lipids, metabolites, and other disease variables to help predict disease progression, regression, and responses to CRV431. All of this is further complicated by variable drug concentrations, patient traits and temporal factors. AI-POWR™ is designed to address many of the typical challenges in drug development, as we believe we can use our proprietary platform to shorten development timelines and increase the delta between placebo and treatment groups. AI-POWR™ will be used to drive our ongoing Phase 2a NASH program and identify additional potential indications for CRV431 to expand our footprint in the cyclophilin inhibition therapeutic space.
Impact of COVID-19
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (the “COVID-19 outbreak”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally.
The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve as of the date of this report. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. Management is actively monitoring the global situation and its impact on our financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce.
While we have not experienced delays to date, we may experience delays in the conduct of clinical testing of our product candidate. We do not know whether planned clinical trials will begin on time, will need to be redesigned or will be completed on schedule, if at all. The COVID-19 pandemic may affect the operations of the FDA and other health authorities, which could result in delays of reviews and approvals, including with respect to our product candidate. The evolving COVID-19 pandemic is also likely to directly or indirectly impact the pace of enrollment in our CRV431 clinical trials for at least the next several months and possibly longer as patients may avoid or may not be able to travel to healthcare facilities and physicians' offices unless due to a health emergency. Clinical trials can be delayed for a variety of reasons, including delays in obtaining regulatory approval to commence a clinical trial, in securing clinical trial agreements with prospective sites with acceptable terms, in obtaining institutional review board approval to conduct a clinical trial at a prospective site, in recruiting patients to participate in a clinical trial, related to the COVID-19 pandemic, or in obtaining sufficient supplies of clinical trial materials. Any delays in completing our clinical trials will increase our costs, slow down our product development, timeliness and approval process and delay our ability to generate revenue.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change and we do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, financing or clinical trial activities or on healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. Although we cannot estimate the length or gravity of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak nor estimate the potential impact to our fiscal year 2020 financial statements at this time, if the pandemic continues, it could have a material adverse effect on our results of future operations, financial position, liquidity, and capital resources, and those of the third parties on which we rely in fiscal year 2021.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), as amended on June 5, 2020 by the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. On April 13, 2020, we were granted a loan (the “Loan”) from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. in the aggregate amount of $176,585, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act.
The Loan, which was in the form of a Note dated April 13, 2020 issued by us, matures on April 13, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 0.98% per annum. The Note may be prepaid by us at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Funds from the Loan may only be used for payroll costs, rent and utilities. We used the entire Loan amount for qualifying expenses. Under the terms of the PPP, certain amounts of the Loan may be forgiven if they are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act. We believe we have properly satisfied all eligibility requirements for the PPP loan and we intend to comply with the loan forgiveness provisions in the legislation; however, there can be no assurance that we will obtain full forgiveness of the loans based on the legislation. As of the date of the
issuance of the consolidated financial statements, we have not yet filed for loan forgiveness. The PPP Loan is reflected in the consolidated balance sheet as long-term debt based upon the terms and conditions of the Loan agreement.
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have an accumulated deficit of approximately $104.1 million. From inception through December 31, 2020, we have not generated any revenue from operations and expect to incur additional losses to perform further research and development activities and do not currently have any commercial biopharmaceutical products. We do not expect to have such for several years, if at all.
On February 12, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley FBR, Inc., as agent (“B. Riley FBR”), pursuant to which we sold through B. Riley FBR 2,311,867 shares (the “Shares”) of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), for $6.8 million. The offer and sale of the Shares were made pursuant to a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 and the related prospectus (File No. 333-229534) filed by us with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Also, on March 27, 2020, we filed a prospectus supplement to the Form S-3 (File No. 333-229534) pursuant to which we sold an additional 2,950,939 shares of our common stock for $4.6 million. In total, we sold 5,262,806 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $11.2 million from the “at the market offerings”.
On November 19, 2020, we terminated the Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. dated February 12, 2020, effective November 24, 2020.
On November 24, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with ThinkEquity, a division of Fordham Financial Management, Inc., as the representative (the “Representative”) of the underwriters listed therein (collectively, the “Underwriters”), with respect to an underwritten public offering (the “Offering”) of 20,000,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 (the “Shares”) at a public offering price of $1.50 per share and a 45-day option to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional shares of common stock to cover over-allotments. On November 25, 2020, the Representative exercised the over-allotment in full.
The Shares were offered by us pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (No. 333- 249724) previously filed with the SEC and subsequently declared effective on November 24, 2020. The Offering closed on November 30, 2020 and we received net proceeds of $31.6 million.
On February 16, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with the Representative with respect to an underwritten public offering of 44,200,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $2.00 per share, in which we received net proceeds of approximately $82.1 million. The shares were offered by us pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-229534), which was declared effective on February 19, 2019, and the base prospectus included therein, as supplemented by the preliminary prospectus supplement, dated February 16, 2021 and final prospectus supplement, dated February 16, 2021.
Our product development efforts are in their early stages and we cannot make estimates of the costs or the time they will take to complete. The risk of completion of any program is high because of the many uncertainties involved in bringing new drugs to market including the long duration of clinical testing, the specific performance of proposed products under stringent clinical trial protocols, the extended regulatory approval and review cycles, our ability to raise additional capital, the nature and timing of research and development expenses and competing technologies being developed by organizations with significantly greater resources.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with fair value of financial instruments, derivative financial instruments, income taxes, contingencies, research and development, goodwill and in-process research and development, and share-based payments have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. We
evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and any differences could be material. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Financial instruments consist of cash, accounts payable, convertible notes, contingent consideration and derivative instruments. These financial instruments are stated at their respective historical carrying amounts, which approximate fair value due to their short-term nature, except for contingent consideration and derivative instruments. We record our contingent consideration and derivative instruments at fair value at the end of each reporting period.
Contingent consideration was related to the acquisition of Ciclofilin and recorded on June 10, 2016. The contingent consideration represented the acquisition date fair value of potential future payments, to be paid in cash and Company stock, upon the achievement of certain milestones and in 2016 was estimated based on a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model utilizing a discount rate of 6.5% and a stock price of $19.60. We completed the first segment of our Phase 1 clinical activities for CRV431 in October 2018 wherein we reached a major clinical milestone of positive data from a Phase I trial of CRV431 in humans. This achievement triggered the first milestone payment, as stated in the Merger Agreement for the acquisition of Ciclofilin Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Ciclofilin,) and we paid a related milestone payment of $1,000,000 and issued 1,439 shares of our common stock with a fair value of $55,398, representing 2.5% of our issued and outstanding common stock as of June 2016, to the Ciclofilin shareholders.
Derivative financial instruments
We have issued common stock warrants in connection with the execution of certain equity financings. The fair value of the warrants, which were deemed to be derivative instruments based on certain contingent put features, was recorded as a derivative liability under the provisions of Accounting Standards Update (“ASC”) Topic 815 Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”) upon issuance. Subsequently, the liability is adjusted to fair value as of the end of each reporting period and the changes in fair value of derivative liabilities are recorded in the statements of operations under the caption “Change in fair value of derivative financial instruments-warrants.” See Note 6 for additional information.
The fair value of the warrants, issued in connection with the October 2015, April 2016 and April 2017 common stock offerings deemed to be derivative instruments due to certain contingent put feature on the warrants, was determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, deemed to be an appropriate model due to the terms of the warrants issued, including a fixed term and exercise price. In October 2020, the October 2015 warrants expired.
The warrants, issued in connection with the July 2018 Rights Offering are deemed to be derivative instruments since if we do not maintain an effective registration statement, we are obligated to deliver registered shares upon exercise and settlement of the warrant because there are further registration and prospectus delivery requirements that are outside of our control. Therefore, the fair value of the warrants was determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, deemed to be an appropriate model due to the terms of the warrants issued, including a fixed term and exercise price.
The fair value of warrants was affected by changes in inputs to the Black-Scholes option pricing model including our stock price, expected stock price volatility, the contractual term, and the risk-free interest rate. This model uses Level 3 inputs, including stock price volatility, in the fair value hierarchy established by ASC 820 Fair Value Measurement. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the fair value of such warrants was $11,673 and $5,623, respectively, which is classified as a long-term derivative liability in the consolidated balance sheets.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which we expect to recover or settle those temporary differences. We recognize the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. We reduce the measurement of a deferred tax asset, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that we will not realize some or all the deferred tax asset. We account for uncertain tax positions by recognizing the financial statement effects of a tax position only when, based upon technical merits, it is ‘‘more-likely-than-not’’ that the position
will be sustained upon examination. Potential interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax positions are recognized in income tax expense.
In April 2019, we transferred New Jersey state net operating loss tax credits and received approximately $1.0 million in connection with the sale of the state net operating losses to a third party recorded as an income tax benefit in the consolidated statement of operations. We received approval for the sale of net operating losses through participation in the New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program. We continue to maintain a full valuation allowance for our U.S net deferred tax assets. The current period income tax expense is related to our foreign operations.
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are subject to loss contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business that cover a wide range of matters, including, among others, government investigations, shareholder lawsuits, product and environmental liability, and tax matters. In accordance with ASC Topic 450, Accounting for Contingencies, (“ASC 450”), we record accruals for such loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability will be incurred, and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We, in accordance with this guidance, does not recognize gain contingencies until realized.
Research and Development
Research and development costs, which include expenditures in connection with an in-house research and development laboratory, salaries and staff costs, application and filing for regulatory approval of proposed products, purchased in-process research and development, license costs, regulatory and scientific consulting fees, as well as contract research, insurance and FDA consultants, are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 730, Research and Development (“ASC 730”). Also, as prescribed by this guidance, patent filing and maintenance expenses are considered legal in nature and therefore classified as general and administrative expense, if any.
We do not currently have any commercial biopharmaceutical products and do not expect to have such for several years, if at all. Accordingly, our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. While certain of our research and development costs may have future benefits, our policy of expensing all research and development expenditures is predicated on the fact that we have no history of successful commercialization of product candidates to base any estimate of the number of future periods that would be benefited.
Also as prescribed by ASC 730, non-refundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities should be deferred and capitalized. As the related goods are delivered or the services are performed, or when the goods or services are no longer expected to be provided, the deferred amounts would be recognized as an expense. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had prepaid research and development costs of $1.8 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
Goodwill and In-Process Research & Development
In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC Topic 350”), goodwill and acquired in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) are determined to have indefinite lives and, therefore, are not amortized. Instead, they are tested for impairment annually, in our fourth quarter, and between annual tests if we become aware of an event or a change in circumstances that would indicate the carrying value may be impaired.
In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other: Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, which eliminates Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. The annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test is performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit should be considered when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable.
The amendments also eliminate the requirements for any reporting unit with a zero or negative carrying amount to perform a qualitative assessment and, if it fails that qualitative test, to perform Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test. An entity still has the option to perform the qualitative assessment for a reporting unit to determine if the quantitative
impairment test is necessary. We adopted ASU 2017-04 on January 1, 2020, and the adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill relates to amounts that arose in connection with the acquisition of Ciclofilin. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired when accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we performed a qualitative assessment of goodwill and determined that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting was less than its carrying value. There was no impairment of goodwill for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
IPR&D acquired in a business combination is capitalized as indefinite-lived assets on our consolidated balance sheets at the acquisition-date fair value. Once the project is completed, the carrying value of the IPR&D is reclassified to other intangible assets, net and is amortized over the estimated useful life of the asset. Post-acquisition research and development expenses related to the IPR&D projects are expensed as incurred. The projected discounted cash flow models used to estimate the fair values of our IPR&D assets, acquired in connection with the Ciclofilin acquisition, reflect significant assumptions regarding the estimates a market participant would make in order to evaluate a drug development asset, including: (i) probability of successfully completing clinical trials and obtaining regulatory approval; (ii) market size, market growth projections, and market share; (iii) estimates regarding the timing of and the expected costs to advance clinical programs to commercialization; (iv) estimates of future cash flows from potential product sales; and (v) a discount rate. These assumptions are based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. The use of different inputs and assumptions could increase or decrease our estimated discounted future cash flows, the resulting estimated fair values and the amounts of related impairments, if any.
If IPR&D becomes impaired or is abandoned, the carrying value of the IPR&D is written down to the revised fair value with the related impairment charge recognized in the period in which the impairment occurs. If the carrying value of the asset becomes impaired as the result of unfavorable data from any ongoing or future clinical trial, changes in assumptions that negatively impact projected cash flows, or because of any other information regarding the prospects of successfully developing or commercializing our programs, we could incur significant charges in the period in which the impairment occurs.
Share-based payments
ASC Topic 718 “Compensation-Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”) requires companies to measure the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for the award of equity instruments based on the estimated fair value of the award at the date of grant. The expense is to be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award. Generally, we issue stock options with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for awards using the straight-line method.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We have a limited trading history in our common stock and lack company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, the estimated expected stock volatility is based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our own traded stock price. The expected term of stock options has been determined utilizing the “simplified” method for awards that qualify as “plain-vanilla” options. The expected term of stock options granted to non-employees is equal to the contractual term of the option award. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For detailed information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements and the expected impact on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 4, "Recent Accounting Pronouncements" in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
JOBS Act
On December 31, 2020, our status as an emerging growth company ended. To the extent that we continue to qualify as a “smaller reporting company,” as such term is defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, after we cease to qualify as an emerging growth company on December 31, 2020, certain of the exemptions available to us as an emerging growth company may continue to be available to us as a smaller reporting company, including: (1) not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes Oxley Act; (2) scaled executive compensation disclosures; and (3) the requirement to provide only two years of audited financial statements, instead of three years.
We expect to qualify as a “smaller reporting company” for the foreseeable future.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
We had no revenues during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, because we do not have any commercial biopharmaceutical products and we do not expect to have such products for several years, if at all.
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 amounted to $12.0 million and $3.2 million, respectively. The $8.8 million increase was primarily due to an increase of $4.7 million for costs related to the production of our drug and various ongoing research studies, a $3.1 million increase in consulting and outside service costs related to various ongoing research studies, and a $0.6 million increase in stock-based compensation costs.
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 amounted to $8.1 million and $4.6 million, respectively. The increase of $3.5 million is primarily due to an increase of $1.8 million in stock-based compensation costs, a $0.3 million increase in insurance costs, and a $1.3 million increase in professional fees and consulting costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded income tax expense of $30,584 and an income tax benefit of $0.9 million, respectively, resulting from an adjustment for deferred tax liability. Refer to Note 10 in the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20.4 million, which was the result of the operating expenses discussed above and a loss of $0.1 million for the change in fair value of derivative instruments related to our warrants. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $7.0 million, which was the result of the operating expenses discussed above, a loss of $0.2 million for the change in fair value of debt, a $0.6 million loss for interest expense, which was offset by income of $0.6 million resulting from the change in fair value of derivative instruments related to our warrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $38.0 million compared to working capital of $12.8 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase of $25.2 million in working capital is primarily related to an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $26.8 million from our equity offerings during 2020.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the following periods:
As of December 31, 2020, we had $40.7 million in cash. Net cash used in operating activities was $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting primarily of our net loss of $20.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $2.6 million primarily for stock-based compensation. Changes in working capital accounts had a positive impact of $1.6 million on cash.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisting of our net loss of $7.0 million, adjusted for non-cash charges primarily of $0.3 million. Changes in working capital accounts had a negative impact of $0.8 million on cash.
Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of was immaterial in both periods.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $43.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs for our equity offerings $42.9 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs in our April and June 2019 offerings of $7.7 million, proceeds from issuance of preferred stock and warrants of $10.0 million, and proceeds from the exercise of warrants of $2.1 million. This was offset by the repayment of convertible debt of $1.1 million.
Common Stock Offerings during 2020
On February 12, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley FBR, Inc., as agent (“B. Riley FBR”), pursuant to which we sold through B. Riley FBR 2,311,867 shares (the “Shares”) of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), for $6.8 million. The offer and sale of the Shares were made pursuant to a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 and the related prospectus (File No. 333-229534) filed by us with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Also, on March 27, 2020, we filed a prospectus supplement to the Form S-3 (File No. 333-229534) pursuant to which we sold an additional 2,950,939 shares of our common stock for $4.6 million. In total, we sold 5,262,806 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $11.2 million from the “at the market offerings”.
On November 19, 2020, we terminated the Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. dated February 12, 2020, effective November 24, 2020.
On November 24, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with ThinkEquity, a division of Fordham Financial Management, Inc., as the representative (the “Representative”) of the underwriters listed therein (collectively, the “Underwriters”), with respect to an underwritten public offering (the “Offering”) of 20,000,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 (the “Shares”) at a public offering price of $1.50 per share and a 45-day option to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional shares of common stock to cover over-allotments. On November 25, 2020, the Representative exercised the over-allotment in full.
The Shares were offered by us pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (No. 333- 249724) previously filed with the SEC and subsequently declared effective on November 24, 2020. The Offering closed on November 30, 2020 and we received net proceeds of $31.6 million.
Common Stock Offerings during 2021
On February 16, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with the Representative with respect to an underwritten public offering of 44,200,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $2.00 per share, in which we received net proceeds of approximately $82.1 million. The shares were offered by us pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-229534), which was declared effective on February 19, 2019, and the base prospectus included therein, as supplemented by the preliminary prospectus supplement, dated February 16, 2021 and final prospectus supplement, dated February 16, 2021.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $104.1 million and expect to incur a significant increase in operating losses for the next several years as we expand our research, development and clinical trials of CRV431. We are unable to predict the extent of any future losses or when we will become profitable, if at all.
We will be required to raise additional capital in a future year to continue the development and commercialization of current product candidates and to continue to fund operations at the current cash expenditure levels. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Recently worldwide economic conditions and the international equity and credit markets have significantly deteriorated and may remain difficult for the foreseeable future. These developments will make it more difficult to obtain additional equity or credit financing, when needed. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience significant dilution. Any debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants that impact our ability to conduct, delay, scale back or discontinue the development and/or commercialization of one or more product candidates; (ii) seek collaborators for product candidates at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable and on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available; or (iii) relinquish or otherwise dispose of rights to technologies, product candidates or products that we would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize on unfavorable terms.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have a long-term contractual cash obligation as of December 31, 2020, comprised of operating lease obligations. The following table summarizes this obligation:
We have recorded contingent consideration for the acquisition of Ciclofilin on June 10, 2016 as well as executed several license agreements, as discussed in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements, respectively. We have not included the contingent consideration payments or accrued milestone and royalty payments associated with licensing as management cannot reasonably estimate if or when they will occur.
We also have employment agreements with certain employees which require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a change in control or termination without cause, occur.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with ASC Topic 842, Leases, (“ASC 842”). We determine if an arrangement is a lease at contract inception. A lease exists when a contract conveys to the customer the right to control the use of identified property, plant, or equipment for a period of time in exchange for consideration. The definition of a lease embodies two conditions: (1) there is an identified asset in the contract that is land or a depreciable asset (i.e., property, plant, and equipment), and (2) the customer has the right to control the use of the identified asset.
Rent expense related to our operating leases was $0.3 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The weighted average remaining term of our noncancelable operating leases is 2.1 years.
Future minimum rental payments under our noncancelable operating leases at December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Contingent Consideration
Contingent consideration was recorded for the acquisition of Ciclofilin Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Ciclofilin) on June 10, 2016. The contingent consideration represented the acquisition date fair value of potential future payments, to be paid in cash and our stock, upon the achievement of certain milestones and in 2016 was estimated based on a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model utilizing a discount rate of 6.5% and a stock price of $19.60. We completed the first segment of our Phase 1 clinical activities for CRV431 in October 2018 wherein we reached a major clinical milestone of positive data from a Phase I trial of CRV431 in humans. This achievement triggered the first milestone payment, as stated in the Merger Agreement for the acquisition of Ciclofilin and in the fourth quarter of 2018, we paid a related milestone payment of $1,000,000 and issued 1,439 shares of our common stock with a fair value of $55,398, representing 2.5% of our issued and outstanding common stock as of June 2016, to the Ciclofilin shareholders. As of December 31, 2020, due to the uncertainty in the timing of the clinical development of the associated product candidate, the entire balance is classified as a non-current liability.
Employment agreements
We also have employment agreements with certain employees which require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a change in control or termination without cause, occur.