ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. For additional discussion, see “SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS” above.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company, developing our portfolio of immuno-oncology and immunology monoclonal antibodies. We are focusing our efforts on the development of our lead product candidate, lenzilumab™, our proprietary Humaneered® (“Humaneered”) anti-human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (“GM-CSF”) monoclonal antibody. Lenzilumab is a monoclonal antibody that has been demonstrated in animal models to neutralize GM-CSF, a cytokine that we believe is of critical importance in the hyperinflammatory cascade, sometimes referred to as cytokine release syndrome (“CRS”) or cytokine storm, associated with COVID-19, chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (“CAR-T”) therapy and acute Graft versus Host Disease (“GvHD”) associated with bone marrow transplants. GM-CSF neutralization with lenzilumab has been shown to reduce downstream inflammatory cytokines, prevent CRS and reduce its associated neurologic toxicities in-vivo in validated preclinical human xenograft models (Blood. 2019 Feb 14;133(7):697-709).
Lenzilumab has completed full enrollment in a Phase 3, multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled potential registrational trial for hospitalized, hypoxic patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. If the data from the trial are favorable, based on our discussions with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), including a Type B meeting, and in consultation with the regulatory experts at Operation Warp Speed, we plan on filing an Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) application in the second quarter of 2021. If the EUA is granted, we could begin to commercialize lenzilumab for the treatment of hospitalized COVID-19 pneumonia patients. We also intend to file a Biologics License Application (“BLA”) in 2021, again assuming the data from the Phase 3 trial are favorable and support such an application. Based on discussions with FDA, we understand that a BLA will require us to generate and present more clinical and manufacturing data than would be required to support an EUA. If the ACTIV-5/BET study described below is successful and completed on a timely basis, we plan to include the results in our BLA filing. COVID-19 infections are widespread and as of February 26, 2021 in the United States, there were over 28 million cases, nearly 1.8 million hospitalizations and over 510 thousand deaths. Several vaccines have been developed which show efficacy in excess of 90%, however the slow rollout of inoculations and the emergence of numerous COVID-19 variants lead us to believe the need for therapeutics to treat COVID-19 currently exists and will continue to exist.
Lenzilumab has been selected to be part of the ACTIV-5 “Big Effect Trial” (ACTIV-5/BET NCT). This study is sponsored by the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”). ACTIV-5/BET is designed to determine whether certain approved therapies or investigational drugs in late-stage clinical development show promise against COVID-19 and, therefore, merit advancement into larger clinical trials. ACTIV-5/BET, currently has 17 active sites enrolling and is expected to enroll in up to 40 U.S. sites, will evaluate lenzilumab with remdesivir, compared to placebo and remdesivir, in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, with approximately 100 patients expected to be assigned to each study arm. We are providing lenzilumab for the study, which is fully funded by NIH.
Lenzilumab is also being studied in a multicenter phase 1b/2 potential registrational trial as a sequenced therapy with Yescarta® (axicabtagene ciloleucel) to reduce CRS and neurotoxicity in patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (“DLBCL”) (NCT04314843). This trial currently has 10 active sites and is being conducted in partnership with Kite Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a Gilead company (“Kite”), which markets Yescarta. We are also in the final planning stages for a Phase 2/3 trial for lenzilumab to treat patients who have undergone allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell therapy (“HSCT”) who are at high and intermediate risk for acute GvHD. The trial is expected to be conducted by the IMPACT Partnership, a collection of 22 stem cell transplant centers located in the United Kingdom.
Our proprietary, patented Humaneered technology platform is a method for converting existing antibodies (typically murine) into engineered, high-affinity human antibodies designed for therapeutic use, particularly with acute and chronic conditions. We have developed or in-licensed targets or research antibodies, typically from academic institutions, and then applied our Humaneered technology to produce them. Lenzilumab and our other two product candidates, ifabotuzumab and HGEN005, are Humaneered monoclonal antibodies. Our Humaneered antibodies are closer to human antibodies than chimeric or conventionally humanized antibodies and have a high affinity for their target but low immunogenicity. We believe our Humaneered antibodies offer additional advantages, such as high potency, a slow off-rate and a lower likelihood to induce an inappropriate immune response or infusion related reactions.
Our Pipeline
Our lenzilumab-based clinical-stage pipeline comprises a Phase 3 potential registration study in COVID-19 which has fully enrolled, the NIH-sponsored and funded ACTIV-5/BET program in COVID-19, a currently enrolling Phase 1b/2 study (ZUMA-19) as sequenced therapy of lenzilumab and Yescarta, a planned Phase 2/3 study in acute GvHD, and a planned Phase 2 study in CMML, the latter two of which we expect will be majority funded by partners. While the majority of our clinical programs involve lenzilumab, we have also fully enrolled an ifabotuzumab Phase 1 study in GBM.
Except for the potential of lenzilumab for COVID-19 under an EUA, our product candidates are in the clinical stage of development and will require substantial time, resources, research and development, and regulatory approval prior to commercialization. Furthermore, it may be years before any of our products are approved for use, if at all. Our current pipeline is depicted below:
1 Phase 3 may not be necessary for approval in ZUMA-19; precedent is CAR-Ts to date have been approved on Phase 2 data
2 UK
3 US, EU, Australia
Results of Operations
General
At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $374.4 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses as well as costs incurred in reorganization. While we may in the future generate revenue from a variety of sources, including license fees, milestone payments, and research and development payments in connection with strategic partnerships, our product candidates are at an early stage of development and may never be successfully developed or commercialized. Accordingly, we expect to continue to incur substantial losses from operations for the foreseeable future, and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
Research and Development Expenses
Conducting research and development is central to our business model. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as incurred. We track external research and development costs incurred by project for each of our clinical programs. Our external research and development costs consist primarily of:
· expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites, and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and a substantial portion of our pre-clinical activities;
· the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial and EUA materials prior to receiving an EUA; and
· other costs associated with development activities, including additional studies.
Other research and development costs consist primarily of internal research and development costs such as salaries and related fringe benefit costs for our employees (such as workers compensation and health insurance premiums), stock-based compensation charges, and external costs not allocated to one of our clinical programs. Internal research and development costs generally benefit multiple projects and are not separately tracked per project.
The following table shows our total research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, costs related to our preparation for commercialization of lenzilumab, professional fees for legal and patent expenses, consulting, audit and tax services, investor and public relations costs, rent and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Selling, general and administrative expenses were $15.8 million and $6.3 million, respectively.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($000’s)
License revenue increased $0.3 million in 2020 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to the signing of the South Korea Agreement, described in more detail in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and development expenses increased $70.1 million in 2020 from $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $72.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to increased clinical trial and clinical material manufacturing costs related to the COVID-19 clinical trials. We expect our development costs to decrease in 2021 as a result of the completion of the COVID-19 clinical trials and related manufacturing costs which comprised a significant portion of our development expense in 2020 upon grant of EUA will be classified as Cost of Goods Sold in 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $9.5 million in 2020 from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to increased compensation costs of $2.0 million, related to the hiring of a new Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer and a new Chief Accounting and Administrative Officer, as well as an increase in bonus costs for our Chief Executive Officer, an increase in public and investor relations expense of $4.9 million, which amount includes the issuance of warrants with a fair value of $2.0 million to certain third party consultants, and an increase in legal fees of $0.8 million incurred in connection with financing preparations and other corporate actions taken. We have also incurred $1.6 million in commercial operations expense as we prepare for a potential commercial launch under an EUA in COVID-19 including the hiring of a Chief Commercial Officer and the engagement of professional services organizations. We expect that we will continue to scale our support operations in connection with the filing for approval of lenzilumab in COVID-19 in the US and in Europe and will increase our commercial operations spending in preparation for potential commercialization under an EUA.
Interest expense and Other expense, net was essentially flat on a year-over-year basis.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $166.2 million to offset future federal income taxes which expire in the years 2021 through 2037, and approximately $261.4 million that may offset future state income taxes which expire in the years 2028 through 2040. We also have federal net operating loss carryforwards generated in 2018, 2019 and 2020 of $104.9 million that have no expiration date as a result of the tax law changes signed into law on December 22, 2017. Current federal and state tax laws include substantial restrictions on the utilization of net operating losses and tax credits in the event of an ownership change. Even if the carryforwards are available, they may be subject to annual limitations, lack of future taxable income, or future ownership changes that could result in the expiration of the carryforwards before they are utilized. At December 31, 2020, we recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets of approximately $82.3 million, as at that time our management believed it was uncertain that they would be fully realized. If we determine in the future that we will be able to realize all or a portion of our deferred tax assets, an adjustment to our valuation allowance would increase net income in the period in which we make such a determination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds from the public offerings and private placements of our common and preferred stock, debt financings, interest income earned on cash, and cash equivalents, and marketable securities, borrowings against lines of credit, and receipts from prior collaboration agreements. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $67.7 million. As of March 5,2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $74.3 million.
Primary Sources of and Uses of Cash
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below ($000’s):
Net cash used in operating activities was $69.9 million and $4.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in operating activities in 2019 primarily related to our net loss of $10.3 million, adjusted for non-cash items, such as $2.0 million in stock-based compensation, changes in operating assets and liabilities of $4.1 million and other non-cash items of $0.2 million. Cash used in operating activities in 2020 primarily related to our net loss of $89.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items, such as $2.1 million in stock-based compensation, changes in operating assets and liabilities of $16.6 million and other non-cash items of $0.4 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $20,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This relates to the acquisition of intangible assets. There was no such investment for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $137.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consists primarily of $67.0 million received from the issuance of common stock in the 2020 Private Placement (as defined below) in June 2020, $72.7 million received from the issuance of common stock in the 2020 Underwritten Offering (as defined below) in September 2020, $0.5 million received from the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes, $0.6 million received from the exercise of stock options, $0.3 million received from the issuance of the 2020 Bridge Notes and $0.1 million received from the issuance of common stock under the equity line of credit with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), offset by $0.5 million for the payoff of the 2020 Convertible Notes, $2.4 million for the payoff of the 2019 and 2020 Bridge Notes and $0.8 million for the payoff of the Notes payable to vendors.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This amount consists primarily of $2.0 million received from the issuance of the 2019 Bridge Notes (as defined below) entered into in June and November 2019, $1.3 million from the issuance of the 2019 Notes (as defined below) entered into in April 2019, $0.3 million received from the exercise of stock options, $0.2 million received from the issuance of common stock under the equity line of credit with Lincoln Park, offset by $0.5 million in payments made against the notes payable to vendors.
Recent Financings
2020 Private Placement
On June 1, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain accredited investors (the “Investors”) to complete a private placement of our common stock (the “Private Placement”). The closing of the Private Placement occurred on June 2, 2020 (the “Closing Date”). At the closing, we issued and sold 16,505,743 shares of our common stock (the “Shares”) at a purchase price of $4.35 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $71.8 million. We used a portion of the proceeds to retire the following indebtedness:
· the outstanding principal amount and accrued and unpaid interest on the Company’s convertible promissory notes issued in March 2020, which approximated $0.5 million, were repaid in full, and the notes were extinguished;
· the outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest, amounting to approximately $2.4 million, on short-term, secured bridge loans made to the Company in 2019 and 2020 were repaid in full and the related liens were released; and
· the remaining outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest, amounting to approximately $0.8 million, on certain notes payable to vendors in accordance with the bankruptcy plan.
We used the remaining proceeds from the Private Placement to fund our Phase 3 study of lenzilumab in COVID-19, to secure manufacturing capacity, to progress Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls (“CMC”) work, to prepare for commercialization in the event of approval of lenzilumab for use in COVID-19 patients, our collaboration with Kite and other development programs, as well as for working capital and other general corporate purposes. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for material information regarding two complaints filed against us in connection with the Private Placement.
2020 Underwritten Public Offering
On September 17, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and Jefferies LLC, as representatives of the several underwriters, in connection with the public offering of 8,000,000 of the Company’s shares of common stock. Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase an additional 1,200,000 shares of common stock, which option was exercised in full by the underwriters on September 18, 2020.
As a result of the pricing of the public offering, our common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “HGEN.”
The aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of the full 9,200,000 shares in the offering were approximately $78.2 million. We expect to use the proceeds from the offering to support our manufacturing, production and commercial preparation activities relating to lenzilumab as a potential therapy for COVID-19 patients and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
Controlled Equity Offering
On December 31, 2020, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., under which we may issue and sell from time to time shares of the Company’s common stock, having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $100,000,000 through Cantor Fitzgerald, as sales agent. As of December 31, 2020, no sales were made under the Sales Agreement. During the period from January 1, 2020 through March 5, 2021, we sold 1,796,858 shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement for net proceeds of $36.2 million.
Secured Term Loan Facility
On March 10, 2021, we executed a Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc., as agent for its affiliates serving as lenders thereunder, pursuant to which we established a term loan facility in aggregate principal amount of up to $80 million (the “Term Loan”). The Term Loan provides us with the ability to draw an initial amount of $25.0 million, with up to an additional $55.0 million available for future draws subject to achievement of future milestones and satisfaction of other conditions. See Part II, Item 9B “Other Information” for additional information regarding the Term Loan.
Liquidity
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our planned operations and capital expenditure requirements for at least 12 months. This evaluation is based on relevant conditions and events that are currently known or reasonably knowable. As a result, we could deplete our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, and a delay in obtaining or failure to obtain an EUA could further constrain our cash resources. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and our operating projections, including our projected net revenue following the potential receipt of an EUA for lenzilumab in COVID-19 patients, may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us. If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed or on acceptable terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate our research and development programs and commercialization efforts.
We expect we will need to obtain additional financing to fund our future operations, including for the development, manufacturing, distribution and commercialization of lenzilumab for patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and other indications including CRS and GvHD and our other product candidates. We may need to obtain additional financing to conduct additional trials for the approval of our product candidates if requested by regulatory authorities in the US and other countries, and to complete the development of any additional product candidates we own or might acquire. Moreover, our fixed expenses such as salaries, committed payments to our contract manufacturers, and other contractual commitments, including those for our other research and clinical collaborations, are substantial and are expected to increase in the future. Our need to raise funds will depend on a number of factors, including our ability to establish additional relationships for the manufacture of lenzilumab and our ability to commence commercialization and begin generating revenues from product sales if lenzilumab were to be issued an EUA and eventually approval under a BLA.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of revenue, we may finance future cash needs through public or private equity offerings, license agreements, grant financing and support from governmental agencies, convertible debt, borrowings under our Term Loan with Hercules Capital and other debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, supply, distribution, or licensing arrangements. Additional funds may not be available when we need them on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay or reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more of our research or development programs, our commercialization efforts or our manufacturing commitments and capacity. We may seek to access the public or private capital markets whenever conditions are favorable, even if we do not have an immediate need for additional capital at that time. In addition, if we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, supply, distribution, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Capital Commitments and Capital Resources
We currently anticipate that top-line data from our Phase 3 trial of lenzilumab in hospitalized and hypoxic patients with COVID-19 will be available before the end of the first quarter of 2021. We have been preparing to submit an application for EUA for lenzilumab in the event data from the Phase 3 clinical trial are favorable. Even if the data are favorable, we cannot provide any assurance that we will receive an EUA from FDA. If EUA is received, we currently anticipate potential product launch, subject to the terms and conditions of the EUA, could occur as early as the second quarter of 2021.
To support our application for EUA and the potential launch of lenzilumab under an EUA, we have entered into agreements with several organizations for clinical trial services, commercialization services and contract manufacturing services as described in more detail elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our agreements with contract manufacturing organizations, more fully described under “Item 1. Business-Manufacturing and Raw Materials,” generally require us to commit to non-refundable up-front costs to secure manufacturing slots. Firm commitments under these agreements for 2021 are estimated to be $53 million, and we have committed to pay approximately $16 million in 2021 for other services related to potential product launch, We expect to be able to fund these firm commitments from our cash and cash equivalents on hand, which approximated $74.3 million as of March 5, 2021.
Our agreements for contract manufacturing also provide for our payment against performance by the manufacturers of their obligations under the contracts. We estimate our total commitments in respect of our current contractual arrangements to be approximately $244 million in 2021, of which approximately $210 million is for manufacturing of lenzilumab. If the data from the COVID-19 Phase 3 clinical trial are favorable and an EUA is granted in the second quarter of 2021, we expect to be able to satisfy the bulk of the cash requirements associated with our manufacturing commitments from revenues from the commercial sale of lenzilumab, supplemented as necessary with proceeds from the sale of our equity securities; the incurrence of debt; upfront and milestone payments from licensees; and government funding or financial support, if offered.
While our clinical manufacturing agreements specify maximum payment terms, they also generally contain standard terms that provide us the right to cancel pending orders prior to the initiation of manufacturing and, if the manufacturer is able to fill the slots with other products, to do so with limited further payment obligations to the manufacturers. Accordingly, in the event we do not receive an EUA, we would seek to terminate these agreements and related commitments. Given our sense of the demand for biologic manufacturing, sterile fill/finish capacity and the materials and components required, in the event of cancellation of production orders, we believe, the spending under these agreements would be limited.
See “Contracts” below for additional information regarding our agreements with Eversana, our contract manufacturers and our CRADA with DOD.
Operating Leases
We lease a small office space in Burlingame, California. Such lease will expire on August 31, 2021.
Other Financings
Notes Payable to Vendors
On June 30, 2016, we issued promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $1.2 million to certain claimants in accordance with the bankruptcy plan. The notes were unsecured, accrued interest at 10% per annum and became due and payable in full, including principal and accrued interest on June 30, 2019. In July and August, 2019, following the receipt of proceeds from the 2019 Bridge Notes, we used approximately $0.5 million of the proceeds to retire a portion of these notes, including accrued interest. After giving effect to these payments, the aggregate principal amount and accrued but unpaid interest on these notes approximated $1.1 million as of December 31, 2019 and we had accrued $0.3 million in interest expense. In June and July 2020, we used the proceeds from the Private Placement to repay the remaining outstanding principal including accrued and unpaid interest on these notes and the notes were extinguished. As of December 31, 2020, all the notes have been repaid.
Advance Notes
In June, July and August 2018, we received an aggregate of $0.9 million of proceeds from advances made to us (the “Advance Notes”) by four different lenders including Dr. Cameron Durrant, the Company’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer; Cheval, an affiliate of BHC, the Company’s controlling stockholder at the time; and Ronald Barliant, a director of the Company (collectively the “Advance Note Lenders”). The Advance Notes accrued interest at a rate of 7% per year, compounded annually.
In accordance with their terms, on May 30, 2019, in connection with our announcement of the Kite Agreement, the Advance Note Lenders converted the amounts due under the Advance Notes into common stock at the conversion price of $2.25 per share. We issued a total of 435,924 shares of common stock in connection with the conversion.
2018 Convertible Notes
Commencing September 19, 2018, we delivered a series of convertible promissory notes (the “2018 Notes”) evidencing an aggregate of $2.5 million of loans made to us by six different lenders, including an affiliate of BHC, our controlling stockholder at the time. The 2018 Notes accrued interest at a rate of 7% per annum.
The 2018 Notes were convertible into our equity securities in three different scenarios, including if we sold our equity securities on or before the date of repayment of the 2018 Notes in any financing transaction that resulted in gross proceeds to us of less than $10 million (a “Non-Qualified Financing”). Our sales of shares pursuant to the purchase agreement with Lincoln Park constituted a Non-Qualified Financing. Commencing on April 2, 2020, the holders of the 2018 Notes notified the Company of their exercise of their conversion rights under the 2018 Notes. See “2019 Convertible Notes” for additional information regarding the conversion of 2018 Notes by the holders.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company had accrued $0.2 million in interest related to these promissory notes. Interest expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $817,000.
2019 Convertible Notes
Commencing on April 23, 2019, we delivered a series of convertible promissory notes (the “2019 Notes” and together with the 2018 Notes, the “Convertible Notes”) evidencing an aggregate of $1.3 million of loans made to us. The 2019 Notes accrued interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum.
The 2019 Notes were convertible into our equity securities in four different scenarios, including if the Company sold its equity securities on or before the date of repayment of the 2019 Notes in any financing transaction that resulted in gross proceeds to us of less than $10 million (a “Non-Qualified Financing”). Our sales of shares pursuant to the purchase agreement with LPC constituted a Non-Qualified Financing. Commencing on April 2, 2020, holders of the Convertible Notes, including Cheval, an affiliate of BHC, the Company’s controlling stockholder at the time, notified us of their exercise of their conversion rights under the Convertible Notes. Pursuant to the exemption from registration afforded by Section 3(a)(9) under the Securities Act, we issued an aggregate of 2,397,915 shares of our common stock upon the conversion of $4.3 million in aggregate principal and interest on the Convertible Notes that were converted, which obligations were retired. Of these, we issued 316,666 shares to Cheval. Dr. Dale Chappell, who was serving as our ex-officio chief scientific officer at the time and currently serves as our Chief Scientific Officer, controls BHC and reports beneficial ownership of all shares held by it and its affiliates, including Cheval. After giving effect to the shares issued upon such conversions, no convertible notes issued in 2018 or 2019 were outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, we had accrued $0.1 million in interest related to the 2019 Notes. Interest expense related to the 2019 Notes, recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $219,000.
2019 Bridge Notes
On June 28, 2019, we issued three short-term, secured bridge notes (the “June Bridge Notes”) evidencing an aggregate of $1.7 million of loans made to us by three parties: Cheval, an affiliate of BHC, our controlling stockholder at the time, lent $750,000; Nomis Bay, our second largest stockholder at the time, lent $750,000; and Dr. Durrant, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of our Board of Directors, lent $200,000. The $1.7 million in proceeds was recorded as Advance notes in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2019. As previously disclosed, the June Bridge Notes were repaid in June 2020 with proceeds from the Private Placement, and the June Bridge Notes were extinguished.
On November 12, 2019, we issued two short-term, secured bridge notes (the “November Bridge Notes” and together with the June Bridge Notes, the “2019 Bridge Notes”) evidencing an aggregate of $350,000 of loans made us by two parties: Cheval, an affiliate of BHC, our controlling stockholder at the time, lent $250,000; and Cameron Durrant, M.D., MBA, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of our Board of Directors, lent $100,000. As previously disclosed, the November Bridge Notes were repaid in June 2020 with proceeds from the Private Placement.
In April 2020, we issued two short-term, secured bridge notes (the “April Bridge Notes” and together with the June Bridge Notes and the November Bridge Notes, the “Bridge Notes”) evidencing an aggregate of $350,000 of loans made to us: Cheval, an affiliate of BHC, our controlling stockholder at the time, loaned $100,000, and Nomis Bay, our second largest stockholder, loaned $250,000. The proceeds from the April Bridge Notes were used for working capital and general corporate purposes. As previously disclosed, these April Bridge Notes were repaid in June 2020 with proceeds from the Private Placement, and these bridge notes were extinguished. The Bridge Notes were secured by a lien on substantially all the Company’s assets, which liens have been released.
The Bridge Notes accrued interest at a rate of 7.0% per annum. Interest expense related to the Bridge Notes, recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $66,000.
2020 Convertible Redeemable Notes
In March 2020, we delivered two convertible redeemable promissory notes (the “2020 Notes”) evidencing loans with an aggregate principal amount of $518,333 made to us. The 2020 Notes accrued interest at a rate of 7.0% per annum and contained an original issue discount of $33,000 and $18,833, respectively. We used the proceeds from the 2020 Notes for working capital. As previously disclosed, the notes were repaid in June 2020 with proceeds from the Private Placement, and the notes were extinguished.
Interest expense related to the 2020 Notes, recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $165,000. Interest expense includes the original issue discount amortization of approximately $52,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Equity Line of Credit
On November 8, 2019, we entered into a purchase agreement and a registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which we had the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to $20,000,000 in shares of our common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the purchase agreement.
In connection with the signing of the ELOC Purchase Agreement on November 8, 2019, we issued 141,318 shares of its common stock to LPC. The issuance of the shares was recorded as debt issuance costs in Common stock and Additional paid-in capital with no net effect on Stockholders’ equity (deficit). During the months of December 2019 and January 2020, we issued a total of 140,000 shares for aggregate proceeds of $0.3 million under the ELOC Purchase Agreement.
On June 2, 2020, following completion of the Private Placement, we notified LPC of our decision to terminate the ELOC Purchase Agreement. The termination of the ELOC Purchase Agreement became effective on June 3, 2020.
Contracts
Eversana Agreement
On January 10, 2021, we announced that we had entered into a master services agreement (the “Eversana Agreement”) with Eveersana Life Science Services, LLC (“Eversana”) pursuant to which Eversana will serve as our end-to-end commercial partner, providing us with a full suite of services in connection with the potential launch of lenzilumab.
We will pay Eversana fees and reimburse it for its expenses in performing the services as established in applicable statements of work. Eversana has agreed to defer its fees pending our receipt of an EUA from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for lenzilumab for hospitalized and hypoxic COVID-19 patients. If we have not received an EUA by April 30, 2021 or such later date as to which the parties otherwise may agree, either party may terminate the Agreement immediately; Eversana will not receive the deferred fees upon such termination.
We estimate that with approval of an EUA and commencement of commercial activities that our first-year commitment to Eversana will be up to $20 million.
Manufacturing Agreements
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we have entered into agreements with several contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) to have them manufacture bulk drug substance (“BDS”) for our lenzilumab clinical trial activities in COVID-19 as well as to manufacture BDS for a potential launch of lenzilumab in anticipation of an EUA in 2021. We have also entered into agreements for filling, finishing and packaging of the drug. These agreements represent large commitments, including upfront amounts prior to commencement of manufacturing and progress payments through the course of the manufacturing process and include payments for technology transfer. As of December 31, 2020, the Company estimates that its commitments to be incurred during the first quarter of 2021 will amount to approximately $48 million. The agreements contain customary cancellation clauses.
License Agreements
We are obligated to make future payments to third parties under in-license agreements, including sublicense fees, royalties, and payments that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones.
We record upfront and milestone payments made to third parties under licensing arrangements as an expense. Upfront payments are recorded when incurred and milestone payments are recorded when the specific milestone has been achieved.
License with the University of Zurich
On July 19, 2019, we entered into the Zurich Agreement with UZH. Under the Zurich Agreement, we have in-licensed certain technologies that we believe may be used to prevent GvHD through GM-CSF neutralization. The Zurich Agreement required an initial one-time payment of $100,000, which we paid to UZH on July 29, 2019. The Zurich Agreement also requires the payment of annual license maintenance fees, as well as milestones and royalties upon the achievement of certain regulatory and commercialization milestones.
License with the Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research
On June 19, 2019, we entered into the Mayo Agreement with the Mayo Foundation. Under the Mayo Agreement, we have in-licensed certain technologies that we believe may be used to create CAR-T cells lacking GM-CSF expression through various gene-editing tools including CRISPR-Cas9. Pursuant to the Mayo Agreement, we were required to pay $200,000 to the Mayo Foundation within six months of the effective date of the Mayo Agreement, or upon completion of a qualified financing, whichever is earlier. We paid the initial payment following completion of the Private Placement. The Mayo Agreement also requires the payment of milestones and royalties upon the achievement of certain regulatory and commercialization milestones.
Collaboration Agreement with Kite
On May 30, 2019, we entered into the Kite Agreement. The Kite Agreement provides that we and Kite will split only the out-of-pocket costs actually incurred in conducting the Study, including all third-party expenses incurred in accordance with a mutually agreed budget. We currently project we will be responsible for an aggregate of approximately $4 million in out-of-pocket costs, assuming up to a total of 36 patients are recruited for a multi-center Study. Each party will otherwise be responsible for its own internal costs, including internal personnel costs, incurred in connection with the Study.
Outlicensing Agreements
The South Korea Agreement
On November 3, 2020, we entered into a License Agreement (the “South Korea Agreement”) with KPM Tech Co., Ltd. (“KPM”) and its affiliate, Telcon RF Pharmaceutical, Inc. (together with KPM, the “Licensee”). Pursuant to the South Korea Agreement, among other things, we granted the Licensee a license under certain patents and other intellectual property to develop and commercialize our lead product candidate, lenzilumab (the “Product”), for treatment of COVID-19 pneumonia, in South Korea and the Philippines (the “Territory”), subject to certain reservations and limitations. The Licensee will be responsible for gaining regulatory approval for, and subsequent commercialization of, lenzilumab in those territories.
As consideration for the license, the Licensee has agreed to pay us (i) an up-front license fee of $6.0 million, payable promptly following the execution of the License Agreement, (ii) up to an aggregate of $14.0 million in two payments based on achievement by the Company of two specified milestones in the US, and (iii) subsequent to the receipt by the Licensee of the requisite regulatory approvals, double-digit royalties on the net sales of lenzilumab in South Korea and the Philippines. The Licensee has agreed to certain development and commercial performance obligations. It is expected that we will supply lenzilumab to the Licensee for a minimum of 7.5 years at a cost plus basis from an existing or future manufacturer. The Licensee has agreed to certain minimum purchases of lenzilumab on an annual basis.
Indemnification
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties and provide for general indemnifications. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future but have not yet been made. To date, we have not paid any claims or been required to defend any action related to our indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements, such as structured finance, special purpose entities, or variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our management believes judgment is involved in determining revenue recognition, the fair value-based measurement of stock-based compensation and accruals. Our management evaluates estimates and assumptions as facts and circumstances dictate. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. If our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material adverse effect on our statements of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. Some of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
· contract research organizations and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
· contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials; and
· vendors in connection with preclinical development activities.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract, and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing these costs, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed for which we have not been invoiced and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock-based compensation expense for stock options is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value as calculated by the Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires various highly judgmental assumptions including expected volatility and expected term. The expected volatility is based on the historical stock volatilities of several of our publicly listed peers over a period equal to the expected terms of the options as we do not have a sufficient trading history to use the volatility of our own common stock. To estimate the expected term, we have opted to use the simplified method, which is the use of the midpoint of the vesting term and the contractual term. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model changes significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially in the future from that recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares expected to vest. We estimate the forfeiture rate based on historical experience and our expectations regarding future pre-vesting termination behavior of employees. To the extent our actual forfeiture rate is different from our estimate, stock-based compensation expense is adjusted accordingly.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue to date has been generated primarily through license agreements and research and development collaboration agreements. We had no revenues for the year ending December 31, 2019 and have recorded revenue from licensing of $0.3 million for the year ending December 31, 2020. Commencing January 1, 2018, we recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)” (“ASC 606”). The core principle of ASC 606 is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods and/or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and/or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue under technology licenses and collaborative agreements typically consists of nonrefundable and/or guaranteed license fees, collaborative research funding, and various milestone and future product royalty or profit-sharing payments.
The fair value of deliverables under the arrangement may be derived using a best estimate of selling price if vendor specific objective evidence and third-party evidence is not available. Deliverables under the arrangement will be separate units of accounting if a delivered item has value to the customer on a standalone basis and if the arrangement includes a general right of return for the delivered item, delivery or performance of the undelivered item is considered probable and substantially in our control.
We recognize upfront license payments as revenue upon delivery of the license only if the license has standalone value from any undelivered performance obligations and that value can be determined. The undelivered performance obligations typically include manufacturing or development services or research and/or steering committee services. If the fair value of the undelivered performance obligations can be determined, then these obligations would be accounted for separately. If the license is not considered to have standalone value, then the license and other undelivered performance obligations would be accounted for as a single unit of accounting. In this case, the license payments and payments for performance obligations are recognized as revenue over the estimated period of when the performance obligations are performed or deferred indefinitely until the undelivered performance obligation is determined.
Whenever we determine that an arrangement should be accounted for as a single unit of accounting, we determine the period over which the performance obligations will be performed, and revenue will be recognized. Revenue is recognized using a proportional performance or straight-line method. The proportional performance method is used when the level of effort required to complete performance obligations under an arrangement can be reasonably estimated. The amount of revenue recognized under the proportional performance method is determined by multiplying the total payments under the contract, excluding royalties and payments contingent upon achievement of milestones, by the ratio of the level of effort performed to date to the estimated total level of effort required to complete performance obligations under the arrangement. If we cannot reasonably estimate the level of effort to complete performance obligations under an arrangement, we recognize revenue under the arrangement on a straight-line basis over the period we are expected to complete our performance obligations. Significant management judgment is required in determining the level of effort required under an arrangement and the period over which we are expected to complete our performance obligations under an arrangement.
Our collaboration agreements typically entitle us to additional payments upon the achievement of development, regulatory and sales performance-based milestones. If the achievement of a milestone is considered probable at the inception of the collaboration, the related milestone payment is included with other collaboration consideration, such as upfront fees and research funding, in our revenue calculation. Typically, these milestones are not considered probable at the inception of the collaboration. As such, milestones will typically be recognized in one of two ways depending on the timing of when the milestone is achieved. If the milestone is achieved during the performance period, then we will only recognize revenue to the extent of the proportional performance achieved at that date, or the proportion of the straight-line basis achieved at that date, and the remainder will be recorded as deferred revenue to be amortized over the remaining performance period. If the milestone is achieved after the performance period has completed and all performance obligations have been delivered, then we will recognize the milestone payment as revenue in its entirety in the period the milestone was achieved.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, “Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting”. This ASU expands the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees and is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within that fiscal year. Early adoption is permitted. We adopted the standard effective January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures.
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-18, “Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808)-Clarifying the Interaction between Topic 808 and Topic 606”. ASU 2018-18 makes targeted improvements for collaborative arrangements by clarifying that certain transactions between collaborative arrangement participants should be accounted for as revenue under Topic 606 when the collaborative arrangement participant is a customer in the context of a unit of account. In those situations, all the guidance in Topic 606 should be applied, including recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure requirements. In addition, unit-of-account guidance in Topic 808 was aligned with the guidance in Topic 606 (that is, a distinct good or service) when an entity is assessing whether the collaborative arrangement or a part of the arrangement is within the scope of Topic 606. ASU 2018-18 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in any interim period. The amendments in this Update should be applied retrospectively to the date of initial application of Topic 606. We adopted the standard effective January 1, 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures.
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) or other standard setting bodies that we adopt as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the Company does not believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations upon adoption.