ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Note About Forward-Looking Statements
This report, including this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”), contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws. All such statements are qualified by the cautionary note included under Item 1 above, which is provided pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “1933 Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Actual results may vary materially from what is expressed in or indicated by the forward-looking statements, for the reasons described in this MD&A, in the Risk Factors in Item 1A above or elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The following MD&A section is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Harte Hanks. This section is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included herein.
Harte Hanks is a leading global customer experience company operating in three business segments: Marketing Services, Customer Care, and Fulfillment & Logistics Services. Through our end-to-end, commerce-focused capabilities, we assist clients in managing their relationships with their customers. Our services include strategic planning, data strategy, performance analytics, creative development and execution; technology enablement; marketing automation; B2B and B2C e-commerce; cross-channel customer care; and product, print, and mail fulfillment.
We are affected by the general, national, and international economic and business conditions in the markets where we and our customers operate. Marketing budgets are largely discretionary in nature, and as a consequence are easier for our clients to reduce in the short-term than all other expenses. Our revenues are also affected by the economic fundamentals of each industry that we serve, various market factors, including the demand for services by our clients, and the financial condition of and budgets available to our clients, among other factors. We remain committed to making the investments necessary to execute our multichannel strategy while also continuing to adjust our cost structure to reduce costs.
We faced an increasingly challenging competitive environment in 2020. We saw an increase in both traditional consulting firms and niche companies becoming players in the customer experience landscape. Additionally, the decrease in client budgets/investments in customer experience activities due to the global pandemic naturally increased competition. The sale of our direct mail assets and equipment to Summit in April 2020, together with our restructuring activities, have and will continue to result in a decrease of recurring expenses. These are all part of our efforts to prioritize our investments and focus on our core business of optimizing the journey of our customers' clients across an omni-channel delivery platform. We expect these actions will continue to enhance our liquidity and financial flexibility, but no assurance can be given that we will sufficiently offset the loss of revenue we have suffered over the past number of years. For additional information, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section.
Results of Operations
Operating results from operations were as follows:
Year ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Results
Revenues
Revenues of $176.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 declined $40.7 million, or 18.7%, as compared to $217.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue in our Customer Care segment increased $10.2 million, or 21.1%, to $58.7 million driven by strong project based revenue for new clients and increases in demand by existing clients. Revenue in our Fulfillment & Logistics Services declined $41.8 million, or 40.6%, to $61.1 million and revenue in our Marketing Services declined $9.1 million, or 13.7%, to $57.1 million. These declines were primarily due to the lost clients and the shut down of our direct mail facilities, which generated only $4.7 million during the portion of 2020 in which we owned the facilities, compared to $18.0 million in 2019 in the aggregate, as well as lower volumes of sales to existing clients.
Among other factors, our revenue performance will depend on general economic conditions in the markets we serve and how successful we are at maintaining and growing business with existing clients and acquiring new clients. We believe that, in the long-term, an increasing portion of overall marketing and advertising expenditures will be shifted from other advertising media to targeted media advertising resulting in a benefit to our business. Targeted media advertising results can be more effectively tracked, enabling measurement of the return on marketing investment.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses of $187.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 declined $51.7 million, or 21.6%, compared to $239.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Labor costs decreased by $18.2 million, or 14.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower payroll expense from lower revenue across most revenue streams and our expense reduction efforts, which was partially offset by higher temporary labor expenses in Customer Care driven by an increased volume of work. Production and distribution expenses declined $26.6 million, or 35.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower revenue and cost reduction initiatives. Advertising, Selling and General and Administrative expenses declined $2.8 million or 11.4%, primarily due to $2.0 million of lower business services expense resulting from the reduction in IT services expenses including data processing fees and data network services as well as $1.2 million of lower employee expenses as a result of less travel and related expenses. The decrease was partially offset by the $0.6 million of higher professional service expenses. Depreciation expense declined $1.7 million, or 32.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower capital expenditures and disposal of mail equipment in the transaction with Summit.
The largest components of our operating expenses are labor, transportation expenses and outsourced costs. Each of these costs is, at least in part, variable and tends to fluctuate in line with revenues and the demand for our services.
Postage costs of mailings are borne by our clients and are not directly reflected in our revenues or expenses.
In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded restructuring charges of $9.4 million and $11.8 million, respectively. See Note O, Restructuring Activities, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on restructuring activities.
Operating Loss
Operating loss was $10.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $21.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The $11.0 million improvement was primarily driven by the impact of restructuring activities with a $51.7 million reduction in operating expenses which exceeded the revenue decline of $40.7 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, net, in the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $0.1 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. due to lower interest rate.
Gain on sale
The gain on sale for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly the result of the $5.0 million earn out we received related to the qualified sale of 3Q Digital. There was no gain on sale recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expense, net
Total other expense, net was $6.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other expense of $7.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. This $0.5 million decrease in other expense was primarily attributable to the reduction of pension expense of $2.1M which was partially offset by the increased foreign currency revaluation expense of $1.1M and losses from disposal of assets.
Income Taxes
Our 2020 income tax benefit was $16.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to tax expense of $1.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in benefit of $18.4 million was due to the enactment of the CARES Act, which permitted the carryback of Net Operating Losses from the years 2018 through 2020 to tax years when the federal statutory rate was 35%, resulting in the additional tax benefit.
We have in general historically calculated the provision for income taxes during interim reporting periods by applying an estimate of the annual effective tax rate for the full calendar year to ordinary income or loss for the reporting period. However, we used a discrete effective tax rate method to calculate income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 because we determined that our ordinary income or loss cannot be reliably estimated and small changes in estimated ordinary income would result in significant changes in the estimated annual effective tax rates.
Net Loss
We recorded net loss of $1.7 million and $26.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $24.6 million decrease in net loss was primarily the result of the $51.7 million decrease in operating expenses which exceeded the decrease in revenue of $40.7 million, as well as the $18.4 million increase in income tax benefit realized in 2020.
Segment Results
The following is a discussion and analysis of the results of our reporting segments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. There are three principal financial measures reported to our CEO (the chief operating decision maker) for use in assessing segment performance and allocating resources. Those measures are revenue, operating income (loss) and operating income (loss) plus depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). For additional information, see Note P, Segment Reporting, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Marketing Services:
Marketing Services segment revenue declined $9.1 million, or 13.7%, driven largely by decreases in client budgets due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite the decline in revenue, operating income for the segment increased $0.3 million due to restructuring and expense reductions recognized as a result of our restructuring activities and transformation plan. Operating Income margin in 2020 improved to 8.7% from 7.1% in 2019, a 22.5% improvement.
Customer Care:
Customer Care segment revenue increased $10.2 million primarily due to additional project work and an increase in volumes with existing clients. Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.8 million, an increase of $10.6 million compared to the prior year. This increase was the result of the increase in revenue as well as our efforts to restructure the cost structure of this segment.
Fulfillment & Logistics Services:
Fulfillment & Logistics Services segment revenue declined $41.8 million compared to the prior year. This decline was mainly due to decreases in our under-performing mail production facilities that were shut down in the second quarter of 2020, as well as COVID related declines in volumes for our clients and lost clients. Operating Loss was $2.7 million for 2020 compared to an Operating Loss of $1.1 million in the previous year primarily driven by the revenue decrease experienced by the segment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our cash and cash equivalent balances were $29.4 million and $28.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cash and cash equivalent and restricted cash balances were $33.6 million and $34.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On April 20, 2020, the Company received PPP Term Note proceeds in the amount of $10 million. On August 5, 2020, we received $3.3 million in federal tax refunds related to our 2018 NOL carryback. On November 19, 2020, we received $2.1 million and $3.2 million in federal tax refunds related to our 2014 and 2016 NOL carryback, respectively. On December 4, 2020, we received $1.0 million in federal tax refunds related to our 2015 NOL carryback. On June 26, 2019, we received $15.9 million in aggregate federal income tax refunds related to carryback of capital losses. On May 7, 2019, we received a $5 million earn-out or contingent payment from the sale of 3Q Digital. We also expect to receive additional tax refunds of $7.5 million in 2021, as a result of the change to the tax NOL carryback provisions included in the CARES Act.
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash on hand, cash provided by operating activities, and borrowings. Our cash is primarily used for general corporate purposes, working capital requirements and capital expenditures.
At this time, we believe that we will be able to continue to meet our liquidity requirements and fund our fixed obligations (such as debt services, operating leases and unfunded pension plan benefit payments) and other cash needs for our operations for at least the next twelve months through a combination of cash on hand, cash flow from operations, and borrowings under the Texas Capital Credit Facility. Although the Company believes that it will be able to meet its cash needs for the foreseeable future, if unforeseen circumstances arise the company may need to seek alternative sources of liquidity. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material impact on the Company’s liquidity or on the Company’s ability to meet its obligations under the Texas Capital Credit Facility, including its ability to comply with all covenants. We will continue to closely monitor the impact the COVID-19 pandemic has on the Company’s liquidity and assess whether any additional cost saving measures, including capital expenditure deferral or human capital decisions, are needed.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This compared to cash provided by operating activities of $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $19.9 million year-over-year decrease was primarily due to the $9 million increase in net pension payment (cost), $6.3 million lower tax refund received in the year ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019, as well as the $5 million earn out related to the qualified sale of 3Q Digital received in the second quarter of 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This compared to cash used in investing activities of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $1.8 million improvement was mainly attributable to the $1.9 million of proceeds from the sale of direct mail assets and equipment to Summit and other vendors in 2020 and lower capital expenditure activities of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $4.2 million increase was primarily due to the $10 million PPP Term Note we received in the second quarter of 2020, which was partially offset by the repayment of $1.6 million of the borrowings outstanding under our Texas Capital Credit Facility in the second and third quarter of 2020 as well as $4.5 million increased borrowing under the Company’s Texas Capital Credit Facility in the first quarter of 2019.
Foreign Holdings of Cash
Consolidated foreign holdings of cash as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $2.5 million and $3.4 million.
Long Term Debt
On April 17, 2017, we entered into the Texas Capital Credit Facility that provided us with a $20.0 million revolving credit facility and for letters of credit issued by Texas Capital Bank up to $5.0 million.
On January 9, 2018, we entered into an amendment to the Texas Capital Credit Facility that increased our borrowing capacity to $22.0 million and extended the maturity by one year to April 17, 2020. On May 7, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Texas Capital Credit Facility which further extended the maturity of the facility by one year to April 17, 2021. On May 11, 2020, we entered into a third amendment to the Texas Capital Credit Facility which further extended the maturity of the facility by one year to April 17, 2022 and decreased the borrowing capacity to $19.0 million. The Texas Capital Credit Facility remains secured by substantially all of our assets and continues to be guaranteed by HHS Guaranty, LLC, an entity formed to provide credit support for Harte Hanks by certain members of the Shelton family (descendants of one of our founders). We pay HHS Guaranty, LLC a quarterly fee of consideration for the guarantee of 0.5% of the value of the collateral actually pledged to secure the facility, which for 2020 amounted to $0.5 million.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had letters of credit in the amount of $1.8 million and $1.7 million outstanding, respectively. No amounts were drawn against these letters of credit at December 31, 2020 and 2019. These letters of credit exist to support insurance programs relating to workers’ compensation, automobile, and general liability. We had no other off-balance sheet financing arrangements at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $17.1 million and $18.7 million of borrowings outstanding under the Texas Capital Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had the ability to borrow an additional $0.1 million under the facility.
On April 20, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds in the amount of $10 million under the Small Business Administration PPP Term Note. The PPP Term Note, established as part of the CARES Act, provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable so long as, over the eight-week period following the receipt by the Company of the PPP Term Note, the Company uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period.
The PPP Term Note bears interest at a fixed annual rate of 1.00%, with interest deferred for the first eighteen months. The Company used the proceeds for purposes consistent with the Paycheck Protection Program. While the Company currently believes that its use of the loan proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness of the loan, we cannot assure you that we will not take actions that could cause the Company to be ineligible for forgiveness of the loan, in whole or in part. At this time, the Company anticipates forgiveness of the entire amount of the PPP Term Note; however, we are not in a position to estimate the timing of the completion of the forgiveness process. We applied for the forgiveness of the PPP Term Note in the first quarter of 2021.
Dividends
We did not pay any dividends in either 2020 or 2019. We currently intend to retain any future earnings and do not expect to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Any future dividend declaration can be made only upon, and subject to, approval of our Board, based on its business judgment.
Share Repurchase
During 2020 and 2019, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under our current stock repurchase program that was publicly announced in August 2014. Under our current program we are authorized to spend up to $20.0 million to repurchase shares of our outstanding common stock. At December 31, 2020, we had authorization of $11.4 million remaining under this program. From 1997 through December 31, 2020, we repurchased 6.8 million shares for an aggregate of $1.2 billion under this program and previously announced programs.
Outlook
We consider such factors as total cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, current assets, current liabilities, total debt, revenues, operating income (loss), cash flows from operations, investing activities, and financing activities when assessing our liquidity. Our management of cash is designed to optimize returns on cash balances and to ensure that it is readily available to meet our operating, investing, and financing requirements as they arise. We believe that there are no conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the twelve months following the issuance of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that, in our judgment, are most important to the portrayal of our Company’s financial condition and results of operations and which require complex or subjective judgments or estimates. The areas that we believe involve the most significant management estimates and assumptions are detailed below. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Our Significant Accounting policies are described in Note A, Overview and Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement.
Revenue Recognition
Application of various accounting principles in U.S. GAAP related to measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make significant judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements with non-standard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine appropriate accounting.
We recognize revenue upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those products or services. We apply the following five-step revenue recognition model:
•
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•
Determination of the transaction price
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•
Recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation
We record revenue net of any taxes collected from customers and subsequently remitted to governmental authorities. Any payments received in advance of the performance of services or delivery of the product are recorded as deferred revenue until such time as the services are performed or the product is delivered. Costs incurred for search engine marketing solutions and postage costs of mailings are billed to our clients and are not directly reflected in our revenue.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous other jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. For additional information on the valuation allowance see Note I, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We adjust these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any reserves that we believe are appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note A, Overview and Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of certain accounting standards that we have recently adopted and certain accounting standards that we have not yet been required to adopt and may be applicable to our future financial condition and results of operations.