Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS
OF OPERATIONS
(dollars in millions throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations)
(unless otherwise stated, references to years relate to fiscal years)
The following discussion compares our results for the year ended September 30, 2021, to the year ended September 30, 2020. The discussion comparing our results for the year ended September 30, 2020 to the year ended September 30, 2019 is included within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on November 12, 2020. We begin the discussion at a consolidated level and then provide separate detail about Advanced Process Solutions, Molding Technology Solutions, and Batesville reportable operating segments, as well as Corporate. These financial results are prepared in accordance with United States (“U.S.”) generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
We also provide certain non-GAAP operating performance measures. These non-GAAP measures are referred to as “adjusted” measures and primarily exclude the following items:
•business acquisitions, disposition, and integration costs;
•restructuring and restructuring-related charges;
•impairment charges;
•inventory step-up charges;
•gains and losses on divestitures;
•COVID-19 pandemic-related costs;
•the related income tax impact for all of these items; and
•certain tax items related to the acquisition of Milacron and divestitures of ABEL, Red Valve, and Cimcool, the revaluation of deferred tax balances in connection with enacted statutory tax rate reductions in certain foreign jurisdictions, foreign income inclusion tax provisions, including the impact the Milacron loss carryforward attributes have on tax provisions related to the imposition of tax on Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) earned by certain foreign subsidiaries, the Foreign Derived Intangible Income Deduction (FDII), and the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (BEAT).
Non-GAAP information is provided as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We use this non-GAAP information internally to make operating decisions and believe it is helpful to investors because it allows more meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our ongoing operating results. The information can also be used to perform trend analysis and to better identify operating trends that may otherwise be masked or distorted by items such as the above excluded items. We believe this information provides a higher degree of transparency.
An important non-GAAP measure that we use is adjusted earnings before interest, income tax, depreciation, and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”). A part of Hillenbrand’s strategy is to selectively acquire companies that we believe can benefit from the HOM to spur faster and more profitable growth. Given that strategy, it is a natural consequence to incur related expenses, such as amortization from acquired intangible assets and additional interest expense from debt-funded acquisitions. Accordingly, we use adjusted EBITDA, among other measures, to monitor our business performance. Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized term under GAAP and therefore does not purport to be an alternative to net income (loss). Further, the Company’s measure of adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
We expect that future net revenue associated with the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments will be influenced by order backlog because of the lead time involved in fulfilling engineered-to-order equipment for customers. Although backlog can be an indicator of future net revenue, it does not include projects and aftermarket parts orders that are booked and shipped within the same quarter. The timing of order placement, size, extent of customization, and customer delivery dates can create fluctuations in backlog and net revenue. Net revenue attributable to backlog may also be affected by foreign exchange fluctuations for orders denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars.
We calculate the foreign currency impact on net revenue, gross profit, operating expenses, consolidated net income (loss) and consolidated adjusted EBITDA, in order to better measure the comparability of results between periods. We calculate the foreign currency impact by translating current year results at prior year foreign exchange rates. This information is provided because exchange rates can distort the underlying change in these metrics, either positively or negatively. The cost structures
for Corporate and Batesville are generally not significantly impacted by the fluctuation in foreign exchange rates, and we do not disclose the foreign currency impact in the Operations Review below where the impact is not significant.
Another important operational measure used is backlog. Backlog is not a term recognized under GAAP; however, it is a common measurement used in industries with extended lead times for order fulfillment (long-term contracts), like those in which the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments compete. Backlog represents the amount of net revenue that we expect to realize on contracts awarded to the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments. For purposes of calculating backlog, 100% of estimated net revenue attributable to consolidated subsidiaries is included. Backlog includes expected net revenue from large systems and equipment, as well as aftermarket parts, components, and service. The length of time that projects remain in backlog can span from days for aftermarket parts or service to approximately 18 to 24 months for larger system sales within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment. The majority of the backlog within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment is expected to be fulfilled within the next twelve months. Backlog includes expected net revenue from the remaining portion of firm orders not yet completed, as well as net revenue from change orders to the extent that they are reasonably expected to be realized. We include in backlog the full contract award, including awards subject to further customer approvals, which we expect to result in net revenue in future periods. In accordance with industry practice, our contracts may include provisions for cancellation, termination, or suspension at the discretion of the customer.
See page 43 for reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to consolidated net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure. We use non-GAAP measures in certain other instances and include information reconciling such non-GAAP measures to the respective most directly comparable GAAP measures. Given that backlog is an operational measure and that the Company’s methodology for calculating backlog does not meet the definition of a non-GAAP measure, as that term is defined by the SEC, a quantitative reconciliation is not required or provided.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our financial results are affected by the selection and application of accounting policies and methods. Significant accounting policies which require management’s judgment are discussed below. A detailed description of our accounting policies is included in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Net revenue includes gross revenue less sales discounts, customer rebates, sales incentives, and product returns, all of which require us to make estimates for the portion of these allowances that have yet to be credited or paid to our customers. We estimate these allowances using the expected value method, which is based upon historical rates and projections of customer purchases toward contractual rebate or incentive thresholds.
Performance Obligations & Contract Estimates
The Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment designs, engineers, manufactures, markets, and services differentiated process and material handling equipment and systems for a wide variety of industries. A large portion of our net revenue across the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment is derived from manufactured equipment, which may be standard, customized to meet customer specifications, or turnkey.
Our contracts with customers in the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment often include multiple performance obligations. Performance obligations are promises in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and are the basis for determining how revenue is recognized. For instance, a contract may include obligations to deliver equipment, installation services, and spare parts. We frequently have contracts for which the equipment and the installation services, as well as highly engineered or specialized spare parts, are all considered a single performance obligation, as in these instances the installation services and/or spare parts are not separately identifiable. However, due to the varying nature of equipment and contracts across the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment, we also have contracts where the installation services and/or spare parts are deemed to be separately identifiable and are therefore deemed to be distinct performance obligations.
As a result, the timing of revenue recognition for each performance obligation is either over time or at a point in time. We recognize revenue over time for contracts that have an enforceable right to collect payment for performance completed to date upon customer cancellation and provide one or more of the following: (i) service over a period of time, (ii) highly customized equipment, or (iii) parts which are highly engineered and have no alternative use. Revenue generated from standard equipment
and highly customized equipment or parts contracts without an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, as well as non-specialized parts sales and sales of death care products, is recognized at a point in time.
We use the input method of “cost-to-cost” to recognize revenue over time. Accounting for these contracts involves management judgment in estimating total contract revenue and cost. Contract revenue is largely determined by negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding contract options, change orders, and incentive and award provisions associated with technical performance clauses. Contract costs are incurred over longer periods of time and, accordingly, the estimation of these costs requires judgment. We measure progress based on costs incurred to date relative to total estimated cost at completion. Incurred cost represents work performed, which corresponds with, and we believe thereby best depicts, the transfer of control to the customer. Contract costs include labor, material, and certain overhead expenses. Cost estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events, including labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the cost of materials, and the performance of suppliers and subcontractors. Significant factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset utilization, and anticipated labor agreements. Revenue and cost estimates are regularly monitored and revised based on changes in circumstances. Anticipated losses on long-term manufacturing contracts are recognized immediately when such losses become evident. We maintain financial controls over the customer qualification, contract pricing, and estimation processes designed to reduce the risk of contract losses.
Standalone service revenue is recognized either over time proportionately over the period of the underlying contract or as invoiced, depending on the terms of the arrangement. Standalone service revenue is not material to the Company.
For the products where revenue is recognized at a point in time within the Advanced Process Solutions, Molding Technology Solutions, and Batesville reportable operating segments, we recognize revenue when customers take control of the asset. We define this as the point in time at which the customer has the capability of full beneficial use of the asset per the contract.
Retirement and Postretirement Benefit Plans
We sponsor retirement and postretirement benefit plans covering some of our employees. Expense recognized for the plans is based upon actuarial valuations. Inherent in those valuations are key assumptions including discount rates, expected returns on assets, and projected future salary rates. The actuarial assumptions we use may differ significantly from actual results due to changing economic conditions, participant life span, and withdrawal rates. These differences may result in a material impact to the amount of net periodic pension cost to be recorded in our Consolidated Financial Statements in the future. The discount rates used in the valuation of our retirement and postretirement benefit plans are evaluated annually based on current market conditions. We use a full yield curve approach in the estimation of the service and interest cost components of our defined benefit retirement plans. Under this approach, we applied discounting using individual spot rates from a yield curve composed of the rates of return on several hundred high-quality, fixed income corporate bonds available at the measurement date. These spot rates align to each of the projected benefit obligations and service cost cash flows. The service cost component relates to the active participants in the plans, so the relevant cash flows on which to apply the yield curve are considerably longer in duration on average than the total projected benefit obligation cash flows, which also include benefit payments to retirees. Interest cost is computed by multiplying each spot rate by the corresponding discounted projected benefit obligation cash flows. The full yield curve approach reduces any actuarial gains and losses based upon interest rate expectations (e.g., built-in gains in interest cost in an upward sloping projected yield curve scenario), or gains and losses merely resulting from the timing and magnitude of cash outflows associated with our benefit obligations.
Our overall expected long-term rate of return on pension assets is based on historical and expected future returns, which are inflation-adjusted and weighted for the expected return for each component of the investment portfolio. Our rate of assumed compensation increase for pension benefits is also based on our specific historical trends of past wage adjustments in recent years and expectations for the future.
Changes in retirement and postretirement benefit expense and the recognized obligations may occur in the future as a result of a number of factors, including changes to key assumptions such as the expected long-term rate of return on pension assets and the weighted-average discount rate. Our expected long-term rate of return on domestic and international pension plan assets was 3.7% and 4.8% at September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The weighted-average discount rate at September 30, 2021 was 2.1% for the domestic and international defined benefit pension plans and 2.4% for the postretirement healthcare plans. A 50 basis-point change in the expected long-term rate of return on domestic and international pension plan assets would change annual pension expense by $1.6. A 50 basis-point change in the weighted-average discount rate would change the annual domestic and international pension expense by $0.2 and the annual postretirement healthcare plan expense by less than $0.1. Impacts from assumption changes could be positive or negative depending on the direction of the change in rates. Based upon
rates and assumptions at September 30, 2021, we expect the aggregate expense associated with our retirement and postretirement benefit plans to decrease from $3.1 in 2021 to $1.4 in 2022. The expected decrease in expense is primarily due to decreasing amortization of actuarial loss.
See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K, for key assumptions and other information regarding our retirement and postretirement benefit plans.
Asset Impairment Determinations
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite lives, primarily trade names, are tested for impairment at least annually and upon the occurrence of certain triggering events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate that the fair value may be below carrying value.
Impairment of goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment if discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by operating segment management. For the purpose of the goodwill impairment test, the Company can elect to perform a quantitative or qualitative analysis. If the qualitative test is elected, qualitative factors are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair values of its reporting units are less than the respective carrying values of those reporting units. Such factors we consider in a qualitative analysis include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, Company-specific events, events affecting the reporting unit, and the overall financial performance of the reporting unit. If after performing the qualitative analysis, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then the Company must perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test.
If we elect to perform or are required to perform a quantitative analysis, we compare the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s net assets, including goodwill, to the fair value of the reporting unit. If the fair value exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is required, and no impairment loss is recognized. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between carrying amount and fair value, not to exceed the original amount of goodwill.
In determining the estimated fair value of the reporting units when performing a quantitative analysis, we consider both the market approach and the income approach. For purposes of the goodwill impairment test, weighting is equally attributed to both the market and income approaches in arriving at the fair value of the reporting units.
Under the market approach, we utilize the guideline company method, which involves calculating valuation multiples based on operating data from comparable publicly traded companies. Multiples derived from these companies provide an indication of how much a knowledgeable investor in the marketplace would be willing to pay for a company. These multiples are then applied to the operating data for our reporting units to arrive at an indication of value.
Under the income approach, the fair value of the reporting unit is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows utilizing a market-based weighted-average cost of capital determined separately for each reporting unit.
To determine the reasonableness of the calculated fair values of our reporting units, the Company reviews the assumptions described below to ensure that neither the market approach nor the income approach yields significantly different valuations. We selected these valuation approaches because we believe the combination of these approaches, along with our best judgment regarding underlying assumptions and estimates, provides us with the best estimate of fair value of our reporting units. We believe these valuation approaches are appropriate for the industry and widely accepted by investors.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires us to make significant judgments, estimates, and assumptions. The Company believes these estimates and assumptions are reasonable. However, future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates that are used in the impairment testing for goodwill, including discount and tax rates or future cash flow projections, could result in significantly different estimates of the fair values. As a result of these factors and the limited cushion (or headroom, as commonly referred) due to the recent acquisition of Milacron, goodwill for the reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment are more susceptible to impairment risk.
The key assumptions for the market and income approaches we use to determine fair value of our reporting units are updated at least annually. Those assumptions and estimates include macroeconomic conditions, competitive activities, cost containment, achievement of synergy initiatives, market data and market multiples (6.5-14.9 times adjusted EBITDA), discount rates (9.0-13.5%), and terminal growth rates (-1.0-3.0%), as well as future levels of revenue growth, operating margins, depreciation,
amortization, and working capital requirements, which are based upon the Company’s strategic plan. Hillenbrand’s strategic plan is updated as part of its annual planning process and is reviewed and approved by management and the Board of Directors. The strategic plan may be revised as necessary during a fiscal year, based on changes in market conditions or other changes in the reporting units. The discount rate assumption is based on the overall after-tax rate of return required by a market participant whose weighted-average cost of capital includes both equity and debt, including a risk premium. The discount rates may be impacted by adverse changes in the macroeconomic environment, specifically the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, volatility in the equity and debt markets or other factors. While the Company can implement and has implemented certain strategies to address these events, changes in operating plans or adverse changes in the future could reduce the underlying cash flows used to estimate reporting unit fair values and could result in a further decline in fair value that would trigger a future material impairment charge of the reporting units’ goodwill balance.
Although there are always changes in assumptions to reflect changing business and market conditions, our overall valuation methodology and the types of assumptions we use have remained consistent. While we use the best available information to prepare the cash flow and discount rate assumptions, actual future cash flows or market conditions could differ significantly resulting in future impairment charges related to recorded goodwill balances.
Similar to goodwill, the Company can elect to perform the impairment test for indefinite-lived intangibles other than goodwill (primarily trade names) using a qualitative analysis, considering similar factors as outlined in the goodwill discussion in order to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair values of the trade names are less than the respective carrying values. If we elect to perform or are required to perform a quantitative analysis, the test consists of a comparison of the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset to the carrying value of the asset as of the impairment testing date. We estimate the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets using the relief-from-royalty method, which we believe is an appropriate and widely used valuation technique for such assets. The fair value derived from the relief-from-royalty method is measured as the discounted cash flow savings realized from owning such trade names and not being required to pay a royalty for their use.
The Company is required to provide additional disclosures about fair value measurements as part of the Consolidated Financial Statements for each major category of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis (including impairment assessments). Goodwill and intangible assets were valued using Level 3 inputs, which are unobservable by nature, and included internal estimates of future cash flows (income approach). Significant increases (decreases) in any of those unobservable inputs in isolation would result in a significantly higher (lower) fair value measurement.
Annual impairment assessment
The Company performed its now annual July 1 goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessments during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 for all reporting units. For all reporting units, the fair value of goodwill was determined to exceed the carrying value, resulting in no impairment to goodwill as part of this test. As a result of the recent Milacron acquisition, there is less cushion or headroom for the reporting units with the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment (see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K). The estimated fair value, as calculated at July 1, 2021, for the three reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment ranged from approximately 9% to 45% greater than their carrying value (3% to 16% at the previous impairment assessment date).
Impairment recorded in the prior year
Fourth quarter of 2020
As a result of classifying certain reporting units within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment as held for sale at September 30, 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment of $16.9 during the fourth quarter of 2020. See Note 4 in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Second quarter of 2020
In connection with the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements for the second quarter of 2020, an interim impairment assessment was performed for select reporting units within the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments as a result of certain triggering events and changes in circumstances discussed in detail below. Additionally, based on the macroeconomic factors below, as well as the decline in the Company’s common stock price during the second quarter of 2020, the Company performed a qualitative review for all remaining reporting units and determined that those reporting units did not require an interim impairment test as it was more likely than not that the
current fair value of those reporting units exceeded their carrying value, based on their current and projected financial performance as well as the headroom from previous goodwill impairment tests.
For certain reporting units within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment, an interim impairment review was triggered during the second quarter of 2020 by the Company’s decision to redirect its strategic investments as it focused on deleveraging following two major events: (1) the continued evaluation of the Company’s operations following the acquisition of Milacron completed on November 21, 2019, and (2) adverse macroeconomic conditions primarily driven by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. In connection with these events, the Company made the decision to limit its future strategic investment in its two reporting units that primarily sold and manufactured products in the flow control sector. The decision to limit future investment, as well as the Company’s updated forecasts, which considered the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced those reporting units’ anticipated annual revenue growth rates and corresponding profitability and cash flows. The annual revenue growth rates utilized in the Company’s fair value estimate are consistent with the reporting units’ operating plans. As a result of the change to expected future cash flows, along with comparable fair value information, the Company concluded that the carrying value for these reporting units exceeded their fair value, resulting in goodwill impairment charges of $72.3 during the second quarter of 2020. The pre-impairment goodwill balance for these reporting units was $95.2. Additionally, under the relief-from-royalty fair value method, the Company concluded that the carrying value of a trade name associated with one of these reporting units exceeded its fair value. As a result, an impairment charge of $0.7 was recorded for this trade name during the second quarter of 2020. The pre-impairment balance for this trade name was $4.4.
For the reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment, an interim impairment review was triggered during the second quarter of 2020, due to adverse macroeconomic conditions primarily driven by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequent to the Company completing the acquisition of Milacron on November 21, 2019, the Company revised its forecasts for all reporting units within the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment due to the deterioration in the overall global economy largely as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the decline in forecasted net revenue, under the relief-from-royalty fair value method, the Company concluded that the carrying value of certain trade names and technology associated with these reporting units exceeded their fair value. As a result, impairment charges of $9.5 were recorded for these intangible assets during the second quarter of 2020. The pre-impairment balance for these intangible assets was $125.0.
The impairment charges to goodwill and the intangible assets were nondeductible for tax purposes. The following table summarizes the impairment charges by reportable segment recorded by the Company during the second quarter of 2020:
Impairment of long-lived assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. For assets (disposal group) held for sale, the disposal group as a whole is measured at the lower of its carrying amount or fair value less cost to sell after adjusting the individual assets of the disposal group, if necessary. If the carrying value of assets, after the consideration of other asset valuation guidance, exceeds fair value less cost to sell, the Company establishes a valuation allowance which would offset the original carrying value of disposal group. This valuation allowance would be adjusted based on subsequent changes in our estimate of fair value less cost to sell. If the fair value less cost to sell increases, the carrying amount of the long-lived assets would be adjusted upward; however, the increased carrying amount cannot exceed the carrying amount of the disposal group before the decision to dispose of the assets was made. Estimates are required to determine the fair value, the disposal costs and the time period to dispose of the assets. The estimate of fair value incorporates the transaction approach, which utilizes pricing indications derived from recent acquisition transactions involving comparable companies. Such estimates are critical in determining whether any impairment charge should be recorded and the amount of such charge if an impairment loss is deemed to be necessary.
The Company determined that at September 30, 2020, the TerraSource Global and flow control businesses met the criteria to be classified as held for sale, and therefore classified the related assets and liabilities as held for sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recognized a non-cash charge of $62.3, which included a goodwill impairment of $16.9 and a valuation adjustment of $45.4, to recognize the assets of these businesses at fair value less estimated costs to sell. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recognized a non-cash valuation adjustment of $11.2 to recognize TerraSource Global at fair value less estimated cost to sell based on the definitive agreement the Company entered into to sell TerraSource Global subsequent to September 30, 2021. The non-cash charges of $11.2 and $62.3, for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were recorded within the impairment charges caption on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For further information, see discussion below within the Executive Overview section and Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
For assets held and used, impairment may occur if projected undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value of the assets. In such cases, additional analysis is conducted to determine the amount of loss to be recognized, and the impairment loss is determined as the amount the carrying value of the asset or asset group exceeds the estimated fair value, measured by future discounted cash flows. The analysis requires estimates of the amount and timing of projected cash flows and, where applicable, judgment associated with, among other factors, the appropriate discount rate. Such estimates are critical in determining whether any impairment charge should be recorded and the amount of such charge if an impairment loss is deemed to be necessary. Our judgment regarding the existence of circumstances that indicate the potential impairment of an asset’s carrying value is based on several factors, including, but not limited to, changes in business environment, a decline in operating cash flows or a decision to close a manufacturing facility. The variability of these factors depends on a number of conditions, including uncertainty about future events and general economic conditions.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Hillenbrand is a global diversified industrial company with multiple leading brands that serve a wide variety of industries around the world. Hillenbrand’s portfolio is composed of three reportable operating segments: Advanced Process Solutions, Molding Technology Solutions, and Batesville®. Advanced Process Solutions designs, develops, manufactures, and services highly engineered industrial equipment and systems around the world. Molding Technology Solutions is a global leader in highly engineered and customized equipment and systems in plastic technology and processing. Batesville is a recognized leader in the death care industry in North America.
We strive to provide superior return for our shareholders, exceptional value for our customers, great professional opportunities for our employees, and to be responsible to our communities through deployment of the HOM. The HOM is a consistent and repeatable framework designed to produce sustainable and predictable results. The HOM describes our mission, vision, values, and mindset as leaders; applies our management practices in Strategy Management, Segmentation, Lean, Talent Development, and Acquisitions; and prescribes three steps (Understand, Focus, and Grow) designed to make our businesses both bigger and better. Our goal is to continue developing Hillenbrand as a world-class global diversified industrial company through the deployment of the HOM.
Our strategy is to leverage our historically strong financial foundation and the implementation of the HOM to deliver sustainable profit growth, revenue expansion, and substantial free cash flow and then reinvest available cash in new growth initiatives that are focused on building platforms with leadership positions in our core markets and near adjacencies, both organically and inorganically, in order to create shareholder value.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the following operational decisions and economic developments had an impact on our current and future cash flows, results of operations, and financial position.
COVID-19 Impact
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide, and the virus continues to spread throughout the U.S. and other countries across the world. To limit the spread of COVID-19, national and local governments around the world have instituted certain measures, including travel restrictions, business curtailments, shelter-in-place orders, social distancing guidelines, and vaccine mandates.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and is continuing to impact Hillenbrand very differently by business, geography, and function. The scope and nature of these impacts continue to evolve, sometimes rapidly, including through the resurgence of COVID-19 due to variant strains of the virus and related governmental vaccine mandates. It is difficult to quantify the complete impact it had for 2021 or beyond, but the actions being undertaken to reduce the severity and spread of
COVID-19 are currently creating disruptions, and are likely to continue to create significant disruptions, with respect to consumer demand, our ability to continue to manufacture products, and the reliability and sufficiency of our supply chain.
We cannot reasonably estimate the duration, spread or severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related variants as well as potential required vaccine or testing mandates; however, as a result of the current circumstances, we expect to continue to experience adverse impacts during 2022 within our Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments. Should these conditions continue beyond 2021 for Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments, or should the severity of COVID-19 increase, the Company would similarly expect adverse impacts on its net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows, depending upon the severity and length of time such conditions persist. The COVID-19 pandemic generally has had a favorable impact on the Batesville reportable operating segment’s net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows. However, given the ongoing and dynamic nature of COVID-19, we are currently not able to predict the extent and duration of the impact for 2022 or the potential negative impact that the estimated increase in deaths in North America due to the COVID-19 pandemic will have on future deaths when the pandemic has subsided. The timing and effectiveness of further vaccine development and rollout (including vaccine mandates), in addition to variants of the virus, could also have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows during 2022 and beyond.
We continue to take actions intended to help minimize the risk to our Company, employees, customers, and the communities in which we operate, as well as to lessen the financial impact on the business while protecting our ability to continue to generate profitable growth over the long-term. We continue to believe the Company has sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment as a result of these actions.
Employees
We have implemented a number of employee safety measures across our plants and other locations in an attempt to contain the spread of COVID-19, which we update as appropriate for the evolving COVID-19 situation depending on the geography and function.
In addition, we believe various factors have contributed to the current labor shortage, particularly in the United States. We have started to experience effects of this labor shortage at certain production facilities, and we are mitigating this impact through the use of overtime and third-party outsourcing as warranted. It is possible that a prolonged shortage of qualified, available workers could result in a further increase in labor costs and could negatively affect our ability to efficiently operate our production facilities and our results of operations.
Supply Chain and Inflation
While global supply chains have recently suffered from various headwinds, supply chains supporting our products generally remained intact, providing access to sufficient inventory of the key materials needed for manufacturing. To date, delays or shortages of raw materials have been limited and have not had a material impact on our results of operations. However, we have started to experience increasing delays of certain raw material components. From time to time, we may identify alternative suppliers to address the risk of a current supplier’s inability to deliver materials in volumes sufficient to meet our manufacturing needs, or we may choose to purchase certain materials in bulk volumes where we have supply chain scarcity concerns. It remains possible that we may experience some sort of interruption to our supply chains, and such an interruption could materially affect our ability to timely manufacture and distribute our products and could also have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated net revenue, results of operations, and cash flows during 2022 and beyond.
We also experienced input cost inflation, including higher transportation costs, in fiscal 2021 as further discussed in our operations review. Pricing actions and supply chain productivity initiatives have and are expected to continue to mitigate some of these inflationary pressures, but we may not be successful in fully offsetting these incremental costs, which could have a significant impact on the Company’s, results of operations, and cash flows during 2022 and beyond.
For additional information regarding labor, supply chain, and other risks, including those relating to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Divestiture of flow control businesses and TerraSource Global
On December 31, 2020, the Company completed the divestiture of Red Valve to DeZURIK, Inc. in a transaction valued at $63.0. The sale included cash proceeds received at closing of $59.4, including working capital adjustments, and a $5.0 note receivable, included within other long-term assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of September 30, 2021. The sale followed the Company's previously announced intent to exit certain non-strategic, sub-scale businesses, resulting in Red Valve being classified as held for sale at September 30, 2020.
As a result of the Red Valve divestiture, the Company recorded a pre-tax gain of $31.6 in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The related tax effect resulted in tax expense of $9.3 and was included within income tax expense in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The Company incurred $2.9 of transaction costs associated with the sale during the year ended September 30, 2021, which were recorded within operating expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Red Valve’s results of operations were included within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment until the completion of the sale on December 31, 2020.
On March 10, 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of ABEL to IDEX Corporation in a transaction valued at $103.5. The sale included cash proceeds received at closing of $106.3, including working capital adjustments. The sale followed the Company's previously announced intent to exit certain non-strategic, sub-scale businesses, resulting in ABEL being classified as held for sale at September 30, 2020.
As a result of the sale, the Company recorded a pre-tax gain after post-closing adjustments of $35.5 in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The related tax effect resulted in tax expense of $3.8 included within income tax expense in the Consolidated Statement of Operations during the year ended September 30, 2021. The Company incurred $3.9 of transaction costs associated with the sale during the year ended September 30, 2021, which were recorded within operating expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. ABEL’s results of operations were included within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment until the completion of the sale on March 10, 2021.
On October 22, 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of TerraSource Global. The results of operations and cash flows of the Company for all periods presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K include TerraSource Global. For further information, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - CONSOLIDATED
(1) Included 315 days of operations related to Milacron following its acquisition on November 21, 2019, including operations of Cimcool prior to its divestiture on March 30, 2020
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Net revenue increased $347.8 (14%), which included favorable foreign currency impact (3%).
•Advanced Process Solutions’ net revenue increased $17.1 (1%) primarily due to an increase in large plastics systems sales, screening and separating equipment sales and favorable pricing, partially offset by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021 and lower aftermarket parts and service net revenue. Foreign currency impact increased net revenue by 4%.
•Molding Technology Solutions’ net revenue increased $259.9 (35%), primarily due to an additional 51 days of net revenue in 2021 compared to 2020 and an increase in demand for injection molding, extrusion, and hot runner equipment and aftermarket parts and service, partially offset by the divestiture of Cimcool, which occurred on March 30, 2020. Foreign currency impact increased net revenue by 2%.
•Batesville’s net revenue increased $70.8 (13%) primarily due to an increase in volume and an increase in average selling price. Higher volume was driven by an increase in burial casket sales primarily due to estimated higher deaths associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an estimated increased rate at which families opted for cremation.
Gross profit increased $144.0 (18%). Gross profit margin improved 110 basis points to 33.4%. On an adjusted basis, which excluded restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($10.3 in 2021 and $3.1 in 2020), business acquisition, integration, and development costs ($3.8 in 2021 and $0.2 in 2020), inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020, and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $1.6 in 2020, gross profit increased $113.6 (13%), and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 10 basis points to 34.0%.
•Advanced Process Solutions’ gross profit decreased $10.1 (2%), primarily driven by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021, cost inflation, unfavorable mix, and an increase in restructuring and restructuring-related charges, partially offset by favorable pricing and productivity improvements including synergies. Foreign currency impact increased gross profit by 4%. Gross profit margin decreased 130 basis points to 34.4% in 2021, primarily due to an increase in restructuring and restructuring-related charges and business acquisition, integration, and development costs, cost inflation, and unfavorable mix, partially offset by pricing and productivity improvements.
Advanced Process Solutions’ gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($7.6 in 2021 and $0.9 in 2020), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs of $1.9 in 2021, and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic ($0.2 in 2020). Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit decreased $1.2 (0.3%) and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 60 basis points to 35.2% compared to prior year.
•Molding Technology Solutions’ gross profit increased $118.8 (64%), primarily due to Milacron inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021, an additional 51 days of gross profit in 2021 compared to 2020, an increase in demand for injection molding, extrusion, and hot runner equipment and aftermarket parts and service, and productivity improvements including synergies, which include savings from restructuring actions. These increases were partially offset by unfavorable mix, the divestiture of Cimcool, which occurred on March 30, 2020, and cost inflation. Foreign currency impact improved gross profit by 4%. Gross profit margin improved 530 basis points to 30.5%, primarily due to the inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021.
Molding Technology Solutions’ gross profit included Milacron inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020, restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($2.6 in 2021 and $2.2 in 2020), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs of $1.9 in 2021, and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $1.0 in 2020. Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $79.8 (35%) and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 20 basis points to 31.0% compared to prior year.
•Batesville’s gross profit increased $35.5 (19%) and gross profit margin improved 180 basis points to 36.1%. The increase in gross profit and gross profit margin was primarily due to higher volume, an increase in average selling price, and productivity initiatives, partially offset by inflation in commodities and wages and benefits and higher transportation and manufacturing costs required to respond to the surge in demand driven by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Batesville’s gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges of $0.1 in 2021 and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $0.4 in 2020. Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $35.2 (19%) and adjusted gross profit margin improved 170 basis points to 36.1% in 2021.
Operating expenses decreased $11.8 (2%), primarily due to a decrease in business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs related to the acquisition of Milacron in the prior year and continued synergy realization related to the ongoing integration of the Milacron acquisition, partially offset by an increase in variable compensation, strategic investments, and cost inflation. Foreign currency impact increased operating expenses by 2.0%. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 300 basis points to 18.4%. Operating expenses included the following items:
On an adjusted basis, which excludes business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs, restructuring and restructuring-related charges, and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic detailed in the table above, operating expenses increased $36.5 (8%), which included unfavorable foreign currency impact (2%). Adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 100 basis points to 17.1% compared to the prior year.
Amortization expense decreased $16.2 (23%), primarily due to backlog amortization of $10.0 in 2020 related to the Milacron acquisition that did not repeat, and the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021, partially offset by an additional 51 days of Molding Technology Solutions amortization in 2021 compared to 2020. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
(Gain) loss on divestitures increased $70.6 due to gains on the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
Impairment charges decreased $133.6 due to $82.5 of impairments related to goodwill and intangible assets recorded during 2020 and $62.3 of non-cash charges (including a goodwill impairment charge and a valuation adjustment) related to assets held for sale during 2020, partially offset by $11.2 of a valuation adjustment related to TerraSource Global assets held for sale during 2021. For further information on the impairment charges, see Notes 2 and 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
Other income, net decreased $3.7 (93%), primarily due to a decrease in foreign currency exchange gains.
The effective tax rate was 27.9% in fiscal 2021 compared to (188.6%) in fiscal 2020. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 differed from the statutory rate primarily due to the effect of taxes on foreign earnings and taxes on current and anticipated future distributions amongst our subsidiaries and the net tax effects of the divestiture and closure of certain businesses. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 differed from the statutory rate primarily due to the Company reporting a net loss for the year, while being in a taxable position, before utilization of tax attributes, for income tax purposes. The taxable position for 2020 was primarily driven by nondeductible impairment changes and taxable gains from the sale of the Cimcool business.
Our adjusted effective income tax rate was 28.7% in 2021 compared to 27.8% in 2020. The adjusted effective income tax rate primarily excludes the impact of the following items:
•the tax effect of the divestiture and closure of certain businesses in 2021 ($7.4 net tax expense in 2021)
•the tax effect on the divestiture of Cimcool in 2020 ($12.7 tax expense in 2020);
•the revaluation of deferred tax balances denominated in non-functional currencies ($1.6 tax expense in 2021)
•certain tax items related to the acquisition of Milacron, including:
◦the tax effect of Milacron carryforward tax attributes adversely impacting domestic taxes associated with the foreign income inclusion tax provisions ($0.6 and $17.5 tax expense in 2021 and 2020, respectively);
◦the revaluation of deferred tax balances in connection with enacted statutory tax rate reductions in certain foreign jurisdictions ($6.5 tax benefit in 2020);
◦the tax effect of nondeductible acquisition expenses ($1.6 tax expense in 2020); and
•the tax effect of adjustments to (loss) income before income taxes.
Excluding these items, the increase in the current year adjusted effective tax rate was primarily due to an increase in tax expense associated with distributions from foreign subsidiaries, as well as recognition of provisions for uncertain tax positions.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - ADVANCED PROCESS SOLUTIONS
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Net revenue increased $17.1 (1%) primarily due to an increase in large plastics systems sales, screening and separating equipment sales and favorable pricing, partially offset by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021, and lower aftermarket parts and service net revenue. Foreign currency impact increased net revenue by 4%.
We expect future net revenue for Advanced Process Solutions to continue to be influenced by order backlog because of the lead time involved in fulfilling engineered-to-order equipment for customers. Though backlog can be an indicator of future net revenue, it does not include projects and aftermarket parts orders that are booked and shipped within the same quarter. The timing of order placement, size of orders, extent of order customization, and customer delivery dates can create fluctuations in backlog and net revenue. Net revenue attributable to backlog is also affected by foreign exchange rate fluctuations for orders denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars. Order backlog increased $361.4 (37%) from $988.0 at September 30, 2020, to $1,349.4 at September 30, 2021, primarily driven by increased demand for large plastics systems. On a sequential basis, order backlog decreased $28.6 (2%) to $1,349.4 at September 30, 2021, down from $1,378.0 at June 30, 2021, primarily due to the impact of foreign currency.
Gross profit decreased $10.1 (2%) primarily driven by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021, cost inflation, unfavorable mix, and an increase in restructuring and restructuring-related charges, partially offset by favorable pricing and productivity improvements including synergies. Foreign currency impact increased gross profit by 4%. Gross profit margin decreased 130 basis points to 34.4% in 2021, primarily due to an increase in restructuring and restructuring-related charges and business acquisition, integration, and development costs, cost inflation, and unfavorable mix, partially offset by pricing and productivity improvements.
Advanced Process Solutions’ gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($7.6 in 2021 and $0.9 in 2020), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs of $1.9 in 2021, and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $0.2 in 2020. Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit decreased $1.2 (0.3%) and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 60 basis points to 35.2% compared to prior year.
Operating expenses increased $0.4 (0.2%), primarily due to an increase in strategic investments, variable compensation, and cost inflation, partially offset by the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021 and synergy savings from restructuring actions. Foreign currency impact increased operating expenses by 4%. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 20 basis points to 17.7% in 2021.
Operating expenses included business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs ($3.1 in 2021 and $1.4 in 2020), restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($2.5 in 2021 and $2.8 in 2020), and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic ($0.9 in 2020). Excluding these items, adjusted operating expenses decreased $0.5 (0.2%), which included unfavorable foreign currency impact (4%). Adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 20 basis points to 17.3% in 2021.
Amortization expense decreased $10.1 (34%), primarily due to the divestitures of Red Valve on December 31, 2020 and ABEL on March 10, 2021. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
Impairment charges decreased $124.1 due to $73.0 of impairments related to goodwill and intangible assets recorded during 2020 and $62.3 of non-cash charges (including a goodwill impairment charge and a valuation adjustment) related to assets held
for sale during 2020, partially offset by $11.2 of a valuation adjustment related to TerraSource Global assets held for sale during 2021. For further information on the impairment charges, see Notes 2 and 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - MOLDING TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS
(1) Included 315 days of operations related to Milacron following its acquisition on November 21, 2019, including operations of Cimcool prior to its divestiture on March 30, 2020
Molding Technology Solutions 2020 results were significantly impacted by the non-recurring effects of the fair value adjustments to inventories ($40.7 during 2020) and order backlog ($10.0 during 2020) required by acquisition accounting. These fair value adjustments were charged to the Consolidated Statements of Operations over the respective periods that inventories were expected to be consumed and order backlog was expected to be realized as net revenue all of which occurred in 2020.
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Net revenue increased $259.9 (35%), primarily due to an additional 51 days of net revenue in 2021 compared to 2020 and an increase in demand for injection molding, extrusion, and hot runner equipment and aftermarket parts and service, partially offset by the divestiture of Cimcool, which occurred on March 30, 2020. Foreign currency impact increased net revenue by 2%.
Order backlog increased $123.0 (51%) from $242.6 at September 30, 2020, to $365.6 at September 30, 2021. The increase in order backlog was primarily driven by an increase in orders within our injection molding and extrusion equipment product lines. On a sequential basis, order backlog decreased $22.3 (6%) to $365.6 at September 30, 2021, down from $387.9 at June 30, 2021. The decrease in order backlog was primarily driven by a decrease in orders within our injection molding equipment product lines.
Gross profit increased $118.8 (64%) primarily due to Milacron inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021, an additional 51 days of gross profit in 2021 compared to 2020, an increase in demand for injection molding, extrusion, and hot runner equipment and aftermarket parts and service, and productivity improvements including synergies, which include savings from restructuring actions, partially offset by unfavorable mix, the divestiture of Cimcool, which occurred on March 30, 2020, and cost inflation. Foreign currency impact improved gross profit by 4%. Gross profit margin improved 530 basis points to 30.5%, primarily due to the inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021.
Molding Technology Solutions’ gross profit included Milacron inventory step-up charges of $40.7 in 2020, restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($2.6 in 2021 and $2.2 in 2020), business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs of $1.9 in 2021, and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $1.0 in 2020. Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $79.8 (35%) and adjusted gross profit margin decreased 20 basis points to 31.0%.
Operating expenses increased $13.3 (10%), primarily due to an additional 51 days of operating expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 and an increase in variable compensation, partially offset by the divestiture of Cimcool, which occurred on March 30, 2020, and synergies, which include savings from restructuring actions. Foreign currency impact increased operating expense by 2%. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 320 basis points to 14.3%.
Operating expenses included business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs of $1.1 in 2021 and $4.1 in 2020 (including severance costs related to the integration), restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($0.7 in 2021 and $2.6 in 2020), and
costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $0.4 in 2020. Excluding these charges, adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 250 basis points to 14.1%, primarily driven by operating leverage.
Amortization expense decreased $6.1 (14%), primarily due to backlog amortization of $10.0 in 2020 that did not repeat, partially offset by an additional 51 days of amortization in 2021 compared to 2020.
Impairment charges decreased $9.5 due to identifiable intangible asset impairments recorded in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021. See Note 2 of our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information on the impairment charges.
OPERATIONS REVIEW - BATESVILLE
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Net revenue increased $70.8 (13%), primarily due to an increase in volume and an increase in average selling price. Higher volume was driven by an increase in burial casket sales primarily due to estimated higher deaths associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an estimated increased rate at which families opted for cremation.
Gross profit increased $35.5 (19%), and gross profit margin improved 180 basis points to 36.1%. The increase in gross profit and gross profit margin was primarily due to higher volume, an increase in average selling price, and productivity initiatives, partially offset by inflation in commodities and wages and benefits and higher transportation and manufacturing costs required to respond to the surge in demand driven by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Batesville’s gross profit included restructuring and restructuring-related charges of $0.1 in 2021 and costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic of $0.4 in 2020 Excluding these charges, adjusted gross profit increased $35.2 (19%) and adjusted gross profit margin improved 170 basis points to 36.1% in 2021.
Operating expenses increased $3.8 (5%) to $75.0 in 2021, primarily due to an increase in variable compensation and cost inflation. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 90 basis points to 12.0%, primarily due to the increase in volume.
Operating expenses included restructuring and restructuring-related charges ($0.8 in 2021 and $0.6 in 2020). Excluding these charges, adjusted operating expenses increased $3.2 (5%), and adjusted operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue improved 90 basis points to 11.8% in 2021.
REVIEW OF CORPORATE EXPENSES
Corporate operating expenses include the cost of providing management and administrative services to each reportable operating segment. These services include treasury management, human resources, legal, business development, and other public company support functions such as information technology, internal audit, investor relations, financial reporting, and tax compliance. Corporate operating expenses also include costs related to business acquisition, disposition, and integration, which we incur as a result of our strategy to grow through selective acquisitions. Core operating expenses primarily represent corporate operating expenses excluding costs related to business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs.
Business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs include legal, tax, accounting, and other advisory fees and due diligence costs associated with investigating opportunities (including acquisitions and dispositions) and integrating completed acquisitions (including severance).
Year Ended September 30, 2021 Compared to Year Ended September 30, 2020
Operating expenses decreased $29.3 (25%) in 2021, primarily due to a decrease in business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs as a result of the acquisition of Milacron and the divestiture of Cimcool in the prior year, partially offset by an increase in variable compensation and strategic investments. These expenses as a percentage of net revenue were 3.1%, an improvement of 160 basis points from the prior year.
Core operating expenses increased $15.1 (32%) in 2021, primarily driven by an increase in variable compensation and strategic investments. These expenses as a percentage of net revenue were 2.2%, an increase of 30 basis points from the prior year.
NON-GAAP OPERATING PERFORMANCE MEASURES
The following is a reconciliation from consolidated net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP operating performance measure, to our non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA.
(1)Hillenbrand recorded a $11.2 valuation adjustment related to assets held for sale within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment during 2021. Hillenbrand recorded $82.5 of impairment charges related to goodwill and certain intangible assets within both the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments during the second quarter of 2020 and $62.3 of non-cash charges (including a goodwill impairment charge and a valuation adjustment) related to TerraSource Global assets held for sale within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment during the fourth quarter of 2020. For further information on the impairment charges, see Notes 2 and 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
(2)Business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs during 2021 primarily included professional fees and employee-related costs attributable to the integration of Milacron and divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL, as well as the anticipated divestiture of TerraSource Global. Business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs during 2020 primarily included $25.7, of expenses for the settlement of outstanding Milacron share-based equity awards, professional fees, and severance and employee-related costs in connection with the acquisition and integration of Milacron. The remaining costs incurred during 2020 were primarily related to professional fees and other transaction costs in connection with the divestiture of Cimcool.
(3)Restructuring and restructuring-related charges primarily included severance costs, unrelated to the acquisition and integration of Milacron, during 2021 and 2020.
(4)Represents the non-cash charges related to the fair value adjustment of inventories acquired in connection with the acquisition of Milacron during 2020. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information on the acquisition of Milacron.
(5)The current year amount represents the gain on divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL during 2021. The prior year amount represents the loss on the divestiture of Cimcool during 2020. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information on the divestiture of Cimcool.
Consolidated net income (loss) for 2021 compared to 2020 increased $308.6 (578%). The increase was primarily driven by impairment charges, inventory step-up charges and additional amortization of intangible assets in relation to the acquisition of Milacron in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021, a decrease in business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs, primarily in relation to the acquisition of Milacron, gains on the divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL in 2021, an increase in demand for equipment and aftermarket parts and service at the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment, pricing and productivity improvements, an increase in volume at the Batesville reportable operating segment, and an additional 51 days of results from the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment compared to the prior year as a result of the timing of the Milacron acquisition (closed November 21, 2019). This increase in consolidated net income (loss) was partially offset by an increase in income tax expense, cost inflation, an increase in variable compensation, and unfavorable mix. Foreign currency impact increased consolidated net income (loss) $10.5.
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA for 2021 compared to 2020 increased $73.8 (16%). The increase was primarily due an increase in demand for equipment and aftermarket parts and service at the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment, pricing and productivity improvements, an increase in volume at the Batesville reportable operating segment, and an additional 51 days of results from the Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment compared to the prior year as a result of the timing of the Milacron acquisition (closed November 21, 2019). This increase in consolidated adjusted EBITDA was partially offset by cost inflation, unfavorable mix, and an increase in variable compensation. Foreign currency impact increased adjusted EBITDA by $15.2.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
In this section, we discuss our ability to access cash to meet business needs. We discuss how we see cash flow being affected for the next twelve months. We describe actual results in generating and using cash by comparing 2021 to 2020. Finally, we identify other significant matters, such as contractual obligations and contingent liabilities and commitments that could affect liquidity on an ongoing basis.
Ability to Access Cash
Our debt financing has historically included revolving credit facilities, term loans, and long-term notes as part of our overall financing strategy. We regularly review and adjust the mix of fixed-rate and variable-rate debt within our capital structure in order to achieve a target range based on our financing strategy.
We have taken proactive measures to maintain financial flexibility within the landscape of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We believe the Company ended the year with, and continues to have, sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment.
As of September 30, 2021, we had $883.6 of maximum borrowing capacity under the Revolver, all of which was immediately available based on our most restrictive covenant. The available borrowing capacity reflects a reduction of $16.4 for outstanding letters of credit issued under the Revolver. The Company may request an increase of up to $450.0 in the total borrowing capacity under the Revolver, subject to approval of the lenders.
In the normal course of business, operating companies within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment provide to certain customers bank guarantees and other credit arrangements in support of performance, warranty, advance payment, and other contractual obligations. This form of trade finance is customary in the industry and, as a result, we maintain adequate capacity to provide the guarantees. As of September 30, 2021, we had guarantee arrangements totaling $411.5, under which $254.0 was utilized for this purpose. These arrangements include the €175.0 Syndicated Letter of Guarantee Facility Agreement (the “L/G Facility Agreement”). Under the L/G Facility Agreement, unsecured letters of credit, bank guarantees, or other surety bonds may be issued. The Company may request an increase to the total capacity under the L/G Facility Agreement by an additional €45, subject to approval of the lenders.
We have significant operations outside the U.S. We continue to assert that the basis differences in the majority of our foreign subsidiaries continue to be permanently reinvested outside of the U.S. We have recorded tax liabilities associated with distribution taxes on expected distributions of available cash and current earnings. The Company has made, and intends to continue to make, substantial investments in our businesses in foreign jurisdictions to support the ongoing development and growth of our international operations. As of September 30, 2021, we had a transition tax liability of $18.9. The cash at our international subsidiaries, including U.S. subsidiaries participating in non-U.S. cash pooling arrangements, totaled $397.7 at September 30, 2021. We continue to actively evaluate our global capital deployment and cash needs.
12-month Outlook
COVID-19 impact
As discussed in the COVID-19 impact section above, the Company has taken actions aimed to safeguard its capital position in the ongoingCOVID-19 environment. We believe the Company has sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment. The challenges posed by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our businesses continue to evolve rapidly and are likely to evolve further as the COVID-19 pandemic continues and the vaccine rollout, including any potential vaccine or testing mandate, is in process. Consequently, we will continue to evaluate our financial position in light of future developments, particularly those relating to COVID-19 and any of the variant strains of the virus, and we plan to take necessary steps to manage through such developments.
TerraSource Global and flow control businesses
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company announced that it had initiated a plan to divest the TerraSource Global and flow control businesses, which operated within the Advanced Process Solutions reportable operating segment, as these businesses were no longer considered a strategic fit with the Company’s long-term growth plan and operational objectives. On December 31, 2020, the Company completed the divestiture of its Red Valve business, on March 10, 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of its ABEL business, and on October 22, 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of TerraSource Global. We have used cash proceeds generated from the divestitures of these businesses primarily to further improve our liquidity position.
Leverage update
The Company’s net leverage (defined as debt, net of cash, to adjusted EBITDA) at September 30, 2021 was 1.4x. Given the strength of the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and with leverage within our targeted range, the Company has resumed consideration of strategic acquisitions and opportunistic share repurchases in support of its capital structure objectives.
Other activities
The Company is required to pay a transition tax on unremitted earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, resulting in an estimated liability of $18.9 recorded as of September 30, 2021. The transition tax liability is expected to be paid over the next four years.
In December 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $200.0. We repurchased 2,792,205 shares of our common stock during 2021, at a total cost of $121.1 and at an average share price of $43.37. At September 30, 2021, we had approximately $78.9 remaining for share repurchases under the existing authorization by the Board of Directors. Subsequent to September 30, 2021, the Company has repurchased an additional 624,317 shares of common stock at a total cost of $28.9.
Our anticipated contribution to our defined benefit pension plans in 2022 is $10.9. We will continue to monitor plan funding levels, performance of the assets within the plans, and overall economic activity, and we may make additional discretionary funding decisions based on the net impact of the above factors.
We currently expect to pay approximately $15.7 in cash dividends each quarter based on our outstanding common stock at September 30, 2021. We increased our quarterly dividend in 2021 to $0.2150 per common share from $0.2125 per common share paid in 2020.
We believe existing cash, cash flows from operations, borrowings under existing arrangements, and the issuance of debt will be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities. Based on these factors,
we believe our current liquidity position is sufficient and will continue to meet all of our financial commitments in the current business environment.
Key liquidity events
$350.0 senior unsecured notes
On March 3, 2021, we issued $350.0 of senior unsecured notes due March 2031 (the “2021 Notes”). The 2021 Notes were issued at par value and bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.75% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears beginning September 2021.
Amendments to current financing agreements
The Company’s June 14, 2021 amendment to the Credit Agreement, among other things, amended certain provisions implemented in May 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic given the Company’s improved financial condition. The primary amendments in this regard (i) decrease the maximum permitted leverage ratio to 3.50 to 1:00 but permit the Company to increase the maximum permitted leverage ratio to 4.00 to 1.00 for 3 consecutive fiscal quarters following certain acquisitions; (ii) decrease the applicable margin (the “Applicable Rate”) paid on revolving loans at certain pricing levels; and (iii) remove additional pricing levels previously added to the Applicable Rate under certain circumstances.
See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further details on these amendments.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Operating activities provided $528.4 of cash during 2021, and provided $354.8 of cash during 2020, a $173.6 (49%) increase. The increase in operating cash flow was primarily due to favorable timing of working capital requirements and a decrease in payments for business acquisition, disposition, and integration costs in relation to the acquisition of Milacron and divestiture of Cimcool, partially offset by an increase in tax payments.
Working capital requirements for the Advanced Process Solutions and Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segments may fluctuate due primarily to the type of product and geography of customer projects in process at any point in time. Working capital needs are lower when advance payments from customers are more heavily weighted toward the beginning of the project. Conversely, working capital needs are higher when a larger portion of the cash is to be received in later stages of manufacturing.
Investing Activities
The $1,421.9 decrease in cash used in investing activities during 2021 was primarily due to a cash outflow of $1,503.1 for the acquisition of Milacron in the prior year. The Company received proceeds of $165.8 from the divestitures of Red Valve and ABEL in 2021, $221.9 from the divestiture of Cimcool in fiscal 2020 and $21.2 of proceeds from the sale of property, plant, and equipment, primarily related to the sale of two Molding Technology Solutions reportable operating segment manufacturing facilities during 2020. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K for further information on these acquisitions and divestitures.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was largely impacted by net borrowing activity. Our general practice is to utilize our cash to pay down debt unless it is needed to fund an acquisition. Daily borrowing and repayment activity under the Revolver may fluctuate significantly between periods as we fulfill the capital needs of our business units.
Cash used in financing activities during 2021 was $523.3, including $338.8 of debt repayments, net of proceeds, which included $350.0 of senior unsecured notes issued in 2021. Cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was $854.9, including $936.7 of proceeds, net of debt repayments. The change in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to financing activity for the acquisition of Milacron in the prior year, including the issuance of two term loans totaling $725.0.
The Company repurchased $121.1 of its common stock during 2021. We returned $64.0 to shareholders in 2021 in the form of quarterly dividends compared to $63.4 in 2020. We increased our quarterly dividend in 2021 to $0.2150 per common share from $0.2125 paid during 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As part of its normal course of business, Hillenbrand is a party to various financial guarantees and other commitments. These arrangements involve elements of performance and credit risk that are not included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The possibility that Hillenbrand would have to make actual cash expenditures in connection with these obligations is largely dependent on the performance of the guaranteed party, or the occurrence of future events that Hillenbrand is unable to predict. We have no off-balance sheet financing agreements or guarantees at September 30, 2021, that we believe are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities and Commitments
The following table summarizes our future obligations not quantified elsewhere in this Form 10-K as of September 30, 2021. This will help give you an understanding of the significance of cash outlays that are fixed beyond the normal accounts payable and other obligations we have already incurred, have recorded, and disclosed in the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.
(1)Cash obligations for interest requirements relate to our fixed-rate debt obligations at the contractual rates as of September 30, 2021.
(2)Agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction.
(3)Primarily includes estimated payments for transition tax liability, the estimated liquidation of liabilities related to both our short-term and long-term casket pricing obligation, self-insurance reserves, and severance payments.
(4)We have excluded from the table our $40.5 liability related to uncertain tax positions as the current portion is not significant and we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the long-term portion.
(5)See Notes 5, 6, and 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K for lease, financing, and pension obligations, respectively.
Summarized Financial Information for Guarantors and the Issuer of Guaranteed Securities
Summarized financial information of Hillenbrand (the “Parent”) and our subsidiaries that are guarantors of our senior unsecured notes (the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”) is shown below on a combined basis as the “Obligor Group.” The Company’s senior unsecured notes are guaranteed by certain of our wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries and rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and financial information of the Obligor Group. All intercompany balances and transactions between the Parent and Guarantor Subsidiaries have been eliminated and all information excludes subsidiaries that are not issuers or guarantors of our senior unsecured notes, including earnings from and investments in these entities.
(1) Current assets include intercompany receivables from non-guarantors of $596.8 as of September 30, 2021 and current liabilities included intercompany payables with non-guarantors $256.2 as of September 30, 2020.
(2) Revenue includes intercompany sales with non-guarantors of $35.8 as of September 30, 2021 and $55.5 as of September 30, 2020.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
For a summary of recently issued and adopted accounting standards applicable to us, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Form 10-K.