Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated)
The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the following discussions, which contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company’s future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the cautionary statements set forth on pages 4 and 5 of this Form 10-K. Actual results are likely to differ, and in the past have differed, materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in the following discussion and in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, and those identified from time to time in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Hartford undertakes no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise.
On September 30, 2020, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell all of the issued and outstanding equity of Navigators Holdings (Europe) N.V., a Belgium holding company, and its subsidiaries, Bracht, Deckers & Mackelbert N.V. (“BDM”) and Assurances Contintales Contintale Verzekeringen N.V. (“ASCO”), (collectively referred to as "Continental Europe Operations").
On May 23, 2019, the Company completed the acquisition of Navigators Group, a specialty underwriter.
For discussion of acquisitions, dispositions and reclassifications, see Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Hartford defines increases or decreases greater than or equal to 200% as “NM” or not meaningful.
For discussion of the earliest of the three years included in the financial statements of the current filing, refer to Part 2, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in The Hartford’s 2019 Form 10-K Annual Report.
Index
Throughout the MD&A, we use certain terms and abbreviations, the more commonly used are summarized in the Acronyms section.
KEY PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND RATIOS
The Company considers the measures and ratios in the following discussion to be key performance indicators for its businesses. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford’s businesses. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, the results presented in the segment discussions that follow in this MD&A. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company’s competitors.
Definitions of Non-GAAP and Other Measures and Ratios
Assets Under Management (“AUM”)- Include mutual fund and ETP assets. AUM is a measure used by the Company's Hartford Funds segment because a significant portion of the Company’s mutual fund and ETP revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in AUM whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows.
Book Value per Diluted Share (excluding AOCI)- This is a non-GAAP per share measure that is
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
calculated by dividing (a) common stockholders' equity, excluding AOCI, after tax, by (b) common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares. The Company provides this measure to enable investors to analyze the amount of the Company's net worth that is primarily attributable to the Company's business operations. The Company believes that excluding AOCI from the numerator is useful to investors because it eliminates the effect of items that can fluctuate significantly from period to period, primarily based on changes in interest rates. Book value per diluted share is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
Combined Ratio- The sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100 demonstrates underwriting losses.
Core Earnings- The Hartford uses the non-GAAP measure core earnings as an important measure of the Company’s operating performance. The Hartford believes that core earnings provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company’s ongoing businesses because it reveals trends in our insurance and financial services businesses that may be obscured by including the net effect of certain items. Therefore, the following items are excluded from core earnings:
•Certain realized capital gains and losses - Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to the insurance and underwriting aspects of our business. Accordingly, core earnings excludes the effect of all realized gains and losses that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Hartford believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so core earnings includes net realized gains and losses such as net periodic settlements on credit derivatives. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the income statement such as net investment income.
•Restructuring and other costs - Costs incurred as part of a restructuring plan are not a recurring operating expense of the business.
•Loss on extinguishment of debt - Largely consisting of make-whole payments or tender premiums upon paying debt off before maturity, these losses are not a recurring operating expense of the business.
•Gains and losses on reinsurance transactions - Gains or losses on reinsurance, such as those entered into upon sale of
a business or to reinsure loss reserves, are not a recurring operating expense of the business.
•Integration and transaction costs in connection with an acquired business - As transaction costs are incurred upon acquisition of a business and integration costs are completed within a short period after an acquisition, they do not represent ongoing costs of the business.
•Change in loss reserves upon acquisition of a business - These changes in loss reserves are excluded from core earnings because such changes could obscure the ability to compare results in periods after the acquisition to results of periods prior to the acquisition.
•Deferred gain resulting from retroactive reinsurance and subsequent changes in the deferred gain - Retroactive reinsurance agreements economically transfer risk to the reinsurers and including the full benefit from retroactive reinsurance in core earnings provides greater insight into the economics of the business.
•Change in valuation allowance on deferred taxes related to non-core components of pre-tax income - These changes in valuation allowances are excluded from core earnings because they relate to non-core components of pre-tax income, such as tax attributes like capital loss carryforwards.
•Results of discontinued operations - These results are excluded from core earnings for businesses sold or held for sale because such results could obscure the ability to compare period over period results for our ongoing businesses.
In addition to the above components of net income available to common stockholders that are excluded from core earnings, preferred stock dividends declared, which are excluded from net income available to common stockholders, are included in the determination of core earnings. Preferred stock dividends are a cost of financing more akin to interest expense on debt and are expected to be a recurring expense as long as the preferred stock is outstanding.
Net income (loss) and net income (loss) available to common stockholders are the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures to core earnings. Core earnings should not be considered as a substitute for net income (loss) or net income (loss) available to common stockholders and does not reflect the overall profitability of the Company's business. Therefore, The Hartford believes that it is useful for investors to evaluate net income (loss), net income (loss) available to common stockholders, and core earnings when reviewing the Company's performance.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Reconciliation of Net Income to Core Earnings
Core Earnings Margin- The Hartford uses the non-GAAP measure core earnings margin to evaluate, and believes it is an important measure of, the Group Benefits segment's operating performance. Core earnings margin is calculated by dividing core earnings by revenues, excluding buyouts and realized gains (losses). Net income margin, calculated by dividing net income by revenues, is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes that core earnings margin provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of Group Benefits because it reveals trends in the business that may be obscured by the effect of buyouts and realized gains (losses) as well as other items excluded in the calculation of core earnings. Core earnings margin should not be considered as a substitute for net income margin and does not reflect the overall profitability of Group Benefits. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both core earnings margin and net income margin when reviewing performance. A reconciliation of net income margin to core earnings margin is set forth in the Results of Operations section within MD&A - Group Benefits.
Current Accident Year Catastrophe Ratio- A component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, represents the ratio of catastrophe losses incurred in the current accident year (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums. For U.S. events, a catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers, as defined by the Property Claim Services office of Verisk. For international events, the Company's approach is similar, informed, in part, by how Lloyd's defines catastrophes. Lloyd's is an insurance market-place operating worldwide. Lloyd's does not underwrite risks. The Company accepts risks as the sole member of its Lloyd's Syndicate. The current accident year catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums.
Expense Ratio- For the underwriting segments of Commercial Lines and Personal Lines is the ratio of underwriting expenses less fee income, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC") and insurance operating costs and expenses, including certain centralized services costs and bad debt expense. DAC include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other incremental direct underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term.
The expense ratio for Group Benefits is expressed as the ratio of insurance operating costs and other expenses including amortization of intangibles and amortization of DAC, to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums.
The expense ratio for Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Group Benefits does not include integration and other transaction costs associated with an acquired business.
Fee Income- Is largely driven from amounts earned as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management in our Hartford Funds business. These fees are generally earned on a daily basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or favorable market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or unfavorable market performance will reduce fee income.
Gross New Business Premium- Represents the amount of premiums charged, before ceded reinsurance, for policies issued to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. Gross new business premium plus gross renewal written premium less ceded reinsurance equals total written premium.
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio- A measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred for both the current and prior
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
accident years. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted ROE fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment.
The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company’s practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the rate-making process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage.
Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio before Catastrophes and Prior Accident Year Development- A measure of the cost of non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year development.
Loss Ratio, excluding Buyouts- Utilized for the Group Benefits segment and is expressed as a ratio of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses, excluding those related to buyout premiums, to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the profitability of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. Buyout premiums represent takeover of open claim liabilities and other non-recurring premium amounts.
Mutual Fund and Exchange-Traded Product Assets- Are owned by the shareholders of those products and not by the Company and, therefore, are not reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements except in instances where the Company seeds new investment products and holds an investment in the fund for a period of time. Mutual fund and ETP assets are a measure used by the Company primarily because a significant portion of the Company’s Hartford Funds segment revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in AUM whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows.
Net New Business Premium- Represents the amount of premiums charged, after ceded reinsurance, for policies issued to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. Net new business premium plus renewal written premium equals total written premium.
Policies in Force- Represents the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of
policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines and standard commercial lines (small commercial and middle market lines within middle & large commercial) within Commercial Lines and is affected by both new business growth and policy count retention.
Premium Retention- Represents renewal premium written in the current period divided by total premium written in the prior period.
Policy Count Retention- Represents the ratio of the number of policies renewed during the period divided by the number of policies available to renew. The number of policies available to renew represents the number of policies, net of any cancellations, written in the previous policy term. Policy count retention is affected by a number of factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain classes of business or states. Policy count retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors.
Policyholder Dividend Ratio- The ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium.
Prior Accident Year Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio- Represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums.
Reinstatement Premiums- Represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of the Company ceding losses to reinsurers.
Renewal Earned Price Increase (Decrease)- Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines automobile business and twelve months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company’s Property and Casualty business. Since the Company earns premiums over the six to twelve month term of the policies, renewal earned price increases (decreases) lag renewal written price increases (decreases) by six to twelve months.
Renewal Written Price Increase (Decrease)-For Commercial Lines, represents the combined effect of rate changes, amount of insurance and individual risk pricing decisions per unit of exposure on commercial lines policies that renewed. For Personal Lines, renewal written price increases represent the total change in premium per policy since the prior year on those policies that renewed and includes the combined effect of rate changes, amount of insurance and other changes in exposure. For Personal Lines, other changes in exposure include, but are not limited to, the effect of changes in number of drivers, vehicles and incidents, as well as changes in customer policy elections, such as deductibles and limits. The rate component represents the change in rate filed with and approved by state regulators during the period and the amount of insurance represents the change in the value of the rating base, such as model year/vehicle symbol for automobiles, building replacement costs for property and wage inflation for workers’ compensation. A number of factors affect renewal written price increases (decreases) including
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
expected loss costs as projected by the Company’s pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company’s underwriters and marketplace competition. Renewal written price changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Renewal written price statistics are subject to change from period to period, based on a number of factors, including changes in actuarial estimates and the effect of subsequent cancellations and non-renewals, and modifications made to better reflect ultimate pricing achieved.
Return on Assets ("ROA"), Core Earnings- The Company uses this non-GAAP financial measure to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, the Hartford Funds segment’s operating performance. ROA, core earnings is calculated by dividing annualized core earnings by a daily average AUM. ROA is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes that ROA, core earnings, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Hartford Funds segment because it reveals trends in our business that may be obscured by the effect of items excluded in the calculation of core earnings. ROA, core earnings, should not be considered as a substitute for ROA and does not reflect the overall profitability of our Hartford Funds business. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both ROA, and ROA, core earnings when reviewing the Hartford Funds segment performance. A reconciliation of ROA to ROA, core earnings is set forth in the Results of Operations section within MD&A - Hartford Funds.
Underlying Combined Ratio-This non-GAAP financial measure of underwriting results represents the combined ratio before catastrophes, prior accident year development and current accident year change in loss reserves upon acquisition of
a business. Combined ratio is the most directly comparable GAAP measure. The underlying combined ratio represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of current accident year catastrophes and current accident year change in loss reserves upon acquisition of a business. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense reserve development. The changes to loss reserves upon acquisition of a business are excluded from underlying combined ratio because such changes could obscure the ability to compare results in periods after the acquisition to results of periods prior to the acquisition as such trends are valuable to our investors' ability to assess the Company's financial performance. A reconciliation of combined ratio to underlying combined ratio is set forth in the Results of Operations section within MD&A - Commercial Lines and Personal Lines.
Underwriting Gain (Loss)- The Hartford's management evaluates profitability of the Commercial and Personal Lines segments primarily on the basis of underwriting gain or loss. Underwriting gain (loss) is a before tax non-GAAP measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Underwriting gain (loss) is influenced significantly by earned premium growth and the adequacy of The Hartford's pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by The Hartford's underwriting discipline, as management strives to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, effective management of claims, use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expenses. The Hartford believes that the measure underwriting gain (loss) provides investors with a valuable measure of profitability, before tax, derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company's investing activities.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Reconciliation of Net Income to Underwriting Gain (Loss)
Written and Earned Premiums- Written premium represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results principally on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company’s sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium.
Traditional life and disability insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policyholder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums, together with net investment income earned, are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors including, but not limited to, customer demand for the Company’s product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the
Company’s reputation and ratings. Persistency refers to the percentage of premium remaining in-force from year-to-year.
THE HARTFORD'S OPERATIONS
The Hartford conducts business principally in five reporting segments including Commercial Lines, Personal Lines, Property & Casualty Other Operations, Group Benefits and Hartford Funds, as well as a Corporate category. The Company includes in the Corporate category reserves for run-off structured settlement and terminal funding agreement liabilities, restructuring costs, capital raising activities (including equity financing, debt financing and related interest expense), transaction expenses incurred in connection with an acquisition, purchase accounting adjustments related to goodwill, and other expenses not allocated to the reporting segments. Corporate also includes investment management fees and expenses related to managing third party business, including management of the invested assets of Talcott Resolution Life, Inc. and its subsidiaries ("Talcott Resolution").
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Talcott Resolution is the holding company of the life and annuity business that was sold in May 2018. In addition, Corporate includes a 9.7% ownership interest in the legal entity that acquired the life and annuity business sold.
The Company derives its revenues principally from: (a) premiums earned for insurance coverage provided to insureds; (b) management fees on mutual fund and ETP assets; (c) net investment income; (d) fees earned for services provided to third parties; and (e) net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverage are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in-force.
The profitability of the Company's property and casualty insurance businesses over time is greatly influenced by the Company’s underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance, the size of its in force block, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company’s response to rate actions taken by competitors, its expense levels and expectations about regulatory and legal developments. The Company seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, the Company is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments and the Lloyd's Syndicate's ability to write business is subject to Lloyd's approval for its premium capacity each year. Most of Personal Lines written premium is associated with our exclusive licensing agreement with AARP. This agreement provides an important competitive advantage given the size of the 50 plus population and the strength of the AARP brand. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company extended this agreement through December 31, 2032.
Similar to property and casualty, profitability of the group benefits business depends, in large part, on the ability to evaluate and price risks appropriately and make reliable estimates of mortality, morbidity, disability and longevity. To manage the pricing risk, Group Benefits generally offers term insurance policies, allowing for the adjustment of rates or policy terms in order to minimize the adverse effect of market trends, loss costs, declining interest rates and other factors. However, as policies are typically sold with rate guarantees of up to three years, pricing for the Company’s products could prove to be inadequate if loss and expense trends emerge adversely during the rate guarantee period or if investment returns are lower than expected at the time the products were sold. For some of its products, the Company is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. New and renewal business for group benefits business, particularly for long-term disability, are priced using an assumption about expected investment yields over time. While the Company employs asset-liability duration matching strategies to mitigate risk and may use interest-rate sensitive derivatives to hedge its
exposure in the Group Benefits investment portfolio, cash flow patterns related to the payment of benefits and claims are uncertain and actual investment yields could differ significantly from expected investment yields, affecting profitability of the business. In addition to appropriately evaluating and pricing risks, the profitability of the Group Benefits business depends on other factors, including the Company’s response to pricing decisions and other actions taken by competitors, its ability to offer voluntary products and self-service capabilities, the persistency of its sold business and its ability to manage its expenses which it seeks to achieve through economies of scale and operating efficiencies.
The financial results of the Company’s mutual fund and ETP businesses depend largely on the amount of assets under management and the level of fees charged based, in part, on asset share class and product type. Changes in assets under management are driven by the two main factors of net flows and the market return of the funds, which are heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity and bond markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund and ETP shareholders. Financial results are highly correlated to the growth in assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis.
The investment return, or yield, on invested assets is an important element of the Company’s earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses are paid. Due to the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the majority of the Company’s invested assets have been held in available-for-sale securities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and collateralized loan obligations. The primary investment objective for the Company is to maximize economic value, consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of credit risk and interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient net of tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations.
Impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity
Impact to revenues
Earned premiums
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruption to the economy of the U.S. and other countries in which we operate. Due to government restrictions that have prevented some businesses from offering goods and services to their customers and due to shelter-in-place guidelines that have reduced business activity, many of our customers, especially small businesses, have had to curtail their operations or have found they are unable to meet cash flow needs due to declining business volume, causing some to lay off workers. As one of the largest providers of small business insurance in the U.S., in 2020, we experienced a 3% year over year decline in our small commercial written premium although trends improved in the second half of 2020. In addition
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
to the expected decline in small commercial written and earned premium, other business lines in Commercial Lines have also been negatively affected due to government-mandated restrictions and stay-at-home guidelines reducing business activity and due to consumers having less disposable income or less willingness to spend on the products and services that our commercial lines policyholders sell. Excluding the effect of the Navigators acquisition, Commercial Lines written premium declined $290, or 4%, year over year driven by lower new business and due to endorsements or other changes to in-force policies that decrease premiums to reflect reduced exposures.
Within Commercial Lines, workers’ compensation written premium declined year over year, partly due to declining payrolls as a result of the economic effects of COVID-19.
Contributing to a 6% decline in Personal Lines written premium in 2020 was the effect of increased shopping behaviors, and lower new business levels arising out of the competitive marketplace. In addition, The Hartford provided a 15 percent refund on policyholders’ April, May and June personal automobile insurance premiums which reduced Personal Lines written and earned premiums by $81 in the second quarter of 2020. In Group Benefits, fully insured ongoing premium decreased 2% in 2020 resulting primarily from lower insured exposure on in-force policies. Because of the economic stress caused by COVID-19, we also experienced a higher amount of uncollectible premiums receivable in 2020. As a result, to reflect our higher expectation of credit losses, The Hartford increased its allowance for credit losses ("ACL") on premiums receivable by $40 in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Net investment income and realized capital gains (losses)
Total net investment income decreased in 2020 primarily due to a lower yield on fixed maturity investments resulting from lower reinvestment rates and lower yields on floating rate securities, partially offset by a higher level of invested assets, due in part to the acquisition of Navigators Group. In an effort to stimulate the economy, central banks have reduced benchmark interest rates to near zero, impacting our yields on floating rate securities and reinvestment rates. From late March to mid-May, 2020, the Company temporarily reinvested receipts of interest and proceeds from maturing fixed maturity investments in liquid, short-term investments. While the Company resumed investing in fixed maturities in May, 2020, lower interest rates since the pandemic began have generally resulted in lower investment yields on newly invested funds. A prolonged period of lower interest rates could depress the Company's net investment income such that to earn the same level of return on equity we may have to charge higher premiums for the insurance products we sell unless loss costs similarly lessen.
Net realized capital gains (losses) on equity securities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $(214) before tax, consisting of unrealized mark-to-market gains (losses) on equity securities held and net realized gains (losses) on equity securities sold, net of realized gains on equity derivative hedges. While equity markets in the last nine months of 2020 increased more than the value they lost during the first quarter, economic conditions remain uncertain and if equity markets were to experience similar declines as occurred in the first quarter of 2020, we may incur more net realized capital losses in future periods.
Net realized capital losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 also included $47 of increases in the allowance for credit losses, partially offset by reversals of the allowance due to improvements in market value or sales, and $5 of intent-to-sell impairments. The increase in the allowance for credit losses in the twelve month period included increases of $28 on available for sale fixed maturities and increases of $19 on commercial mortgage loans. If it takes a prolonged period for the economy to recover or if the impacts of the economic downturn are deeper than anticipated, we could experience further credit losses and intent-to-sell impairments, particularly with highly leveraged companies and issuers in the energy, commercial real estate, and travel and leisure sectors, resulting in further net realized capital losses.
Impact to direct benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses from COVID-19 claims
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded direct COVID-19 incurred losses in P&C of $278, reflecting management’s best estimate of the ultimate cost of settling COVID-19 claims incurred, including $141 for property claims, $66 for workers’ compensation, net of favorable frequency on other workers' compensation claims, and $71 of incurred losses largely concentrated in financial lines such as D&O and E&O and in surety and marine.
Nearly all of our property insurance policies require direct physical loss or damage to property and contain standard exclusions that we believe preclude coverage for COVID-19 related claims, and the vast majority of such policies contain exclusions for virus-related losses. Included in the $141 of COVID-19 property incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses in the twelve month period were $101 of losses arising from a small number of property policies that do not require direct physical loss or damage and from policies intended to cover specific business needs, including crisis management and performance disruption, as well as a reserve of $40 for legal defense costs. Given the significant business disruptions that have occurred due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has experienced increased property claims, resulting in increased litigation activity and legal expenses. Within Property & Casualty, we incur COVID-19 workers’ compensation losses when it is determined that workers were exposed to COVID-19 out of and in the course of their employment and in other cases where states have passed laws providing for the presumption of coverage for certain industry classes, including health care and other essential workers. While current accident year losses for workers’ compensation for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $180 due to COVID-19 claims, this has been partially offset by lower claim frequency of non-COVID-19 related workers’ compensation claims due to reduced business activity, resulting in a net increase in incurred losses of $66. Favorable non-COVID-19 workers’ compensation claim frequency could continue through 2021 though possibly to a lesser extent if more business activity resumes. The Company could incur additional COVID-19 direct incurred losses in P&C through much of 2021, particularly for workers’ compensation and financial lines.
Within Group Benefits, the Company experienced excess mortality in its group life business of $239 in 2020, primarily caused by direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19. Within the group disability business, in 2020 the Company recognized $29 of
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
COVID-19 direct losses from short-term disability claims, more than offset by $38 of favorable frequency on other short-term disability claims.
Other impacts from COVID-19 and resulting economic downturn
Apart from impacts on the investment portfolio, net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses), in 2020, the Company incurred a number of other insurance business impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic downturn as follows:
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an estimated decrease in current accident incurred losses in Personal Lines automobile of $218 due to a significant reduction in miles driven since the pandemic began, though miles driven has begun to increase again. In the second quarter of 2020, Personal Lines written and earned premiums were reduced by $81 due to providing automobile policyholders with premium refunds or credits in recognition of the decrease in miles driven.
•The Company experienced the impacts of lower premium retention, including the impact of a lower exposure base on workers' compensation premium.
•From April through approximately July of 2020, the Company waived late payment fees for a period of time for business and personal insurance customers and temporarily suspended the policy cancellation process for policyholders of our Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Group Benefits segments with the period of policy cancellations for non-payment varying by state.
•Because of the economic stress caused by COVID-19 and partly due to the extension of billing terms, we expect a higher amount of uncollectible premiums receivable. As a result, to reflect our higher expectation of credit losses, The Hartford increased its ACL on premiums receivable by $40 in the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Apart from the increase in the premiums receivable allowance, we have experienced a decline in insurance operating costs and other expenses partly due to lower travel and employee benefits costs and lower operating costs associated with lower earned premium volumes.
Considering the impacts of COVID-19, the Company evaluated the impact of market factors on the fair value of the reporting units using the income approach and determined the estimated fair values do not indicate a goodwill impairment for any reporting unit. The annual goodwill assessment for the reporting units was completed as of October 31, 2020, and resulted in no write-downs of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For information about additional resources the Company has to manage capital and liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic and economic downturn, refer to the Capital Resources & Liquidity section of MD&A.
For additional information about the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic downturn, see the risk factor "The pandemic caused by the spread of COVID-19 has disrupted our operations and may have a material adverse impact
on our business results, financial condition, results of operations and/or liquidity" in Item 1A of Part I.
Common stockholders’ equity
Apart from the direct loss and premium impacts of COVID-19 on net income, we could also experience a reduction in AOCI within common stockholders’ equity. The net unrealized gain position on our portfolio of fixed maturities, AFS increased by $1.4 billion from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, due to an increase in valuations resulting from a decline in interest rates. If credit spreads widen going forward or if interest rates increase from the level they were at as of December 31, 2020, we would recognize a decline in the fair value of fixed maturities, AFS in future periods through a reduction of AOCI within common stockholders’ equity.
In December 2020, the Company announced a $1.5 billion equity repurchase authorization by the Board of Directors which is effective from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2022. Any future repurchase of shares is dependent on market conditions and other factors including the extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. For further information, see Note 16 - Equity of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Operational Transformation and Cost Reduction Plan
In recognition of the need to become more cost efficient and competitive along with enhancing the experience we provide to agents and customers, on July 30, 2020, the Company announced an operational transformation and cost reduction plan it refers to as Hartford Next. Through reduction of its headcount, IT investments to further enhance our capabilities, and other activities, relative to 2019, the Company expects to achieve a reduction in annual insurance operating costs and other expenses of approximately $500 by 2022. The Hartford Next program will contribute to our goal of reducing the 2022 P&C expense ratio by about 2.0 to 2.5 points, reducing the 2022 Group Benefits expense ratio by about 1.5 to 2.0 points and reducing our 2022 claim expense ratio by approximately 0.5 point.
To achieve those expected savings, we expect to incur approximately $410, with $153 expensed over the last six months of 2020, and expected expenses of $110 in 2021, $77 in 2022 and $70 after 2022, with the expenses after 2022 consisting mostly of amortization of internal use software and capitalized real estate costs. The estimated costs of approximately $410 includes an expected $54 in capitalized development costs for internal use software to be amortized over the useful life of the software, typically 3 years, and approximately $23 of capitalized real estate assets to be amortized over their useful lives. Included in the estimated costs of $410, we expect to incur restructuring costs of approximately $158, including $73 of employee severance, and approximately $85 of other costs, including consulting expenses and the cost to retire certain IT applications.
Restructuring costs are reported as a charge to net income but not in core earnings. All other costs of the Hartford Next program will be included in insurance operating costs and other expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Relative to 2019 full year actual expenses, the Company recognized a net increase in insurance operating costs and other expenses of approximately
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
$47 over the last six months of 2020 and expects a net expense reduction of approximately $240 in 2021 and approximately $423 in 2022.
The following table presents Hartford Next program costs incurred, including restructuring costs, and expense savings realized in 2020 from the inception of the program on July 30, 2020 through December 31, 2020, and expected costs and expense savings in each year through the expected completion of the program on December 31, 2022:
[1] Does not include approximately $48 of IT asset amortization after 2022.
[2] Does not include approximately $19 of real estate amortization after 2022.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
2020 Financial Highlights
Þ Decreased $348 or 17% Þ Decreased $0.90 or 16% Ý Increased $6.54 or 15%
- A change from net realized capital gains in the
2019 period to losses in the 2020 period
- Decrease in net income + Increase in common stockholders' equity largely due to net income in excess of stockholder dividends and an increase in AOCI, primarily driven by an increase in net unrealized capital gains on available for sale
securities
+ Decrease in weighted average shares outstanding
- $220, after tax, of P&C COVID-19 claims including property, financial lines and workers’ compensation, net of favorable workers’ compensation frequency
- An increase in current accident year catastrophes
+ Decrease in dilutive shares outstanding
- A decrease in net investment income
- Higher mortality within group life driven by COVID-19
- Restructuring costs related to the Hartford Next initiative
+ Loss on reinsurance and loss on extinguishment of debt in 2019
+ Greater net favorable prior accident year development
+ Lower non-COVID-19 current accident year non-catastrophe property losses, lower personal automobile claim frequency, net of premium refunds, and lower P&C operating expenses
Þ Decreased 40 bps Þ Improved 0.8 points Þ Decreased 2.4 points
- Lower reinvestment rates and lower yield on
variable rate securities due to the decline in
interest rates
- Lower current accident year loss ratio in Personal Lines, due to lower automobile claim frequency
- Higher mortality in group life, driven by the direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19
- Lower net investment income
- More favorable prior accident year development with 2020 reserve reductions for catastrophes partially offset by reserve increases for A&E and sexual molestation and sexual abuse claims
- A decrease in net realized capital gains
+ A lower group disability loss ratio, driven by lower claim incidence and an increase in favorable prior incurral year development
- Lower expense ratio mostly driven by lower variable incentive compensation, staffing levels, and travel
+ Higher current accident year catastrophes, largely due to losses from civil unrest
+ Higher current accident year loss ratio in
Commercial Lines driven by COVID-19 losses, partially offset by lower non-catastrophe property losses
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Consolidated Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes as well as with the segment operating results sections of the MD&A.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Net income available to common stockholders decreased by $348 primarily driven by a $409 before tax change from net realized capital gains in the 2019 period to net realized capital losses in the 2020 period, $278 before tax of P&C COVID-19 claims in the 2020 period, higher mortality in group life, mostly driven by COVID-19, a $143 before tax increase in current accident year catastrophes, a $105 before tax decrease in net investment income, and $104 before tax of restructuring costs, partially offset by lower Personal Lines automobile claim frequency in the 2020 period net of premium credits given to policyholders in second quarter 2020, lower non-catastrophe property losses, a decrease in P&C insurance operating costs, higher net favorable P&C prior accident year development, and the effect of charges in 2019, including the Navigators ADC premium paid of $91 before tax and a $90 before tax loss on debt extinguishment.
For a discussion of the Company's operating results by segment, see MD&A - Segment Operating Summaries. In addition, for further discussion of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the Impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity section of this MD&A.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Revenue
Earned Premiums
[1]For the years ended 2020 and 2019, the total includes $9 and $10, respectively, recorded in Corporate other revenue.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Earned premiums increased primarily due to:
•An increase in Property and Casualty reflecting a 7% increase in Commercial Lines driven by the Navigators Group acquisition, partially offset by a 6% decline in Personal Lines. Driving part of the decrease in Personal Lines earned premiums was the impact of the Company offering a 15 percent credit on policyholders’ April, May and June personal automobile insurance premiums totaling $81.
•A 1% decrease in Group Benefits, principally driven by a decline in group life due to lower insured exposure on in-force policies.
Fee income decreased due to:
•Lower fee income in Hartford Funds largely due to a shift in mix of assets to lower fee generating funds, lower installment fee income in P&C and lower fee income on administrative services only business in Group Benefits.
Other revenues decreased primarily due to a decrease in income generated from the Talcott Resolution investment and less transition services revenue received related to the sale of the life and annuity business in 2018.
Net Investment Income
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Net investment income decreased primarily due to:
•Lower yield on fixed maturity investments resulting from lower reinvestment rates and lower yields on floating rate securities, partially offset by a higher level of invested assets, due in part to the acquisition of Navigators Group.
Net realized capital gains (losses) decreased from net gains in the 2019 period to net losses in the 2020 period, primarily driven by:
•Depreciation in the value of equity securities due to the significant decline in equity market levels in the first quarter of 2020 as well as realized losses upon sales of equity securities, partially offset by net realized gains upon termination of derivatives used to hedge against a decline in equity market levels.
•A loss of $48, before tax, on sale of the Company’s Continental Europe Operations, which the Company agreed to sell in September of 2020, net credit losses recognized on fixed maturities and an increase in the ACL on mortgage loans, partially offset by slightly higher net gains on sales of fixed maturity securities.
For further discussion of investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Realized Capital Gains and MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Benefits, losses and expenses
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Losses and LAE Incurred for P&C
Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased due to:
•An increase in incurred losses for Property & Casualty which was driven by an increase in Commercial Lines, partially offset by a decrease in Personal Lines, and was attributable to:
-An increase in Property & Casualty current accident year ("CAY") loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the effect on incurred losses of earned premium from the Navigators Group acquisition and COVID-19 incurred losses of $278 which is net of favorable frequency of workers’ compensation claims due to reduced business activity and lower payrolls. Partially offsetting the increase were lower weather-related non-COVID-19 non-catastrophe property claims and lower claim frequency in personal automobile due to shelter-in-place guidelines reducing miles driven.
-An increase in current accident year catastrophe losses of $143 before tax. Current accident year catastrophe losses for 2020 were primarily from civil unrest, a number of hurricanes and tropical storms, Pacific Coast wildfires and Northeast windstorms as well as tornado, wind and hail events in the South, Midwest and Central Plains. Catastrophe losses in the 2019 period were primarily from tornado, wind and hail events in the South, Midwest and Mountain West and winter storms across the country as well as from hurricanes and tropical storms in the Southeast. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property & Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance.
-Partially offset by more favorable Property & Casualty net prior accident year reserve development of $71, before tax. Prior accident year reserve development in the 2020 period was a favorable $136 before tax, with $529 of reserve reductions related to catastrophes, including decreases in estimated losses arising from wind and hail events in 2017, 2018 and 2019 and from the 2017 and 2018 California wildfires, including a $289 before tax subrogation benefit from PG&E. Reserve development in 2020 also included a $254 before tax increase in reserves for sexual molestation and sexual abuse claims, a $208 before tax increase in A&E reserves and a $102 before tax increase in reserves on Navigators related to 2018 and prior accident years. While $220 of A&E and $102 of Navigators’ reserve development has been economically ceded to NICO, the Company recognized a $312 deferred gain under retroactive reinsurance accounting with $10 of the $220 ceded A&E losses recognized as a benefit to income in 2020. Prior accident year development in 2019 primarily included reserve decreases for workers’ compensation, small commercial package business, catastrophes, personal lines automobile liability, and uncollectible reinsurance, partially offset by increases in general liability and professional liability, including increases in Navigators Group reserves upon acquisition of the business, and commercial lines automobile liability. For further discussion, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property & Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance.
Losses and LAE Incurred for Group Benefits
•Losses and LAE increased in Group Benefits driven by higher mortality on group life claims, primarily caused by direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by the impact of a lower group disability loss ratio driven by lower claim incidence and increased favorable prior incurral year development.
For further discussion of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the impact of COVID-19 on our financial
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
condition, results of operations and liquidity section of this MD&A
Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased from the prior year period primarily due to an increase in Commercial Lines mainly attributable to the impact of the Navigators Group acquisition, partially offset by decreases in Personal Lines and Group Benefits consistent with the decline in earned premium in those segments.
Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased due to:
•A reduction in incentive compensation and employee travel and benefits costs, a reduction in contingent consideration of $12 before tax in Hartford Funds associated with the acquisition of Lattice, and expense reductions from the Company’s Hartford Next operational and transformation cost reduction plan.
•Partially offsetting the decrease in expenses were a $40 before tax increase in the ACL on uncollectible premiums receivable in 2020 due to the economic impacts of COVID-19 and higher information technology costs within
Group Benefits and middle & large commercial, partially offset by Personal Lines technology expenses incurred in 2019. In addition, 2020 included a full year of operating costs incurred due to the Navigators Group acquisition in May of 2019, partially offset by lower integration and transaction costs in 2020.
Restructuring and other costs are due to the Company's Hartford Next operational transformation and cost reduction plan which includes $73 of incurred severance costs.
For further discussion of impacts resulting from the Hartford Next initiative, see MD&A - The Hartford's Operations, Operational Transformation and Cost Reduction Plan and Note 23 - Restructuring and Other Costs of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income tax expense decreased primarily due to a decline in income before tax.
For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
INVESTMENT RESULTS
[1] Primarily consists of equity fund investments, overseas deposits, consolidated investment funds and derivative instruments which are carried at fair value.
December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
Fixed maturities, AFS increased primarily due to net additions of corporate securities and an increase in valuations as a result of a decline in interest rates.
Short-term investments are slightly higher in order to fund asset purchase commitments at year end 2020, which were settled in January 2021.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
[1]Yields calculated using annualized net investment income divided by the monthly average invested assets at amortized cost as applicable, excluding repurchase agreement and securities lending collateral, if any, and derivatives book value.
[2]Includes net investment income on short-term investments.
[3]Primarily includes changes in fair value of certain equity fund investments and income from derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting and are used to hedge fixed maturities.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Total net investment income decreased primarily due to a lower yield on fixed maturity investments resulting from lower reinvestment rates and lower yields on floating rate securities, partially offset by a higher level of invested assets, due in part to the acquisition of Navigators Group.
Annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments and non-routine items on fixed maturities, which primarily include make-whole payments and prepayment fees, partially offset by paydowns, was down primarily due to lower reinvestment and short-term rates.
Average reinvestment rate, on fixed maturities and mortgage loans, excluding certain U.S. Treasury securities, for the
year-ended December 31, 2020, was 2.5% which was below the average yield of sales and maturities of 3.4% for the same period. The average reinvestment rate for the year-ended December 31, 2019 was 3.4% which was below the average yield of sales and maturities of 4.0%.
For the 2021 calendar year, we expect the annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments and non-routine items on fixed maturities, to be lower than the portfolio yield earned for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a lower yield on short-term investments and lower reinvestment rates. The estimated impact on net investment income yield is subject to change due to evolving market conditions and active portfolio management.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
[1]The net unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities included in net realized capital gains (losses) related to equity securities still held as of December 31, 2020, were $53 for the year-ended December 31, 2020. The net unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities included in net realized capital gains (losses) related to equity securities still held as of December 31, 2019, were $164 for the year-ended December 31, 2019. The net unrealized gains (losses) on equity securities included in net realized capital gains (losses) related to equity securities still held as of December 31, 2018, were $(80) for the year-ended December 31, 2018.
[2]Due to the adoption of accounting guidance for credit losses on January 1, 2020, realized capital losses previously reported as OTTI are now presented as credit losses which are net of any recoveries. For further information refer to Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies. In addition, see Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A.
[3]Represents the change in ACL recorded during the period following the adoption of accounting guidance for credit losses on January 1, 2020. For further information refer to Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies. In addition, see ACL on Mortgage Loans within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A.
[4]See Intent-to-Sell Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A.
[5]Includes gains (losses) on non-qualifying derivatives for 2020, 2019, and 2018 of $104, $(24), and $(12), respectively, gains (losses) from transactional foreign currency revaluation of $(1), $(9) and $1, respectively, and a loss of $48 from the sale of the Continental Europe Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year ended December 31, 2020
Gross gains and losses on sales were primarily driven by issuer-specific sales of corporate securities and tax-exempt municipal bonds, rebalancing within the foreign government sector, and sales of U.S. treasury securities for duration and/or liquidity management.
Equity securities net losses were driven by mark-to-market losses due to the decline in equity market levels in the first quarter and losses incurred on sales across multiple issuers as the Company reduced its exposure to equity securities, partially offset by mark-to-market equity gains given recent equity market performance and tighter credit spreads, which resulted in price appreciation of preferred equities.
Other, net gains are primarily due to $75 of realized gains on terminated derivatives used to hedge against a decline in equity market levels and $21 of gains on interest rate derivatives due to a decline in interest rates. These gains were partially offset by a loss of $48, before tax, on the sale of the Company’s Continental Europe Operations which the Company agreed to sell in September of 2020.
Year ended December 31, 2019
Gross gains and losses on sales were primarily driven by issuer-specific selling of corporate securities, continued reduction of tax-exempt municipal bonds and sales of U.S. treasuries for duration management.
Equity securities net gains were primarily driven by appreciation of equity securities due to higher equity market levels.
Other, net losses includes losses on interest rate derivatives of $34 due to higher rates, losses on equity derivatives of $17 due
to an increase in domestic equity markets, and losses of $9 due to foreign currency revaluation. These losses were partially offset by gains on credit derivatives of $27 due to credit spread tightening.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ, and in the past have differed, from those estimates.
The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability:
•property and casualty insurance product reserves, net of reinsurance;
•group benefit long-term disability ("LTD") reserves, net of reinsurance;
•evaluation of goodwill for impairment;
•valuation of investments and derivative instruments including evaluation of credit losses on fixed maturities, AFS and ACL on mortgage loans; and
•contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain of these estimates are particularly sensitive to market conditions, and deterioration and/or volatility in the worldwide debt or equity markets could have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements.
Property & Casualty Insurance Product Reserves
P&C Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, Net of Reinsurance, by Segment as of December 31, 2020
Loss and LAE Reserves, Net of Reinsurance as of December 31, 2020
[1]Commercial Lines policy packages that include property and general liability coverages are generally referred to as the package line of business.
For descriptions of the coverages provided under the lines of business shown above, see Part I - Item1, Business.
Overview of Reserving for Property and Casualty Insurance Claims
It typically takes many months or years to pay claims incurred under a property and casualty insurance product; accordingly, the Company must establish reserves at the time the loss is incurred. Most of the Company’s policies provide for occurrence-based
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
coverage where the loss is incurred when a claim event happens like an automobile accident, house or building fire or injury to an employee under a workers’ compensation policy. Some of the Company's policies, mostly for directors and officers insurance and errors and omissions insurance, are claims-made policies where the loss is incurred in the period the claim event is reported to the Company even if the loss event itself occurred in an earlier period.
Loss and loss adjustment expense reserves provide for the estimated ultimate costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company, less amounts paid to date. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual loss and loss adjustment expenses reported to the Company by claimants (“reported losses”). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. For most lines, Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. For certain lines acquired from the Navigators Group book of business, total reserves are evaluated on a policy year basis and then converted to accident year. A policy year is the calendar year in which a policy incepts.
Factors that Change Reserve Estimates- Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Inflation in claim costs, such as with medical care, hospital care, automobile parts, wages and home and building repair, would cause claims to settle for more than they are initially reserved. Changes in the economy can cause an increase or decrease in the number of reported claims (claim frequency). For example, an improving economy could result in more automobile miles driven and a higher number of automobile reported claims, or a change in economic conditions can lead to more or less workers’ compensation reported claims. An increase in the number or percentage of claims litigated can increase the average settlement amount per claim (claim severity). Changes in the judicial environment can affect interpretations of damages and how policy coverage applies which could increase or decrease claim severity. Over time, judges or juries in certain jurisdictions may be more inclined to determine liability and award damages. New legislation can also change how damages are defined or change the statutes of limitations for the filing of civil suits, resulting in greater claim frequency or severity. In addition, new types of injuries may arise from exposures not contemplated when the policies were written. Past examples include pharmaceutical products, silica, lead paint, sexual molestation and sexual abuse and construction defects.
Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal Company operations. A delay or acceleration in handling claims may signal a need to increase or reduce reserves from what was initially estimated. New lines of business may have loss development patterns that are not well established. Changes in the geographic mix of business, changes in the mix of business
by industry and changes in the mix of business by policy limit or deductible can increase the risk that losses will ultimately develop differently than the loss development patterns assumed in our reserving. In addition, changes in the quality of risk selection in underwriting and changes in interpretations of policy language could increase or decrease ultimate losses from what was assumed in establishing the reserves.
In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. The Company assumes property and casualty risks from other insurance companies as part of its Global Re business acquired from Navigators Group and from certain pools and associations. Global Re, which is a part of the global specialty business, mostly assumes property, casualty, surety, agriculture, and marine risks and, until recently, assumed accident and health insurance risks. Changes in the case reserving and reporting patterns of insurance companies ceding to The Hartford can create additional uncertainty in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates of direct and assumed reserves, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future.
Reinsurance Recoverables- Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company records reinsurance recoverables for loss and loss adjustment expenses ceded to its reinsurers representing the anticipated recovery from reinsurers of unpaid claims, including IBNR.
The Company estimates the portion of losses and loss adjustment expenses to be ceded based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, including an estimate of IBNR for losses that will ultimately be ceded.
The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management’s best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers’ unwillingness or inability to pay. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance comprises an ACL and an allowance for disputed balances. The ACL primarily considers the credit quality of the Company's reinsurers while the allowance for disputes considers recent outcomes in arbitration and litigation in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and recent commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants that may signal how the Company’s own reinsurance claims may settle. Where its reinsurance contracts permit, the Company secures funding of future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $105 as of December 31, 2020, comprised of $44 related to Commercial Lines, $1 related to Personal Lines and $60 related to Property & Casualty Other Operations.
The Company’s estimate of reinsurance recoverables, net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses for direct and assumed exposures.
Review of Reserve Adequacy- The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business or more detailed level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For Property & Casualty Other Operations, asbestos and environmental (“Run-off A&E”) reserves are reviewed by type of event rather than by line of business.
Reserve adjustments, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in establishing the reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses and in recording the reinsurance recoverables for ceded unpaid losses.
Reserving Methodology
The following is a discussion of the reserving methods used for the Company's property and casualty lines of business other than asbestos and environmental.
Reserves are set by line of business within the operating segments. A single line of business may be written in more than one segment. Lines of business for which reported losses emerge over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which reported losses emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. The Company’s shortest-tail lines of business are homeowners, commercial property, marine and automobile physical damage. The longest tail lines of business include workers’ compensation, general liability, professional liability and assumed reinsurance. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods after a given accident year and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses.
Use of Actuarial Methods and Judgments- The Company’s reserving actuaries regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. A variety of actuarial methods and judgments are used for most lines of business to arrive at selections of estimated ultimate losses and loss adjustment expenses. New methods may be added for specific lines over time to inform these selections where appropriate. The reserve selections incorporate input, as appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management about reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. Most reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for homeowners, commercial property, marine, automobile physical damage, automobile liability, package property business, and workers’ compensation. Other reserves, including most general liability and professional liability lines, are reviewed semi-annually. Certain additional reserves are also reviewed semi-annually or annually, including reserves for losses incurred in accident years older than twelve years for Personal Lines and older than twenty years for Commercial Lines, as well as reserves for bond, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures such as construction defects, and unallocated loss adjustment expenses. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually or annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters and, if necessary, performs a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change.
An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined by starting with the average loss ratio of
recent prior accident years and adjusting that ratio for the effect of expected changes to earned pricing, loss frequency and severity, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period.
As losses emerge or develop in periods subsequent to a given accident year, reserving actuaries use other methods to estimate ultimate unpaid losses in addition to the expected loss ratio method. These primarily include paid and reported loss development methods, frequency/severity techniques and the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method (a combination of the expected loss ratio and paid development or reported development method). Within any one line of business, the methods that are given more influence vary based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates representing a range of actuarial indications.
Reserve Discounting- Most of the Company’s property and casualty insurance product reserves are not discounted. However, the Company has discounted liabilities funded through structured settlements and has discounted a portion of workers’ compensation reserves that have a fixed and determinable payment stream. For further discussion of these discounted liabilities, see Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Differences Between GAAP and Statutory Basis Reserves- As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, U.S. property and casualty insurance product reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance recoverables, reported under U.S. GAAP were lower than net reserves reported on a statutory basis, primarily due to reinsurance recoverables on two ceded retroactive reinsurance agreements that are recorded as a reduction of other liabilities under statutory accounting. One of the retroactive reinsurance agreements covers substantially all adverse development on asbestos and environmental reserves subsequent to 2016 and the other covers adverse development on Navigators Insurers' existing net loss and allocated loss adjustment reserves as of December 31, 2018. Under both agreements, the Company cedes to NICO, a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. ("Berkshire").
Reserving Methods by Line of Business- Apart from Run-off A&E which is discussed in the following section on Property & Casualty Other Operations, below is a general discussion of which reserving methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), other methods than those described for the line of business may also be employed for a coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Preferred Reserving Methods by Line of Business
In the final step of the reserve review process, senior reserving actuaries and senior management apply their judgment to determine the appropriate level of reserves considering the actuarial indications and other factors not contemplated in the actuarial indications. Those factors include, but are not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions used in the current actuarial indications, the maturity of the accident
year, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. The Company also considers the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. In general, adjustments are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. Such adjustments of reserves are referred to as “prior accident year development”. Increases in previous estimates of ultimate loss costs are referred to as either an increase in prior accident year reserves or as unfavorable reserve development. Decreases in previous estimates of ultimate loss costs are referred to as either a decrease in prior accident year reserves or as favorable reserve development. Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results.
For a discussion of changes to reserve estimates recorded in 2020, see Note 12 - Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Current Trends Contributing to Reserve Uncertainty
The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty insurance business. The Hartford is, therefore, subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from changes in loss trends and other conditions which could become material at any point in time. As market conditions and loss trends develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve).
General liability- Within Commercial Lines, including the acquired Navigators Group book of business, and Property & Casualty Other Operations, the Company has exposure to general liability claims, including from bodily injury, property damage and product liability. Reserves for these exposures can be particularly difficult to estimate due to the long development pattern and uncertainty about how cases will settle. In particular, the Company has exposure to bodily injury claims that is the result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica, talcum powder, head injuries and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. In addition, the Company has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions, and other organizations, including the Boy Scouts of America, relating to sexual molestation and sexual abuse. State “reviver” statutes, extending statutes of limitations for certain sexual molestation and sexual abuse claims, could result in additional litigation or could result in unexpected sexual molestation and sexual abuse losses. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods, which can raise complex coverage issues with significant effects on the ultimate scope of coverage. Such exposures may also be impacted by insured bankruptcies. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company monitors trends in litigation, the external environment including legislation, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company’s reserves. Additionally, uncertainty in estimated claim severity causes reserve variability, particularly with respect to changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices.
Workers’ compensation- Included in both small commercial and in middle & large commercial, workers’ compensation is the Company’s single biggest line of business and the property and casualty line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. To the extent that patterns in the frequency of settlement payments deviate from historical patterns, loss reserve estimates would be less reliable. Medical costs make up approximately 50% of workers’ compensation payments. As such, reserve estimates for workers’ compensation are particularly sensitive to changes in medical inflation, the changing use of medical care procedures and changes in state legislative and regulatory environments. In addition, a deteriorating economic environment can reduce the ability of an injured worker to return to work and lengthen the time a worker receives disability benefits. In National Accounts, reserves for large deductible workers’ compensation insurance require estimating losses attributable to the deductible amount that will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company is contractually liable.
Commercial Lines automobile- Uncertainty in estimated claim severity causes reserve variability for commercial automobile losses including reserve variability due to changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices as well as due to changes in the external environment.
Directors' and officers' insurance- Uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits can result in reserve volatility for both directors' and officers' insurance claims. Additionally, the Company’s exposure to losses under directors’ and officers’ insurance policies, both domestically and internationally, is primarily in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex.
Personal Lines automobile- While claims emerge over relatively shorter periods, estimates can still vary due to a number of factors, including uncertain estimates of frequency and severity trends. Severity trends are affected by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices as well as by changes in the external environment. Changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. Severity trends have increased in recent accident years, in part driven by more expensive parts associated with new automobile technology, causing additional uncertainty about the reliability of past patterns. In addition, the introduction of new products and class plans has led to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Such changes in mix increase the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business.
Assumed reinsurance- While the pricing and reserving processes can be challenging and idiosyncratic for insurance companies, the inherent uncertainties of setting prices and estimating such reserves are even greater for the reinsurer. This is primarily due to the longer time between the date of an occurrence and the reporting of claims to the reinsurer, the diversity of development patterns among different types of reinsurance treaties or contracts, the necessary reliance on the ceding companies for information regarding reported claims and differing pricing and reserving practices among ceding companies. In addition, trends that have affected development of liabilities in the past may not necessarily occur or impact liability
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
development in the same manner or to the same degree in the future. As a result, actual losses and LAE may deviate, perhaps substantially, from the expected estimates.
International business- In addition to several of the line-specific trends listed above, the International business acquired through the Navigators Group book of business may have additional uncertainty due to geopolitical, foreign currency, and trade dispute risks.
COVID-19 impacts- As further explained under "Impacts of COVID-19" within The Hartford's Operations section of MD&A, through December 31, 2020, the Company incurred $278 of COVID-19 claims in P&C, including in workers' compensation, property and financial lines. Under workers’ compensation, we could experience a continuation of COVID-19 incurred losses, particularly due to laws or directives in certain states that require coverage of COVID-19 claims for health care and other essential workers based on a presumption that they contracted the virus while working. We could also incur losses on general liability policies if claimants can successfully assert that insureds were negligent from protecting employees, customers and others from exposure though we do not expect this exposure to be significant. Under commercial property policies, we have reserved for business interruption claims that pertain to policies in middle & large commercial and in global specialty which do not require direct physical loss or property damage. We have also experienced an increase in COVID-19 related claims under director's and officer's insurance policies. In other cases, particularly in small commercial, where there are policy exclusions and the requirement that there be direct physical loss or damage to the property, we have not recorded loss reserves as there is no coverage though we have recorded a reserve for legal defense costs.
In addition to the direct impacts of COVID-19 mentioned above, we are monitoring for indirect impacts as well. In our commercial surety lines there continues to be the potential for elevated frequency and severity due to an increase in the number of bankruptcies, especially in small businesses and impacted industries such as hospitality, entertainment and transportation. In construction surety, there is the potential for elevated losses from contractors who experience project shutdowns or payment delays, which negatively impact their cash flows, or result in disruptions in their supply chains, labor shortages or inflation in the cost of materials.
Reserve estimates for COVID-19 claims are difficult to estimate. In establishing reserves for COVID-19 incurred claims through December 31, 2020, we have provided IBNR at a higher percentage of ultimate estimated incurred losses than usual as we expect longer claim reporting patterns given the economic effects of COVID-19. For example, we expect longer delays than usual between the time a worker is treated and the date the claim is eventually submitted for workers' compensation coverage. Reserve estimates for D&O, E&O and employment practices liability are subject to significant uncertainty given that estimates must be made of the expected ultimate severity of claims that have recently been reported. Several lines have experienced a decline in frequency during the pandemic months; however, uncertainty remains with respect to severity given the pandemic's potential impact on economic activity, driving behaviors, and the healthcare and legal systems. Changes in the legal environment and litigation process, including but not limited
to court delays and closings, may also have potential impacts on development patterns for liability lines.
Impact of Key Assumptions on Reserves
As stated above, the Company’s practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements within its reserve estimation process. The Company does not consistently use statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not disclose reserve ranges.
Across most lines of business, the most important reserve assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. The trend in loss cost frequency and severity is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible.
The following discussion discloses possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key indicators of potential losses. For automobile liability lines in both Personal Lines and Commercial Lines, the key indicator is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. For workers’ compensation and general liability, loss development patterns are a key indicator, particularly for more mature accident years. For workers’ compensation, paid loss development patterns have been impacted by medical cost inflation and other changes in loss cost trends. For general liability, incurred loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) and a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims.
Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key indicators or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company’s reserves in total. For any one reserving line of business, the estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key indicators is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. The variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and, therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims
How A&E Reserves are Set- The process for establishing reserves for asbestos and environmental claims first involves estimating the required reserves gross of ceded reinsurance and then estimating reinsurance recoverables.
In establishing reserves for gross asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds’ estimated liabilities for such claims by examining exposures for individual insureds and assessing how coverage applies. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, the level of plaintiff demands, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential impact of other defendants being in bankruptcy.
Similarly, the Company reviews exposures to establish gross environmental reserves. The Company considers several factors in estimating environmental liabilities, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds’ alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, the appropriateness and cost of remediation, the nature of governmental enforcement activities or mandated remediation efforts and potential impact of other defendants being in bankruptcy.
After evaluating its insureds’ probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company evaluates the insurance coverage in place for such claims. The Company considers its insureds’ total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language, the nature of how policy limits are enforced on multi-year policies and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any.
The estimated liabilities of insureds and the Company’s exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company’s lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges.
For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also analyzes its historical paid and reported losses and expenses year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. The historical losses and expenses are analyzed on both a direct basis and net of reinsurance.
Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company’s experience with reinsurance collections. See the section that follows entitled A&E Adverse Development Cover that discusses the impact the reinsurance agreement with NICO may have on future adverse development of asbestos and environmental reserves, if any.
Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of A&E Reserves- A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for gross asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment, resolution of coverage disputes with our policyholders and the expense to indemnity ratio. Reserve estimates for gross asbestos and environmental reserves are subject to greater variability than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures.
The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are appropriate. Future developments could continue to cause the Company to change its estimates of its gross asbestos and environmental reserves. Losses ceded under the adverse development cover ("A&E ADC") with NICO in excess of the ceded premium paid of $650 have resulted in a deferred gain resulting in a timing difference between when gross reserves are increased and when reinsurance recoveries are recognized. This timing difference results in a charge to net income until such periods when the recoveries are recognized. Consistent with past practice, the Company will continue to monitor its reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations regularly, including its annual reviews of asbestos liabilities, reinsurance recoverables, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, and environmental liabilities. Where future developments indicate, we will make appropriate adjustments to the reserves at that time.
Total P&C Insurance Product Reserves Development
In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company’s property and casualty insurance products at December 31, 2020 represent the Company’s best estimate of its ultimate liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, it is possible that management’s estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
may change in the future and that the required adjustment to currently recorded reserves could be material to the Company’s results of operations and liquidity.
Rollforward of Property and Casualty Insurance Product Liabilities for Unpaid Losses and LAE for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
[1]Includes a cumulative effect adjustment of $1 and $(1) for Commercial Lines and Property & Casualty Other Operations respectively, representing an adjustment to the ACL recorded on adoption of accounting guidance for credit losses on January 1, 2020. See Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
[2]Prior accident year development does not include the benefit of a portion of losses ceded under the Navigators and A&E ADC which, under retroactive reinsurance accounting, is deferred and is recognized over the period the ceded losses are recovered in cash from NICO. For additional information regarding the two adverse development cover reinsurance agreements, refer to Note 12 - Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[3]The “loss and loss expense paid ratio” represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums and fee income.
[4]“Prior accident year development (pts)” represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums.
In December, 2019, the judge overseeing the bankruptcy of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company (together, “PG&E”) approved an $11 billion settlement of insurance subrogation claims to resolve all such claims arising
from the 2017 Northern California wildfires and 2018 Camp wildfire. That settlement was contingent upon, among other things, the judge entering an order confirming PG&E’s chapter 11 bankruptcy plan (“PG&E Plan”) incorporating the settlement
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
agreement. On June 20, 2020, the bankruptcy court judge approved the PG&E Plan and PG&E subsequently transferred the $11 billion settlement amount to a trust designed to allocate and distribute the settlement among subrogation holders, including certain of the Company’s insurance subsidiaries. In the second quarter of 2020, the Company recorded an estimated $289
subrogation benefit though the ultimate amount it collects will depend on how the Company’s ultimate paid claims subject to subrogation compare to other insurers’ ultimate paid claims subject to subrogation. In 2020, the Company received distributions, net of attorney costs, of $227.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Rollforward of Property and Casualty Insurance Product Liabilities for Unpaid Losses and LAE for the Year Ended December 31, 2019
[1]Prior accident year development does not include the benefit of a portion of losses ceded under the Navigators ADC which, under retroactive reinsurance accounting, is deferred and recognized over the period the ceded losses are recovered in cash from NICO. For additional information regarding the Navigators ADC agreement, refer to Note 12 - Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[2]The “loss and loss expense paid ratio” represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums and fee income.
[3]“Prior accident year development (pts)” represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Rollforward of Property and Casualty Insurance Product Liabilities for Unpaid Losses and LAE for the Year Ended December 31, 2018
[1]The “loss and loss expense paid ratio” represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums and fee income.
[2]“Prior accident year development (pts)” represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums.
[1]Refers to reinsurance recoverable under the Company's Property Aggregate treaty. For further information on the treaty, refer to Part II, Item 7, MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management - Insurance Risk.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For discussion of the factors contributing to unfavorable (favorable) prior accident year reserve development, refer to Note 12 - Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Property & Casualty Other Operations
Net reserves and reserve activity in Property & Casualty Other Operations are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, and “all other”. The “all other” category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, head injuries, sexual molestation and sexual abuse and other long-tail liabilities. In addition to various insurance and assumed reinsurance exposures, "all other" includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves. "All other" also includes the Company’s allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, net reserves for the related cause of loss (including asbestos, environmental or all other) are increased for the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement.
P&C Other Operations
Total Reserves, Net of Reinsurance
Asbestos and Environmental Reserves
The vast majority of the Company's exposure to A&E relates to policy coverages provided prior to 1986, reported within the P&C Other Operations segment (“Run-off A&E”). In addition, since 1986, the Company has written asbestos and environmental exposures under general liability policies and pollution liability under homeowners policies, which are reported in the Commercial Lines and Personal Lines segments.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Run-off A&E Summary as of December 31, 2020
[1]Including $898 of ceded losses for Run-off A&E and a ($38) reduction in ceded losses for Commercial Lines and Personal Lines, cumulative net incurred losses of $860 have been ceded to NICO under an adverse development cover reinsurance agreement. See the section that follows entitled A&E Adverse Development Cover for additional information.
Rollforward of Run-off A&E Losses and LAE
[1] Related to the reclassification of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance from the "all other" category of P&C Other Operations reserves.
A&E Adverse Development Cover
Effective December 31, 2016, the Company entered into an A&E ADC reinsurance agreement with NICO, a subsidiary of Berkshire, to reduce uncertainty about potential adverse development. Under the A&E ADC, the Company paid a reinsurance premium of $650 for NICO to assume adverse net loss and allocated loss adjustment expense reserve development up to $1.5 billion above the Company’s existing net A&E reserves
as of December 31, 2016 of approximately $1.7 billion, including both Run-off A&E and A&E reserves in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines. The $650 reinsurance premium was placed in a collateral trust account as security for NICO’s claim payment obligations to the Company. The Company has retained the risk of collection on amounts due from other third-party reinsurers and continues to be responsible for claims handling and other administrative services, subject to certain conditions. The A&E ADC covers substantially all the Company’s A&E reserve development up to the reinsurance limit.
Under retroactive reinsurance accounting, net adverse A&E reserve development after December 31, 2016 will result in an offsetting reinsurance recoverable up to the $1.5 billion limit. Cumulative ceded losses up to the $650 reinsurance premium paid have been recognized as a dollar-for-dollar offset to direct losses incurred. Cumulative ceded losses exceeding the $650 reinsurance premium paid have resulted in a deferred gain. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has incurred a cumulative $860 in adverse development on A&E reserves that have been ceded under the A&E ADC treaty with NICO, including $898 for Run-off A&E reserves and ($38) for A&E reserves in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines. As such, $640 of coverage is available for future adverse net reserve development, if any. As a result, the Company has recorded a $210 deferred gain within other liabilities, representing the difference between the reinsurance recoverable of $860 and ceded premium paid of $650. The deferred gain is recognized over the claim settlement period in the proportion of the amount of cumulative ceded losses collected from the reinsurer to the estimated ultimate reinsurance recoveries. Consequently, until periods when the deferred gain is recognized as a benefit to earnings, cumulative adverse development of asbestos and environmental claims will result in charges against earnings, which may be significant.
Net and Gross Survival Ratios
Net and gross survival ratios are a measure of the quotient of the carried reserves divided by average annual payments (net of reinsurance and on a gross basis) and is an indication of the number of years that carried reserves would last (i.e. survive) if future annual payments were consistent with the calculated historical average.
Since December 31, 2016, asbestos and environmental net reserves have been declining since all adverse development has been ceded to NICO, up to a limit of $1.5 billion and the deferred gain on retroactive reinsurance has been recorded within other liabilities rather than in net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves. Recoveries from NICO will not be collected until the Company has cumulative loss payments of more than the $1.7 billion carrying value of net reserves as of December 31, 2016. Accordingly, the payment of losses without any current collection of recoveries from NICO has reduced the Company’s net loss reserves which decreases the net survival ratios such that, unadjusted, the net survival ratios would not be representative of the true number of years of average loss payments covered by the reserves. Therefore, the net survival ratios presented in the table below are calculated before considering the effect of the A&E ADC reinsurance agreement but net of other reinsurance in place.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Net and Gross Survival Ratios
[1] As of December 31, 2020, the one year net survival ratios after considering the reduction in reserves for losses ceded to the ADC were 4.1 and 2.6 for asbestos and environmental, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the three year net survival ratios after considering the ADC were 4.7 and 2.7, respectively.
Run-off A&E Paid and Incurred Losses and LAE Development
Annual Reserve Reviews
Review of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves
The Company performs its regular comprehensive annual review of asbestos and environmental reserves in the fourth quarter, including both Run-off A&E (P&C Other Operations) and asbestos and environmental reserves included in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines. As part of the evaluation of asbestos and environmental reserves in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos and environmental liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts.
2020 comprehensive annual reviews
As a result of the 2020 fourth quarter review, the Company increased estimated asbestos reserves before NICO reinsurance in P&C Other Operations by $130, primarily due to an increase in the rate of asbestos claims settlements for both mesothelioma
and non-mesothelioma claims. In addition, average settlement values and defense costs were higher than anticipated, driven by elevated plaintiff demands. Overall, the number of claim filings in the period covered by the 2020 study was roughly flat with the 2019 study, driven by an increase in non-mesothelioma claim filings, while the number of mesothelioma claim filings decreased as expected. The increase in asbestos reserves was offset by $132 reinsurance recoverable under the NICO treaty, recognizing ($2) in reserve releases not subject to the NICO treaty.
As a result of the 2020 fourth quarter review, the Company increased estimated environmental reserves before NICO reinsurance in P&C Other Operations by $106, primarily due to an increasing number of claims and suits alleging contamination from or exposure to per & polyfluoroalkyl substances ("PFAS"). In addition, higher than anticipated remediation costs and legal defense costs also contributed to the reserve increase. The increase in environmental reserves was offset by a $106 reinsurance recoverable under the NICO treaty.
The total $236 increase in asbestos and environmental reserves in P&C Other Operations was offset by a $238 reinsurance recoverable under the NICO treaty, with a ($2) release in asbestos reserves not subject to the NICO treaty. Including a reduction of asbestos and environmental reserves in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines, the net increase in A&E reserves ceded to the A&E ADC in 2020 was $220 offset by a $220 increase in reinsurance recoverables under the NICO treaty. However, since cumulative losses ceded to the A&E ADC of $860 exceed the $650 of ceded premium paid, the Company recognized a $210 increase in deferred gain on retroactive reinsurance, resulting in the Company recording a charge to earnings of $208 in 2020, consisting of the $210 deferred gain net of the $2 of favorable development on A&E reserves not subject to the NICO treaty.
2019 comprehensive annual reviews
During the 2019 fourth quarter review, the Company increased estimated asbestos reserves before NICO reinsurance in P&C Other Operations by $76, primarily due to an increase in average settlement values, most notably from mesothelioma claims, driven by elevated plaintiff demands. In addition, cost-sharing agreements and settlements with certain insureds reduced the uncertainty of the Company’s asbestos liability but resulted in a reserve increase. Partially offsetting the adverse development was a decrease in the number of claim filings, most notably from mesothelioma claims. The increase in reserves was offset by a $76 reinsurance recoverable under the NICO treaty.
As a result of the 2019 fourth quarter review, the Company increased estimated environmental reserves before NICO reinsurance in P&C Other Operations by $56, primarily due to regulatory remediation requirements that changed in 2019 for certain sites polluted by coal ash and resulted in more costly and extensive remediation plans, a higher than anticipated number of claims associated with PFAS, and increased defense and cleanup costs associated with Superfund sites. The increase in environmental reserves was offset by a $56 reinsurance recoverable under the NICO treaty.
The total $132 increase in asbestos and environmental reserves in P&C Other Operations was offset by a $132 reinsurance recoverable under the NICO treaty. Including a reduction of asbestos and environmental reserves in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines, the net increase in A&E reserves in 2019 was $117 offset by a $117 increase in reinsurance recoverables under the NICO treaty.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For information regarding the 2018 comprehensive annual review, refer to Part 2, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in The Hartford’s 2019 Form 10-K Annual Report.
Major Categories of Asbestos Accounts
Direct asbestos exposures include both Known and Unallocated Direct Accounts.
•Known Direct Accounts- includes both Major Asbestos Defendants and Non-Major Accounts, and represent approximately 71% of the Company's total Direct gross asbestos reserves as of December 31, 2020 compared to approximately 73% as of December 31, 2019. Major Asbestos Defendants have been defined as the “Top 70” accounts in Tillinghast's published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts, while Non-Major accounts are comprised of all other direct asbestos accounts and largely represent smaller and more peripheral defendants. Major Asbestos Defendants have the fewest number of asbestos accounts.
•Unallocated Direct Accounts- includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. These exposures represent approximately 29% of the Company's Direct gross asbestos reserves as of December 31, 2020 compared to approximately 27% as of December 31, 2019.
Review of "All Other" Reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations
Prior year development on all other reserves resulted in increases of $50, $21 and $65, respectively for calendar years 2020, 2019 and 2018. Included in the 2020 adverse reserve development was a $35 increase in reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses ("ULAE"), primarily due to an increase in expected aggregate claim handling costs associated with asbestos and environmental claims, as well as higher than anticipated unallocated loss adjustment expenses in recent years, prompting an increase in the projected run rate expense. In addition, elevated claim activity related to certain mass torts and assumed residual value policies contributed to the overall reserve increases, offset by favorable development from previously disputed or potentially uncollectible reinsurance.
The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management’s best estimate of
reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers’ unwillingness or inability to pay. In performing its assessment, the Company evaluates the collectibility of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in Property & Casualty Other Operations. In conducting these evaluations, the company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company’s reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. As of 2020, 2019, and 2018 the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Property & Casualty Other Operations totaled $60, $71 and $105, respectively. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, particularly for older, long-term casualty liabilities, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company’s reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required.
Impact of Re-estimates on Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves
Estimating property and casualty insurance product reserves uses a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary materially from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Prior accident year reserve development is generally due to the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or due to changes in interpretations of information and trends.
The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past ten years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The ranges presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last ten years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. For further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves, see Preferred Reserving Methods by Line of Business and Impact of Key Assumptions on Reserves sections.
Range of Prior Accident Year Unfavorable (Favorable) Development for the Ten Years Ended December 31, 2020
[1]Excluding the reserve increases for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total property and casualty insurance ranged from (1.5%) to 1.0%.
The potential variability of the Company’s property and casualty insurance product reserves would normally be expected to vary
by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
variability for each of the segments are discussed under Critical Accounting Estimates for Property & Casualty Insurance Product Reserves and Asbestos and Environmental Reserves. See the section entitled Property & Casualty Other Operations, Annual Reserve Reviews about the impact that the A&E ADC retroactive reinsurance agreement with NICO may have on net reserve changes of asbestos and environmental reserves going forward.
The following table summarizes the effect of reserve re-estimates, net of reinsurance, on calendar year operations for the
ten-year period ended December 31, 2020. The total of each column details the amount of reserve re-estimates made in the indicated calendar year and shows the accident years to which the re-estimates are applicable. The amounts in the total column on the far right represent the cumulative reserve re-estimates during the ten year period ended December 31, 2020 for the indicated accident year in each row. This table does not include Navigators Group reserve re-estimates for periods prior to the acquisition of the business on May 23, 2019.
Effect of Net Reserve Re-estimates on Calendar Year Operations
[1]For the 2020 and 2019 calendar years, net favorable prior accident year development recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations was $(448) rather than $(136) and $65 rather than $81, respectively, as shown in this table as the Company recognized a $312 and $16 deferred gain on retroactive reinsurance. For additional information regarding the two adverse development cover reinsurance agreements, refer to Note 12 - Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[2]For calendar years before 2017, the 2010 and prior accident year development includes adverse development for A&E reserves. Beginning with the 2017 calendar year, A&E reserve development has been ceded to NICO.
The commentary below explains, by accident year, the total prior accident year development recognized over the past 10 years.
Accident years 2010 and Prior
The net increases in estimates of ultimate losses for accident years 2010 and prior are driven mostly by increased reserves for asbestos and environmental reserves, and also by increased estimates for customs bonds, sexual molestation and sexual abuse and other mass torts claims.
Partially offsetting these reserve increases was favorable development in general liability and personal automobile liability.
Accident year 2011
Unfavorable changes in estimates of ultimate losses on accident year 2011 were primarily related to workers' compensation and commercial automobile liability. Workers' compensation loss cost trends were higher than initially expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. Unfavorable commercial automobile liability reserve re-estimates were driven by higher frequency of large loss bodily injury claims.
Accident years 2012 and 2013
Estimates of ultimate losses were decreased for accident years 2012 and 2013 due to favorable frequency and/or medical severity trends for workers’ compensation and favorable professional liability claim emergence. Favorable emergence of property lines of business, including catastrophes, for the 2013 accident year, is partially offset by increased reserves in automobile liability due to increased severity of large claims.
Accident years 2014 and 2015
Changes in estimates of ultimate losses for accident years 2014 and 2015 were largely driven by unfavorable frequency and severity trends for personal and commercial automobile liability, increased severity of liability claims on package business and increased estimated severity on the acquired Navigators Group book of business related to U.S. construction, premises liability, products liability and excess casualty offset by favorable frequency and medical severity trends for workers' compensation.
Accident year 2016
Estimates of ultimate losses were decreased for the 2016 accident year largely due to reserve decreases on short-tail lines of business, where results emerge more quickly, and workers’ compensation due to lower estimated claim severity, somewhat offset by unfavorable reserve estimates for higher hazard general liability exposures due to increased frequency and severity trends, higher estimated severity in middle & large commercial and on the acquired Navigators Group book of business related to U.S. construction, premises liability, products liability and excess casualty.
Accident year 2017
Ultimate loss estimates were decreased for the 2017 accident year mainly due to release of reserves related to catastrophes, lower reserve estimates in personal automobile liability due to emergence of lower estimated severity and lower reserve estimates for workers’ compensation related to lower than previously estimated claim severity , somewhat offset by
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
increases in estimates of ultimate losses in general liability and bond. Partially offsetting was an increase to general liability reserves that was related to high hazard exposures which experienced increased frequency and severity trends. In addition, unfavorable bond reserve re-estimates were driven by large claims. On the Navigators Group book of business, reserve increases for professional liability were related to large syndicate D&O losses.
Accident year 2018
Ultimate loss estimates were decreased for the 2018 accident year mainly due to reduction in estimated catastrophe reserves for California wildfires and for various wind and hail events. Reserve estimates were also reduced, to a lesser extent, for personal automobile liability which decreased due to lower than previously expected claim severity. These reserve decreases were slightly offset by increases in commercial automobile liability, professional liability and general liability. Commercial automobile liability reserve increases were related to higher estimated severity on middle & large commercial. Increases in general liability reserves for middle market and complex liability claims were also largely due to higher than previously expected severity. On the Navigators Group book of business, reserve increases for professional liability were related to large loss activity and increased estimated severity on directors and officers reserves.
Accident year 2019
Ultimate loss estimates were decreased for the 2019 accident year mainly due to favorable emergence of property lines of business, mainly related to catastrophes, slightly offset by increases in commercial automobile liability reserves due to higher than expected large losses in middle & large commercial.
Group Benefit LTD Reserves, Net of Reinsurance
The Company establishes reserves for group life and accident & health contracts, including long-term disability coverage, for both reported claims and claims related to insured events that the Company estimates have been incurred but have not yet been reported. As long-term disability reserves are long-tail claim liabilities, they are discounted because the payment pattern and the ultimate costs are reasonably fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. The Company held $6,494 and $6,616 of LTD unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Reserving Methodology
How Reserves are Set - A Disabled Life Reserve ("DLR") is calculated for each LTD claim. The DLR for each claim is the expected present value of all future benefit payments starting with the known monthly gross benefit which is reduced for estimates of the expected claim recovery due to return to work or claimant death, offsets from other income including offsets from Social Security benefits, and discounting where the discount rate is tied to expected investment yield at the time the claim is incurred. Estimated future benefit payments represent the monthly income benefit that is paid until recovery, death or expiration of benefits. Claim recoveries are estimated based on claim characteristics such as age and diagnosis and represent an estimate of benefits that will terminate, generally as a result of the claimant returning to work or being deemed able to return to work. For claims recently closed due to recovery, a portion of the
DLR is retained for the possibility that the claim reopens upon further evidence of disability. In addition, a reserve for estimated unpaid claim expenses is included in the DLR.
The DLR also includes a liability for potential payments to pending claimants beyond the elimination period who have not yet been approved for LTD. In these cases, the present value of future benefits is reduced for the likelihood of claim denial based on Company experience.
Estimates for incurred but not reported ("IBNR") claims are made by applying completion factors to expected emerged experience by line of business. Included within IBNR are bulk reserves for claims reported but still within the waiting period until benefits are paid, typically 3 or 6 months depending on the contract. Completion factors are derived from standard actuarial techniques using triangles that display historical claim count emergence by incurral month. These estimates are reviewed for reasonableness and are adjusted for current trends and other factors expected to cause a change in claim emergence. The reserves include an estimate of unpaid claim expenses, including a provision for the cost of initial set-up of the claim once reported.
For all products, including LTD, there is a period generally ranging from two to twelve months, depending on the product and line of business, where emerged claims for an incurral year are not yet credible enough to be a basis for estimating reserves. In these cases, the ultimate loss is estimated using earned premium multiplied by an expected loss ratio based on pricing assumptions of claim incidence, claim severity, and earned pricing.
Impact of Key Assumptions on Reserves
The key assumptions affecting our group life and accident & health reserves including disability include:
Discount Rate - The discount rate is the interest rate at which expected future claim cash flows are discounted to determine the present value. A higher selected discount rate results in a lower reserve. If the discount rate is higher than our future investment returns, our invested assets will not earn enough investment income to cover the discount accretion on our claim reserves which would negatively affect our profits. For each incurral year, the discount rates are estimated based on investment yields expected to be earned net of investment expenses. The incurral year is the year in which the claim is incurred and the estimated settlement pattern is determined. Once established, discount rates for each incurral year are unchanged except that LTD reserves assumed from the acquisition of Aetna's U.S. group life and disability business are all discounted using rates as of the November 1, 2017 acquisition date. The weighted average discount rate on LTD reserves was 3.4% in 2020 and 2019. Had the discount rate for each incurral year been 10 basis points lower at the time they were established, our LTD unpaid loss and loss adjustment expense reserves would be higher by $29, pretax, as of December 31, 2020.
Claim Termination Rates (inclusive of mortality, recoveries, and expiration of benefits) - Claim termination rates are an estimate of the rate at which claimants will cease receiving benefits during a given calendar year. Terminations result from a number of factors, including death, recoveries and expiration of benefits. The probability that benefits will terminate in each future month
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
for each claim is estimated using a predictive model that uses past Company experience, contract provisions, job characteristics and other claimant-specific characteristics such as diagnosis, time since disability began, and age. Actual claim termination experience will vary from period to period. Over the past 9 years, claim termination rates for a single incurral year have generally increased and have ranged from 6% below to 7% above current assumptions over that time period. For a single recent incurral year (such as 2020), a one percent decrease in our assumption for LTD claim termination rates would increase our reserves by $9. For all incurral years combined, as of December 31, 2020, a one percent decrease in our assumption for our LTD claim termination rates would increase our Group Benefits unpaid losses and loss adjustment expense reserves by $22.
Impact of COVID-19 on 2020 Results of Operations
Within Group Benefits, the Company experienced excess mortality in its group life business of $239 in 2020, primarily caused by direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19. Within the group disability business, in 2020 the Company recognized $29 of COVID-19 direct losses from short-term disability claims, more than offset by $38 of favorable frequency on other short-term disability claims.
Current Trends Contributing to Reserve Uncertainty
We hedge our interest rate exposure over a three year period at the time we price and sell long-term disability policies and our weighted average discount rate assumption for the 2020 incurral year is up slightly from that of the 2019 incurral year.
While we have not seen a significant change in claim recovery patterns to date, in future periods, because of COVID-19, we could experience a delay in the Social Security Administration’s processing of disability claims and a delay in physicians approving a disability claimant’s ability to return to work, resulting in lower expected claim terminations or recoveries, including Social Security offsets. Also, due to the effects on the economy, including higher unemployment, we could experience an increase in claim incidence on long-term disability claims.
Evaluation of Goodwill for Impairment
Goodwill balances are reviewed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that a triggering event for a potential impairment has occurred. Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted updated accounting guidance on recognition and measurement of goodwill impairment, as required. The updated guidance requires recognition and measurement of goodwill impairment based on the excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit over its estimated fair value, up to the amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill.
The estimated fair value of each reporting unit incorporates multiple inputs into discounted cash flow calculations including assumptions that market participants would make in valuing the reporting unit. Assumptions include levels of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections, assets under management for Hartford Funds and the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting. Decreases in business
growth, decreases in earnings projections and increases in the weighted average cost of capital will all cause a reporting unit’s fair value to decrease, increasing the possibility of impairment.
A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. The Company’s reporting units, for which goodwill has been allocated consist of Commercial Lines, Personal Lines, Group Benefits and Hartford Funds.
The carrying value of goodwill was $1,911 as of December 31, 2020 and was comprised of $659 for Commercial Lines, $119 for Personal Lines, $861 for Group Benefits, and $272 for Hartford Funds.
The annual goodwill assessment for the reporting units was completed as of October 31, 2020, and resulted in no write-downs of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2020. All reporting units passed the annual impairment test with a significant margin. For information regarding the 2019 and 2018 impairment tests see Note 11 - Goodwill & Other Intangible Assets of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Due to the continuing impacts in the economy because of the COVID-19 pandemic, near-term expected net cash flows over the forecast period reflect estimated COVID-19 claims and economic effects of the pandemic. Considering the impacts of COVID-19, if the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting increases significantly or if the economic downturn worsens or persists for an extended period and the Company's actual and forecasted operating results deteriorate, the Company may determine it is more likely than not that a reporting unit's fair value is below its carrying value, including goodwill, which could result in an impairment of goodwill.
Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments
Fixed Maturities, Equity Securities, Short-term Investments, and Derivatives
The Company generally determines fair values using valuation techniques that use prices, rates, and other relevant information evident from market transactions involving identical or similar instruments. Valuation techniques also include, where appropriate, estimates of future cash flows that are converted into a single discounted amount using current market expectations. The Company uses a "waterfall" approach comprised of the following pricing sources which are listed in priority order: quoted prices, prices from third-party pricing services, internal matrix pricing, and independent broker quotes. The fair value of derivative instruments are determined primarily using a discounted cash flow model or option model technique and incorporate counterparty credit risk. In some cases, quoted market prices for exchange-traded transactions and transactions cleared through central clearing houses ("OTC-cleared") may be used and in other cases independent broker quotes may be used. For further discussion, see the Fixed Maturities, Equity Securities, Short-term Investments and Derivatives section in Note 5 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Evaluation of Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS and ACL on Mortgage Loans
Each quarter, a committee of investment and accounting professionals evaluates investments to determine if a credit loss is present for fixed maturities, AFS or an ACL is required for mortgage loans. This evaluation is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties. For further discussion of the accounting policies, see the Significant Investment Accounting Policies Section in Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of credit losses recorded, see the Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS and Intent-to-Sell Impairments and ACL on Mortgage Loans sections within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A.
Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters
Management evaluates each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its “best estimate,”
or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses.
The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. Management expects that the ultimate liability, if any, with respect to such lawsuits, after consideration of provisions made for estimated losses, will not be material to the consolidated financial condition of the Company. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated results of operations and liquidity in a particular quarterly or annual period.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
SEGMENT OPERATING SUMMARIES
Results of Operations
Underwriting Summary
[1]For discussion of current accident year catastrophes and prior accident year development, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves Development, Net of Reinsurance and Note 12- Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[2]For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results.
[3]For discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Premium Measures
[1]Middle market disclosures exclude loss sensitive and programs businesses.
[2]Excludes Global Re and Continental Europe Operations and is before ceded reinsurance.
Underwriting Ratios
[1]Upon acquisition of Navigators Group and a review of Navigators Insurers reserves, the year ended December 31, 2019 included $68 of prior accident year reserve increases and $29 of current accident year reserve increases which were excluded for the purposes of the underlying combined ratio calculation.
2021 Outlook
The Company expects higher Commercial Lines written premiums in 2021, with growth across small commercial, middle & large commercial, and global specialty. In small commercial, policy retention is expected to remain strong with new business growth across all lines of business. Assuming the economy recovers with the rollout of vaccines, we expect an increase in insured exposures, including from higher payrolls on workers’ compensation policies. In middle & large commercial, assuming a continued economic recovery, we expect written premium
growth in our general industries book of business driven by new business growth and an increase in insured exposures and that we will generate new business growth in specialized industries as well as with large and complex solutions. In global specialty, premium growth in 2021 is expected primarily in wholesale and financial lines benefiting from written pricing increases.
In 2021, management expects positive renewal written pricing in all lines of business except workers' compensation, with workers' compensation pricing expected to be flat to slightly positive in middle market and down in small commercial. In small commercial
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
and middle & large commercial, high-single digit rate increases are expected to continue in commercial auto, general liability and property. In global specialty, in 2021, we expect written pricing increases in the high teens in international, low double-digits in wholesale and high single digits in US financial lines. Written pricing increases in 2021 in lines other than workers’ compensation are driven by a number of factors including the effects of social inflation, increased catastrophe losses due to changing weather patterns, and a prolonged low interest rate environment, that puts added pressure on the need for underwriting profits to make up for the lost investment yield.
The Company expects the Commercial Lines combined ratio will be between approximately 93.5 and 95.5 for 2021, compared to 100.4 in 2020, primarily due to lower current accident year catastrophe losses expected in 2021 and lower COVID-19 incurred claims. The underlying combined ratio is expected to be lower as fewer COVID-19 claims are expected in 2021 as we emerge from the pandemic. Apart from lower expected COVID-19 claims, earned pricing increases in excess of moderate increases in loss costs in most lines will be partially offset by continued margin compression in small commercial workers’ compensation, while the expense ratio is expected to improve by nearly a point. Current accident year catastrophes are assumed to be 3.1 points of the combined ratio in 2021 compared to 4.5 points in 2020.
Net Income
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net income decreased primarily due to a change from an underwriting gain in 2019 to an underwriting loss in 2020 and a change from net realized capital gains in 2019 to net realized capital losses in 2020, partially offset by higher net investment income. Also partially offsetting the decline in net income was $91 before tax of ADC ceded premium in the prior year period. For further discussion of investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results.
Underwriting Gain (Loss)
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Underwriting loss in 2020 compared with an underwriting gain in 2019 with the underwriting loss in 2020 primarily due to COVID-19 incurred losses in property, workers’ compensation and financial and other lines, higher current accident year catastrophes, a change from net favorable prior accident year development in 2019 to net unfavorable prior accident year development in 2020 and the effect of lower earned premiums excluding the effect of the Navigators acquisition. Underwriting expenses were down slightly as a decrease in incentive compensation, benefits costs, commissions and travel costs were largely offset by the inclusion of Navigators for a full twelve months in 2020, an increase in the ACL on premiums receivable in 2020 due to the economic impacts of COVID-19 and the effect of a reduction in state taxes and assessments in 2019. In 2020, the acquisition of Navigators Group contributed to an increase in earned premiums with a corresponding increase to losses and loss adjustment expenses, amortization of DAC and underwriting expenses.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Earned Premiums
[1]Other of $43, $42, and $45 for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, is included in the total.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Earned premiums increased in 2020 with the increase in reflecting a full twelve months of premium from the acquisition of Navigators Group. Excluding Navigators, earned premiums declined in 2020, with decreases in both small commercial and in middle & large commercial.
Written premiums increased in 2020 with the growth attributable to the acquisition of Navigators Group. Excluding Navigators, written premiums declined in 2020 due to the economic impacts of COVID-19, including lower new business across most lines as well as reductions in estimated audit premiums and endorsements reducing premium in workers’ compensation due to a declining exposure base, partially offset by continued written pricing increases in all lines except workers' compensation.
In small commercial, renewal written price increases were slightly higher in 2020 than 2019, with mid-single digit to high single-digit rate increases in most lines, largely offset by written pricing decreases in workers’ compensation. In middle market, higher written pricing increases in 2020 were mostly due to double digit rate increases in middle market automobile and specialty excess liability lines and mid-single digit to high single-digit rate increases in most other middle market lines. In global specialty, our US wholesale book achieved an approximate 25% renewal written price increase, led by excess casualty, property and
automobile. The international lines also achieved strong price increases, led by D&O.
New business premium decreased in 2020 in most lines driven by lower quote volume due to the economic effects of COVID-19 and a competitive pricing environment, though to a lesser extent in the second half of 2020. Also contributing to the decrease in new business in small commercial was the effect of new business from the 2018 Foremost renewal rights agreement in 2019.
•Small commercial written premium declined in 2020 driven by a decrease in workers compensation, partially offset by growth in package business.
•Middle & large commercial written premium decreased in 2020 driven by lower new business and premium retention across all lines, partially offset by the acquisition of Navigators Group. Middle & large commercial premium decreases in 2020 were primarily driven by declines in general industries, driven by underwriting actions to improve the profitability of that book, as well as in industry verticals and national accounts, partially offset by growth in specialty and commercial excess lines.
•Global specialty written premium increased in 2020 with the increase driven by the acquisition of Navigators Group. Apart from Navigators Group, written premium decreased slightly in 2020 due to a decline in wholesale and bond business, partially offset by growth in professional liability.
Current Accident Year Loss and LAE Ratio before Catastrophes
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Current Accident Year Loss and LAE ratio before catastrophes increased in 2020, primarily due to COVID-19 incurred losses, net of favorable non-COVID-19 workers' compensation frequency as well as a slightly higher loss ratio in small commercial workers' compensation, partially offset by lower non-catastrophe property losses and margin improvement in the Navigators book, primarily in wholesale and global re.
2020 included COVID-19 incurred losses of $278 before tax, including losses of $141 in property, $66 in workers’ compensation, net of favorable frequency on other workers' compensation claims, and $71 in financial and other lines.
Included in the $141 of COVID-19 property incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses in 2020 were $101 of losses arising from a small number of property policies that do not require direct physical loss or damage and from policies intended to cover specific business needs, including crisis management and performance disruption. In addition, we recorded a reserve of $40 for legal defense costs in 2020. Workers’ compensation COVID-19 incurred losses in 2020 were driven by claims in both states with presumptive coverage and in other states where the claimant must prove their COVID-19 illness was contracted at work. Financial lines COVID-19 claims in 2020 were primarily driven by exposures in D&O, E&O and employment practices liability and the recessionary impacts on the surety book of business.
Catastrophes and Unfavorable (Favorable) Prior Accident Year Development
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 Current accident year catastrophe losses for 2020 were primarily from civil unrest, a number of hurricanes and tropical storms, Pacific Coast wildfires, and Northeast windstorms as well as tornado, wind and hail events in the South, Midwest and Central Plains. Catastrophe losses for 2019 were primarily from tornado, wind and hail events in various areas of the Midwest, Mountain West and Southeast and, to a lesser extent, winter storms in the northern plains, Midwest and Northeast.
Prior accident year development was a net unfavorable $44 before tax in 2020 compared to a net favorable $44 before tax in the comparable 2019 period. Net unfavorable reserve development for 2020 included reserve increases for general liability driven primarily by increases in reserves for sexual molestation and sexual abuse claims, and increases in commercial automobile liability reserves, partially offset by net reserve decreases for catastrophes, workers' compensation and package business. Favorable development on prior year catastrophe reserves in 2020 was due to recognizing a $29 before tax subrogation benefit from a settlement with PG&E over certain of the 2017 and 2018 California wildfires and a reduction in estimated catastrophe losses from a number of wind and hail events that occurred in 2017, 2018 and 2019. Prior accident year development in 2020 also included $102 of reserve increases related to Navigators Group on 2018 and prior accident years that was economically ceded to NICO but for which the benefit was not recognized in earnings as it has been recorded as a deferred gain on retroactive reinsurance. Net reserve decreases for 2019 were primarily related to lower loss reserve estimates for workers' compensation claims, package business reserves and catastrophes, partially offset by a $68 before tax increase to Navigators Group reserves upon acquisition of the business and increases in reserves for automobile liability and general liability. The increase in Navigators Group reserves upon acquisition of the business principally related to higher reserve estimates for general liability, professional liability and marine.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations
Underwriting Summary
[1]For discussion of current accident year catastrophes and prior accident year development, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance.
[2]Includes servicing revenues of $81, $83, and $84 for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively and includes servicing expenses of $67, $70, and $68 for 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
[3]For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results.
[4]For discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Written and Earned Premiums
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Premium Measures
[1] Premium retention for automobile decreased in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 largely due to $81 of premium credits given to automobile policyholders. Excluding the impact of the premium credits, automobile premium retention would have been 86% in the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020.
Underwriting Ratios
Product Combined Ratios
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
2021 Outlook
Written premium is expected to be relatively flat in 2021 compared with 2020 despite $81 of premium credits issued in 2020 as non-renewal of premium more than offsets new business. While new business conversions are expected to increase, new business premium is expected to be relatively flat as the Company begins to transition from 12-month automobile policies to 6-month automobile policies for AARP members as we roll out our new automobile and homeowners products in certain states.
In 2021, the Company expects written pricing increases in 2021 to be in the low single digits for automobile and high-single digits for homeowners. Rate increases in automobile will likely continue to moderate as lower claim frequency due to shelter-in-place guidelines during the pandemic is reflected in rate filings.
The Company expects the combined ratio for Personal Lines will be between approximately 94.0 and 96.0 for 2021 compared to 75.5 in 2020 as 2020 benefited from lower claim frequency due to fewer miles driven as a result of the pandemic as well as from favorable prior accident year development. The underlying combined ratio for Personal Lines is expected to be higher due to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in both automobile and homeowners. Current accident year catastrophes are assumed to be 7.2 points of the combined ratio in 2021 compared with 6.9 points in 2020. For automobile, we expect the underlying combined ratio to increase as automobile claim frequency rises again as we emerge from the pandemic. The underlying combined ratio for homeowners is also expected to increase in 2021, primarily driven by a return to a higher, more normal, level of non-catastrophe weather loss experience, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases.
Net Income (Loss)
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net income increased by $400, primarily due to favorable prior accident year catastrophe reserve development in the 2020 period, lower non-catastrophe current accident year losses in automobile and homeowners, and lower underwriting expenses, partially offset by an increase in current accident year catastrophes, a reduction in earned premium, including the effect of $81 in premium credits given to automobile policyholders in the second quarter of 2020, a change to net realized capital losses in the 2020 period and lower net investment income.
Underwriting Gain (Loss)
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Underwriting gain in 2020 increased primarily due to favorable prior accident year development in the 2020 period driven by a reduction in prior year catastrophe reserves, lower current accident year losses in automobile due to effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, a reduction in non-catastrophe weather losses in homeowners, and lower underwriting expenses, partially offset by a reduction in earned premium, including the effect of $81 in premium credits given to automobile policyholders in the second quarter of 2020.
Earned Premiums
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Earned premiums decreased in 2020, reflecting a decline in written premium over the prior twelve months in both Agency and in AARP Direct and, the effect of $81 of premium credits given to automobile policyholders in the second quarter of 2020 in recognition of shelter-in-place guidelines that have resulted in a decline in miles driven.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Written premiums decreased in 2020 in AARP Direct and Agency. For automobile, written premium in 2020 included a reduction for the $81 of premium credits given to policyholders in the second quarter. Written premium for both automobile and homeowners declined as the amount of non-renewed premium exceeded the new business premium. New business increased slightly in automobile and declined in homeowners.
Renewal written pricing increases were lower in 2020 in automobile in response to moderating loss cost trends. For homeowners, while written pricing increases had moderated during the first half of 2020, written pricing increases were higher in the second half of 2020 due to the rate need arising from catastrophe and other property claims experience.
Policy count retention increased for both automobile and homeowners reflecting the effect of moderating renewal written price increases during all of 2020 for automobile and during the first six months of 2020 for homeowners.
Premium retention for automobile decreased in 2020 mostly due to the $81 of automobile premium credits given to policyholders in the second quarter of 2020. Premium retention for homeowners improved in 2020 driven by renewal rate increases, partially offset by a decline in policy count retention in the second half of 2020.
Policies in-force decreased in 2020 in both automobile and homeowners, driven by not generating enough new business to offset the loss of non-renewed policies.
Current Accident Year Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio before Catastrophes
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Current accident year loss and LAE ratio before catastrophes decreased in 2020 in both automobile and homeowners. For automobile, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio benefited from earned pricing increases and from lower claim frequency, primarily driven by shelter-in-place guidelines due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For homeowners, the primary driver was fewer non-catastrophe weather claims.
Current Accident Year Catastrophes and Unfavorable (Favorable) Prior Accident Year Development
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Current accident year catastrophe losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily from a number of hurricanes and tropical storms, Pacific Coast wildfires and Northeast windstorms as well as tornado, wind and hail events in the South, Midwest and Central Plains. Catastrophe losses for 2019 primarily included winter storms across the country and tornado, wind and hail events in the South, Midwest, and Mountain West.
Prior accident year development was favorable in 2020, principally due to a reduction in catastrophe loss reserves and, to a lesser extent, lower than previously expected AARP Direct automobile liability claim severity for the 2017 to 2019 accident years. The reduction in catastrophe loss reserves was
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
driven by lower estimated losses for the 2017 and 2018 California wildfires, including a $260 subrogation benefit from PG&E, as well as a reduction in losses for various 2017, 2018 and 2019 wind and hail events. Prior accident year development was
favorable in 2019 primarily due to a decrease in automobile liability reserves for the 2017 accident year.
Results of Operations
Underwriting Summary
[1]For discussion of prior accident year development, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance.
[2]For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results.
[3]For discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Income (Loss)
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net loss in 2020 changed from net income in 2019, primarily due to an increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development, a decrease in net investment income and a change from net realized capital gains to net realized capital losses.
Unfavorable prior accident year development in 2020 primarily included a $208 charge for increases in A&E reserves and a $35 increase in ULAE reserves which was largely driven by the higher estimate for A&E claims. Before NICO reinsurance, A&E reserves were increased by $236 in P&C Other Operations, including $130 for asbestos and $106 for environmental. Cumulative adverse A&E reserve development on both ongoing operations and P&C Other Operations totaled $860 through December 31, 2020 and since this amount exceeds ceded premium paid for the A&E ADC of $650, the Company recognized a $210 deferred gain on retroactive reinsurance in 2020, all recognized within P&C Other Operations.
Asbestos Reserves prior accident year development in 2020 before NICO reinsurance of $130 was primarily due to a higher rate of claim settlements, particularly with certain larger, national defendants, higher than expected average settlement values and defense costs, and an increase in the Company's
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
estimated share of liability under pending or potential cost sharing agreements and settlements.
Environmental Reserves prior accident year development in 2020 before NICO reinsurance of $106 was
primarily due to an increasing number of claims and suits alleging contamination from or exposure to per & polyfluoroalkyl substances ("PFAS"), and increased defense and cleanup costs associated with Superfund sites.
Results of Operations
Operating Summary
[1]For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results.
[2]For discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Premiums and Other Considerations
Ratios, Excluding Buyouts
[1] Integration and transaction costs related to the acquisition of Aetna's U.S. group life and disability business are not included in the expense ratio.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Margin
2021 Outlook
The Company expects Group Benefits fully insured ongoing premiums to increase modestly in 2021 due to modestly higher book persistency and continued strong sales which is expected to offset continued lagging employment levels as a result of the pandemic. In 2021, the segment's net income margin is expected to be between 3.5% and 4.5%, compared to a net income margin of 6.4% in 2020. The expected decrease in net income margin largely reflects downward pressure on pricing due to recent historical favorable claim incidence, an expectation of less favorable claim incidence and recoveries on long-term disability claims in 2021 and lower expected investment yields, partially offset by an expectation of lower excess mortality caused by COVID-19 though that is subject to significant uncertainty. The expected net income margin of 3.5% to 4.5% assumes excess mortality of $160 before tax, largely in the first half of 2021 with the most significant portion in the first quarter of 2021. Margins on long-term disability business are expected to decline as the favorable long-term disability loss trends begin to reverse due to economic factors and as price competition intensifies, partly driven by customer behavior to seek multiple bids for renewal. Margins on group life business in 2021 will largely depend on how long COVID-19 infections continue in 2021 pending the timing of distribution and citizen acceptance of vaccines. Management expects that the 2021 core earnings margin, which does not include the effect of net realized capital gains (losses) or integration costs associated with the acquired business, will be in the range of 3.7% to 4.7%, down from a 2020 core earnings margin of 6.4%.
Net Income
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net income decreased primarily due to higher mortality in group life, and, to a lesser extent, lower net investment income, and lower net realized capital gains, partially offset by modestly higher recoveries and lower claim incidence on group disability claims. The increased mortality in group life included $239 of claims deemed to be excess mortality due to direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19. Lower net investment income was primarily driven by lower reinvestment rates and, to a lesser extent, lower income from limited partnership and other alternative investments.
Insurance operating costs and other expenses were relatively flat in 2020 as higher information technology ("IT") and other costs related to improving the customer experience were largely offset by lower incentive compensation, employee benefits, travel costs, and lower integration costs.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Fully Insured Ongoing Premiums
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Fully insured ongoing premiums decreased in 2020 with a decrease in both group disability and group life with the declines resulting primarily from lower insured exposure on in-force policies. Premiums for voluntary business increased primarily due to strong sales and persistency.
Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts increased in 2020 with increases in both group disability and group life.
Ratios
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Total loss ratio increased 2.2 points in 2020 reflecting a higher group life loss ratio, partially offset by a lower group disability loss ratio. The group life loss ratio increased 8.0 points primarily due to a higher current incurral year loss ratio driven by higher mortality, including $239 of excess mortality due to the direct and indirect effects of COVID-19. Prior incurral year development for group life was more favorable due to favorable mortality emergence on the prior incurral year recognized in the three month period ended March 31, 2020, partially offset by the reserve assumption update related to late reported death claims. The group disability loss ratio decreased 1.2 points with a 0.6 point improvement in the current incurral year loss ratio and 0.3 points of more favorable prior incurral year development. The current incurral year group disability loss ratio improved 0.6 points as lower claim incidence more than offset 1.0 points ($29) of COVID-19 short-term disability and New York Paid Family Leave claims. The more favorable prior incurral year development in group disability was driven by higher claim recoveries and continued improving claim incidence, partially offset by the favorable impacts in 2019 from the long term disability reserve assumption update.
Expense ratio increased 0.7 points in 2020. The expense ratio increased largely due to the decline in premiums and other considerations as higher IT and other costs related to improving the customer experience was largely offset by lower incentive compensation, employee benefits, and travel costs.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations
Operating Summary
[1]For discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[2]Represents annualized earnings divided by a daily average of assets under management, as measured in basis points.
Hartford Funds Segment AUM
[1]Represents AUM of the life and annuity business sold in May 2018 that is still managed by the Company's Hartford Funds segment.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Mutual Fund AUM by Asset Class
[1]Includes balanced, allocation, and alternative investment products.
2021 Outlook
Assuming continued growth in equity markets in 2021, the Company expects net income for Hartford Funds to increase from 2020 to 2021. From its diversified lineup of mutual funds and ETFs, the Company expects strong sales, though net flows are more uncertain given market volatility and historical redemption rates.
Net Income
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net income increased primarily due to lower operating costs and other expenses driven by a $12 before tax decrease in Lattice contingent consideration in 2020, a $7 before tax increase in Lattice contingent consideration in 2019 and a reduction in travel
costs. Fee income and other revenues decreased slightly as the effect of a continued shift to lower fee generating assets was largely offset by higher daily average assets under management. See Note 5 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Lattice contingent consideration.
Hartford Funds AUM
December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
Hartford Funds AUM increased compared to the prior
year due to an increase in market values, partially offset by net outflows, along with the continued runoff of AUM related to the Talcott Resolution life and annuity separate account AUM.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Results of Operations
Operating Summary
[1]Includes benefits expense on life and annuity business previously underwritten by the Company.
[2]For discussion of debt, see Note 14 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[3]For discussion of income taxes, see Note 17 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Income (Loss)
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net loss increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to restructuring costs of $104 before tax, lower net investment
income, lower transition services revenue, and lower income from the Company's retained equity interest in the former life and annuity operations, partially offset by a $90 before tax loss on extinguishment of debt in 2019, transaction costs incurred in 2019 in connection with the acquisition of Navigators Group and lower interest expense.
Income before tax from the Company's retained equity interest in the former life and annuity operations was $42 and $66 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net investment income was lower in 2020 than 2019 primarily due to a lower yield on short-term investments as well as lower asset levels.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Interest Expense
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Interest expense decreased primarily due to the repayment of our 5.5% senior notes in March of 2020. For additional information, see Note 14 - Debt of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT
The Company’s Board of Directors has ultimate responsibility for risk oversight, as described more fully in our Proxy Statement, while management is tasked with the day-to-day management of the Company’s risks.
The Company manages and monitors risk through risk policies, controls and limits. At the senior management level, an Enterprise Risk and Capital Committee (“ERCC”) oversees the risk profile and risk management practices of the Company. As illustrated below, a number of functional committees sit underneath the ERCC, providing oversight of specific risk areas and recommending risk mitigation strategies to the ERCC.
The Company's enterprise risk management ("ERM") function supports the ERCC and functional committees, and is tasked with, among other things:
•risk identification and assessment;
•the development of risk appetites, tolerances, and limits;
•risk monitoring; and
•internal and external risk reporting.
The Company categorizes its main risks as insurance risk, operational risk and financial risk, each of which is described in more detail below.
Insurance Risk
Insurance risk is the risk of losses of both a catastrophic and non-catastrophic nature on the P&C and Group Benefits products the Company has sold. Catastrophe insurance risk is the exposure arising from both natural (e.g., weather, earthquakes, wildfires, pandemics) and man-made catastrophes (e.g., terrorism, cyber-attacks) that create a concentration or aggregation of loss across the Company's insurance or asset portfolios.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Sources of Insurance Risk Non-catastrophe insurance risks exist within each of the Company's segments except Hartford Funds and include:
•Property- Risk of loss to personal or commercial property from automobile related accidents, weather, explosions, smoke, shaking, fire, theft, vandalism, inadequate installation, faulty equipment, collisions and falling objects, and/or machinery mechanical breakdown resulting in physical damage and other covered perils.
•Liability- Risk of loss from automobile related accidents, uninsured and underinsured drivers, lawsuits from accidents, defective products, breach of warranty, negligent acts by professional practitioners, environmental claims, latent exposures, fraud, coercion, forgery, failure to fulfill obligations per contract surety, liability from errors and omissions, losses from political and credit coverages, losses from derivative lawsuits, and other securities actions and covered perils.
•Mortality- Risk of loss from unexpected trends in insured deaths impacting timing of payouts from group life insurance, personal or commercial automobile related accidents, and death of employees or executives during the course of employment, while on disability, or while collecting workers compensation benefits.
•Morbidity- Risk of loss to an insured from illness incurred during the course of employment or illness from other covered perils.
•Disability- Risk of loss incurred from personal or commercial automobile related losses, accidents arising outside of the workplace, injuries or accidents incurred during the course of employment, or from equipment, with each loss resulting in short term or long-term disability payments.
•Longevity- Risk of loss from increased life expectancy trends among policyholders receiving long-term benefit payments.
•Cyber Insurance- Risk of loss to property, breach of data and business interruption from various types of cyber-attacks.
Catastrophe risk primarily arises in the property, automobile, workers' compensation, casualty, group life, and group disability lines of business. Not all insurance losses arising from catastrophe
risk are categorized as catastrophe losses within the segment operating results. For example, losses arising from the COVID-19 pandemic were not categorized as catastrophe losses within either the P&C or Group Benefits segments as the pandemic was not identified as a catastrophe event by the Property Claim Service in the U.S. See the term Current Accident Year Catastrophe Ratio within the Key Performance Measures section of MD&A for an explanation of how the Company defines catastrophe losses in its financial reporting.
Impact Non-catastrophe insurance risk can arise from unexpected loss experience, underpriced business and/or underestimation of loss reserves and can have significant effects on the Company’s earnings. Catastrophe insurance risk can arise from various unpredictable events and can have significant effects on the Company's earnings and may result in losses that could constrain its liquidity.
Management The Company's policies and procedures for managing these risks include disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk-based pricing, risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. The Company has established underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and risks in the aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company uses both internal and third-party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company's financial position and results of operations across its businesses.
In addition, certain insurance products offered by The Hartford provide coverage for losses incurred due to cyber events and the Company has assessed and modeled how those products would respond to different events in order to manage its aggregate exposure to losses incurred under the insurance policies we sell. The Company models numerous deterministic scenarios including losses caused by malware, data breach, distributed denial of service attacks, intrusions of cloud environments and attacks of power grids.
Among specific risk tolerances set by the Company, risk limits are set for natural catastrophes, terrorism risk and pandemic risk.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
[1]The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates that have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates provided assume that the Company is able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. The Company also manages natural catastrophe risk for group life and group disability, which in combination with property and workers compensation loss estimates are subject to separate enterprise risk management net aggregate loss limits as a percent of enterprise surplus.
[2]For U.S. insurance subsidiaries, reported capital and surplus is equal to actual U.S. statutory capital and surplus. For Navigators Insurers in non-U.S. jurisdictions, reported capital and surplus is equal to U.S. GAAP equity of those subsidiaries less certain assets such as goodwill and intangible assets.
Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy
The Company uses reinsurance to transfer certain risks to reinsurance companies based on specific geographic or risk concentrations. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company's risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that reinsure property and workers' compensation exposures, and individual risk (including facultative reinsurance) or quota share arrangements, that reinsure losses from specific classes or lines of business. The Company has no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund (“FHCF”), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program (“TRIPRA”) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business.
Reinsurance for Catastrophes- The Company utilizes various reinsurance programs to mitigate catastrophe losses including excess of loss occurrence-based treaties covering property and workers’ compensation, and an aggregate property catastrophe treaty. The aggregate property catastrophe treaty covers the
aggregate of catastrophe events designated by the Property Claim Services office of Verisk and, for international business, net losses arising from two or more risks involved in the same loss occurrence totaling at least $500 thousand, in excess of a $700 retention. The occurrence-based property catastrophe treaties respond in excess of $100 per occurrence for all perils other than named storm and earthquake (subject to a $50 annual aggregate deductible). Our per occurrence property catastrophe treaties and workers’ compensation catastrophe treaty incepting January 1, 2020 did not exclude pandemic losses from coverage and did not require a pandemic to be designated as a catastrophe event by PCS for coverage. Accordingly, we would have the opportunity for recovery if COVID-19 related losses were to exceed the retentions and fall within the terms and conditions of the contracts, including that losses are sustained by the Company during a defined period of time, commonly referred to as an hours clause. Based on current estimates of ultimate incurred losses from the pandemic, we have not booked a recovery under our per occurrence property or workers’ compensation catastrophe treaties. Our aggregate property catastrophe program requires a PCS catastrophe designation for events in the U.S. and since the pandemic has not been designated a PCS event, COVID-19 losses would not be covered by the aggregate program. In addition to
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
catastrophe reinsurance, the Company has per risk and quota share reinsurance that would respond to certain COVID-19 related losses. The reinsurance market has shifted to require communicable disease exclusions and, as such, our per occurrence property catastrophe treaty and workers’ compensation catastrophe treaty incepting January 1, 2021 do not cover pandemic losses. The Company has reinsurance in place to cover individual group life losses in excess of $1 per person. With respect to civil unrest, losses relating to civil unrest that in
2020 was designated by the Property Claim Services office of Verisk as a catastrophe event will cede to our property catastrophe aggregate cover. Such losses are not expected to be covered by the property catastrophe occurrence treaties because the unrest occurred in non-contiguous areas though the Company has property per risk and property quota share reinsurance that would cover certain losses related to the civil unrest. For our property catastrophe treaty incepting January 1, 2021, losses from most cyber events are not covered.
Primary Catastrophe Treaty Reinsurance Coverages as of January 1, 2021
[1] These treaties do not cover the assumed reinsurance business which purchases its own retrocessional coverage.
[2]In addition to the Per Occurrence Property Catastrophe Treaty, for Florida wind events, The Hartford has purchased the mandatory FHCF reinsurance for the annual period starting at June 1, 2020. Retention and coverage varies by writing company. The writing company with the largest coverage under FHCF is Hartford Insurance Company of the Midwest, with coverage estimated at approximately $55 of per event losses in excess of a $24 retention (estimates are based on best available information at this time and are periodically updated as information is made available by Florida).
[3]Portions of this layer of coverage extend beyond a traditional one year term.
[4]The aggregate treaty is not limited to a single event; rather, it is designed to provide reinsurance protection for the aggregate of all catastrophe events (up to $350 per event), either designated by the Property Claim Services office of Verisk or, for international business, net losses arising from two or more risks involved in the same loss occurrence totaling at least $500 thousand. All catastrophe losses apply toward satisfying the $700 attachment point under the aggregate treaty.
[5]In addition to the limits shown, the workers' compensation reinsurance includes a non-catastrophe, industrial accident layer, providing coverage for 80% of $30 in per event losses in excess of a $20 retention.
[6]Named hurricanes and tropical storms are defined as any storm or storm system declared to be a hurricane or tropical storm by the US National Hurricane Center, US Weather Prediction Center, or their successor organizations (being divisions of the US National Weather Service).
In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses. The Per Occurrence Property Catastrophe Treaty, and Workers' Compensation Catastrophe Treaty include a provision to reinstate one limit in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties.
Reinsurance for Terrorism- For the risk of terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is generally limited and largely unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological attacks. As such, the Company's principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through TRIPRA to the end of 2027.
TRIPRA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any “act of terrorism”, which is certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General, for losses that exceed a threshold of industry losses of $200. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government will pay a percentage of losses incurred from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer's losses exceed 20% of the Company's eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. The percentage of losses paid by the federal government is 80% . The Company's estimated deductible under the program is $1.6 billion for 2021. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Reinsurance for A&E and Navigators Group Reserve Development - The Company has two adverse development cover (“ADC”) reinsurance agreements in place, both of which are accounted for as retroactive reinsurance. One agreement covers substantially all A&E reserve development for 2016 and prior accident years (the “A&E ADC”) and the other covers substantially all reserve development of Navigators Insurance
Company and certain of its affiliates for 2018 and prior accident years (“Navigators ADC”). For more information on the A&E ADC and the Navigators ADC, see Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 12, Reserve for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Reinsurance Recoverables
Property and Casualty insurance product reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expense recoverables from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. A portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverables balance relates to the Company’s participation in various mandatory (assigned) and involuntary risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements.
Group Benefits and Corporate reinsurance recoverables represent reserves for future policy benefits and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses and other policyholder funds and benefits payable that are recoverable from a number of reinsurers.
The table below shows the gross and net reinsurance recoverables reported in the Property and Casualty and Group Benefits reporting segments as well as Corporate.
To manage reinsurer credit risk, a reinsurance security review committee evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer.
In placing reinsurance, the Company considers the nature of the risk reinsured, including the expected liability payout duration, and establishes limits tiered by reinsurer credit rating. Where its
contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral or other credit enhancement, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company’s reinsurers. For further discussion on reinsurance recoverables, including details of recoverables by AM Best credit rating, see Note 9 - Reinsurance of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Annually, the Company completes evaluations of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations and Group Benefits reporting segments as well as recoverables in Corporate, and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reported in the Commercial Lines reporting segment. For a discussion regarding the results of these evaluations, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance and Group Benefit LTD Reserves, Net of Reinsurance.
Reinsurance Recoverables as of December 31
Guaranty Funds and Other Insurance-related Assessments
As part of its risk management strategy, the Company regularly monitors the financial strength of other insurers and, in particular, activity by insurance regulators and various state guaranty associations in the U.S. relating to troubled insurers. In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes and systems, human error, or from external events.
Sources of Operational Risk Operational risk is inherent in the Company's business and functional areas. Operational risks include: compliance with laws and regulation, cybersecurity, business disruption, technology failure, inadequate execution or process management, reliance on model and data analytics, internal fraud, external fraud, third party dependency and attraction and retention of talent.
Impact Operational risk can result in financial loss, disruption of our business, regulatory actions or damage to our reputation.
Management Responsibility for day-to-day management of operational risk lies within each business unit and functional area. ERM provides an enterprise-wide view of the Company's operational risk on an aggregate basis. ERM is responsible for establishing, maintaining and communicating the framework, principles and guidelines of the Company's operational risk management program. Operational risk mitigation strategies include the following:
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
•Establishing policies and monitoring risk tolerances and exceptions;
•Conducting business risk assessments and implementing action plans where necessary;
•Validating existing crisis management protocols;
•Identifying and monitoring emerging risks; and
•Purchasing insurance coverage.
In response to COVID-19 the Company has implemented a number of mitigation strategies to address potential operational impacts, including:
•Activated our cross-functional Crisis Management Team ("CMT") comprising representatives from areas such as the Business Resiliency Office, IT, Corporate Health & Well-being, Employee Relations, Security, Facilities and Communications ;
•Enabled the vast majority of employees to work from home with no material impacts to operations; for employees in the office, various protocols have been implemented to promote employee health and safety including, but not limited to, the use of personal protective equipment, practicing social distancing and enhanced cleaning;
•Strengthened technology infrastructure and expanded policies for accessing the Company’s network remotely;
•Actively worked with sourcing partners to ensure they were implementing their business continuity plans; and
•Provided support to employees through our Corporate, Health & Well-being team composed of healthcare professionals to identify and isolate employees with potential COVID-19 exposure.
Cybersecurity Risk
The Hartford has implemented an information protection program with established governance routines that promote an adaptive approach for assessing and managing risks. The Hartford employs a ‘defense-in-depth’ strategy that uses multiple security measures to protect the integrity of the Company's information assets. This ‘defense-in-depth’ strategy aligns to the National Institute of Standards and Technology ("NIST") Cyber Security Framework and provides preventative, detective and responsive measures that collectively protects the Company. Various cyber assurance methods, including security metrics, third party security assessments, external penetration testing, red team exercises, and cyber war game exercises are used to test the effectiveness of the overall cybersecurity control environment.
The Hartford, like many other large financial services companies, blocks attempted cyber intrusions on a daily basis. In the event of a cyber intrusion, the Company invokes its Cyber Incident Response Program (the "Program") commensurate with the nature of the intrusion. While the actual methods employed differ based on the event, our approach uses internal teams and outside advisors with specialized skills to support the response and recovery efforts and requires elevation of issues, as necessary, to senior management. In addition, we have procedures to ensure timely notification of critical cybersecurity incidents pursuant to the Program to help identify employees who may have material non-public information and to implement blackout restrictions on
trading the Company's securities during the investigation and assessment of such cybersecurity incidents.
From a governance perspective, senior members of our Enterprise Risk Management, Information Protection and Internal Audit functions provided detailed, regular reports on cybersecurity matters in 2020 to the Board, including the Finance, Investment, and Risk Management Committee ("FIRMCo"), a committee consisting of all directors and the Audit Committee, which oversees controls for the Company's major risk exposures, and has principal responsibility for oversight of cybersecurity risk. The topics covered by these updates include the Company's activities, policies and procedures to prevent, detect and respond to cybersecurity incidents, as well as lessons learned from cybersecurity incidents and internal and external testing of our cyber defenses.
Financial Risk
Financial risks include direct and indirect risks to the Company's financial objectives from events that impact financial market conditions and the value of financial assets. Some events may cause correlated movement in multiple risk factors. The primary sources of financial risks are the Company's invested assets.
Consistent with its risk appetite, the Company establishes financial risk limits to control potential loss on a U.S. GAAP, statutory, and economic basis. Exposures are actively monitored and managed, with risks mitigated where appropriate. The Company uses various risk management strategies, including limiting aggregation of risk, portfolio re-balancing and hedging with over-the-counter and exchange-traded derivatives with counterparties meeting the appropriate regulatory and due diligence requirements. Derivatives are utilized to achieve the following Company-approved objectives: hedging risk arising from interest rate, equity market, commodity market, credit spread and issuer default, price or currency exchange rate risk or volatility; managing liquidity; controlling transaction costs; and engaging in income generation covered call transactions and synthetic replication transactions. Derivative activities are monitored and evaluated by the Company’s compliance and risk management teams and reviewed by senior management. The Company identifies different categories of financial risk, including liquidity, credit, interest rate, equity and foreign currency exchange.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk to current or prospective earnings or capital arising from the Company's inability or perceived inability to meet its contractual funding obligations as they come due.
Sources of Liquidity Risk Sources of liquidity risk include funding risk, company-specific liquidity risk and market liquidity risk resulting from differences in the amount and timing of sources and uses of cash as well as company-specific and general market conditions. Stressed market conditions may impact the ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business and may result in a significant loss in value.
Impact Inadequate capital resources and liquidity could negatively affect the Company’s overall financial strength and its ability to generate cash flows from its businesses, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management The Company has defined ongoing monitoring and reporting requirements to assess liquidity across the enterprise under both current and stressed market conditions. The Company measures and manages liquidity risk exposures and funding needs within prescribed limits across legal entities, taking into account legal, regulatory and operational limitations to the transferability of liquid assets among legal entities. The Company also monitors internal and external conditions, and identifies material risk changes and emerging risks that may impact operating cash flows or liquid assets. The liquidity requirements of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ("HFSG Holding Company") have been and will continue to be met by the HFSG Holding Company's fixed maturities, short-term investments and cash, and dividends from its subsidiaries, principally its insurance operations, as well as the issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities as needed. The Company maintains multiple sources of contingent liquidity including a revolving credit facility, an intercompany liquidity agreement that allows for short-term advances of funds among the HFSG Holding Company and certain affiliates, and access to collateralized advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston ("FHLBB") for certain affiliates. The Company's CFO has primary responsibility for liquidity risk.
Refer to the Capital Resources & Liquidity section of MD&A for the discussion of what the Company is doing to manage liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Credit Risk and Counterparty Risk
Credit risk is the risk to earnings or capital due to uncertainty of an obligor’s or counterparty’s ability or willingness to meet its obligations in accordance with contractually agreed upon terms. Credit risk is comprised of three major factors: the risk of change in credit quality, or credit migration risk; the risk of default; and the risk of a change in value due to changes in credit spreads.
Sources of Credit Risk The majority of the Company’s credit risk is concentrated in its investment holdings and use of derivatives, but it is also present in the Company’s ceded reinsurance activities and various insurance products.
Impact A decline in creditworthiness is typically reflected as an increase in an investment’s credit spread and an associated decline in the investment's fair value, potentially resulting in recording an ACL and an increased probability of a realized loss upon sale. In certain instances, counterparties may default on their obligations and the Company may realize a loss on default. Premiums receivable, including premiums for retrospectively rated plans, reinsurance recoverable and deductible losses recoverable are also subject to credit risk based on the counterparty’s unwillingness or inability to pay.
For a discussion of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the Impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity section of this MD&A.
Management The objective of the Company’s enterprise credit risk management strategy is to identify, quantify, and manage credit risk in aggregate and to limit potential losses in accordance with the Company's credit risk management policy. The Company manages its credit risk by managing aggregations of risk, holding a diversified mix of issuers and counterparties
across its investment, reinsurance, and insurance portfolios and limiting exposure to any specific reinsurer or counterparty. Potential credit losses can be mitigated through diversification (e.g., geographic regions, asset types, industry sectors), hedging and the use of collateral to reduce net credit exposure.
The Company manages credit risk through the use of various surveillance, analyses and governance processes. The investment, derivatives and reinsurance areas have formal policies and procedures for counterparty approvals and authorizations, which establish criteria defining minimum levels of creditworthiness and financial stability for eligible counterparties. Potential investments are subject to underwriting reviews and private securities are also subject to management approval. Mitigation strategies vary across the three sources of credit risk, but may include:
•Investing in a portfolio of high-quality and diverse securities;
•Selling investments subject to credit risk;
•Hedging through use of credit default swaps;
•Clearing derivative transactions through central clearing houses that require daily variation margin;
•Entering into derivative and reinsurance contracts only with strong creditworthy institutions
•Requiring collateral; and
•Non-renewing policies/contracts or reinsurance treaties.
The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. Aggregate counterparty credit quality and exposure are monitored on a daily basis utilizing an enterprise-wide credit exposure information system that contains data on issuers, ratings, exposures, and credit limits. Exposures are tracked on a current and potential basis and aggregated by ultimate parent of the counterparty across investments, reinsurance receivables, insurance products with credit risk, and derivatives.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no investment exposure to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer or counterparty greater than 10% of the Company's stockholders' equity, other than the U.S. government and certain U.S. government agencies. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk in the investment portfolio, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 6 - Investments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Assets and Liabilities Subject to Credit Risk
Investments Essentially all of the Company's invested assets are subject to credit risk. In 2020, net credit losses on fixed maturities, AFS and the increase (decrease) in ACL on mortgage loans were $28 and $19 respectively. In 2019. credit related impairments were $3 and there were no mortgage loans that had a valuation allowance. (See the Investment Portfolio Risk section of Financial Risk Management under “Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS and Intent-to-Sell Impairments" and "ACL on Mortgage Loans”).
Reinsurance recoverables Reinsurance recoverables, net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, were $6,011 and $5,527 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. (See the Enterprise Risk Management section of the MD&A under “Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy.”)
Premiums receivable and agents' balances Premiums receivable and agents’ balances, net of an ACL, were $4,268 and $4,384, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For a discussion regarding collectibility of these balances, see Note 8 - Premiums Receivable and Agents' Balances of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Credit Risk of Derivatives
The Company uses various derivative counterparties in executing its derivative transactions. The use of counterparties creates credit risk that the counterparty may not perform in accordance with the terms of the derivative transaction.
Downgrades to the credit ratings of the Company’s insurance operating companies may have adverse implications for its use of derivatives. In some cases, downgrades may give derivative counterparties for OTC derivatives and clearing brokers for OTC-cleared derivatives the right to cancel and settle outstanding derivative trades or require additional collateral to be posted. In addition, downgrades may result in counterparties and clearing brokers becoming unwilling to engage in or clear additional derivatives or may require additional collateralization before entering into any new trades.
Managing the Credit Risk of Counterparties to Derivative Instruments
The Company also has derivative counterparty exposure policies which limit the Company’s exposure to credit risk. The Company monitors counterparty exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company’s policies with respect to derivative counterparty exposure establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company’s risk management team and reviewed by senior management.
The Company minimizes the credit risk of derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties primarily rated A or better. The Company also generally requires that OTC derivative contracts be governed by an International
Swaps and Derivatives Association ("ISDA") Master Agreement, which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. The Company enters into credit support annexes in conjunction with the ISDA agreements, which require daily collateral settlement based upon agreed upon thresholds.
The Company also has derivative counterparty exposure policies which limit the Company’s exposure to credit risk. Credit exposures are generally quantified based on the prior business day’s net fair value, including income accruals, of all derivative positions transacted with a single counterparty for each separate legal entity. The notional amount of derivative contracts represents the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. The Company enters into collateral arrangements in connection with its derivatives positions and collateral is pledged to or held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the exposure is greater than zero, subject to minimum transfer thresholds or negotiated thresholds, if applicable. In accordance with industry standards and the contractual requirements, collateral is typically settled on the same business day. For further discussion, see the Derivative Commitments section of Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Use of Credit Derivatives
The Company may also use credit default swaps to manage credit exposure or to assume credit risk to enhance yield.
Credit Risk Reduced Through Credit Derivatives
The Company uses credit derivatives to purchase credit protection with respect to a single entity or referenced index. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the notional amount related to credit derivatives that purchase credit protection was $6 and $124, respectively, while the fair value was less than $(1) and $(3), respectively. These amounts do not include positions that are in offsetting relationships.
Credit Risk Assumed Through Credit Derivatives
The Company also enters into credit default swaps that assume credit risk as part of replication transactions. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that are permissible investments under the Company’s investment policies. These swaps primarily reference investment grade single corporate issuers and indexes. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the notional amount related to credit derivatives that assume credit risk was $675 and $500, respectively, while the fair value was $21 and $13, respectively. These amounts do not include positions that are in offsetting relationships.
For further information on credit derivatives, see Note 7 - Derivatives of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Credit Risk of Business Operations
A portion of the Company's Commercial Lines business is written with large deductibles or under retrospectively-rated plans. Under some commercial insurance contracts with a large deductible, the Company is obligated to pay the claimant the full amount of the claim and the Company is subsequently reimbursed by the policyholder for the deductible amount. As such, the Company is subject to credit risk until reimbursement is made. Retrospectively-rated policies are utilized primarily for
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
workers' compensation coverage, whereby the ultimate premium is adjusted based on actual losses incurred. Although the premium adjustment feature of a retrospectively-rated policy substantially reduces insurance risk for the Company, it presents credit risk to the Company. The Company’s results of operations could be adversely affected if a significant portion of such policyholders failed to reimburse the Company for the deductible amount or the amount of additional premium owed under retrospectively-rated policies. The Company manages these credit risks through credit analysis, collateral requirements, and regular monitoring. For more information, see Note 8- Premiums Receivable and Agents' Balances of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk of financial loss due to adverse changes in the value of assets and liabilities arising from movements in interest rates. Interest rate risk encompasses exposures with respect to changes in the level of interest rates, the shape of the term structure of rates and the volatility of interest rates. Interest rate risk does not include exposure to changes in credit spreads.
Sources of Interest Rate Risk The Company has exposure to interest rate risk arising from its fixed maturity investments, commercial mortgage loans we invest in as well as debt securities, preferred stock and similar securities issued by the Company and discount rate assumptions associated with the Company’s claim reserves and pension and other post retirement benefit obligations as well as from assets that support the Company's pension and other post-retirement benefit plans.
Impact Changes in interest rates from current levels can have both favorable and unfavorable effects for the Company.
For a discussion of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the Impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity section of this MD&A.
Management The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk by constructing investment portfolios that seek
to protect the firm from the economic impact associated with changes in interest rates by setting portfolio duration targets that are aligned with the duration of the liabilities that they support. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation under various market scenarios of the liabilities and their supporting investment portfolios. Key metrics that the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and the associated liabilities include duration, convexity and key rate duration.
The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its investment portfolio or to hedge liabilities. Interest rate caps, floors, swaps, swaptions, and futures may be used to manage portfolio duration. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to desired objectives and manage the duration profile within established tolerances. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flows of a forecasted purchase or sale of fixed rate securities due to changes in interest rates. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk, including offsetting positions, totaled $10.7 billion and $11.4 billion, respectively, and primarily relate to hedging invested assets. The fair value of these derivatives was $(69) and $(59) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Assets and Liabilities Subject to Interest Rate Risk
Fixed income investments The fair value of fixed income investments, which include fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans, and short-term investments, was $52.8 billion and $49.3 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The weighted average duration of the portfolio, including derivative instruments, was approximately 4.9 years and 5.0 years as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Changes in the fair value of fixed maturities due to changes in interest rates are reflected as a component of AOCI.
Long-term debt obligations The Company's variable rate debt obligations will generally result in increased interest expense as a result of higher interest rates; the inverse is true during a declining interest rate environment. Changes in the value of long-term debt as a result of changes in interest rates will impact the fair value of these instruments but not the carrying value in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Group life and disability product liabilities The cash outflows associated with contracts issued by the Company's Group Benefits segment, primarily group life and short and long-term disability policy liabilities, are not interest rate sensitive but vary based on timing. Though the aggregate cash flow payment streams are relatively predictable, these products rely upon actuarial pricing assumptions (including mortality and morbidity) and have an element of cash flow uncertainty. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $8,653 and $8,667, respectively of reserves for group life and disability contracts. Changes in the value of the liabilities as a result of changes in interest rates will impact the fair value of these instruments but not the carrying value in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Pension and other post-retirement benefit obligations The Company’s pension and other post-retirement benefit obligations are exposed to interest rate risk based upon the sensitivity of present value obligations to changes in liability discount rates as well as the sensitivity of the fair value of investments in the plan portfolios to changes in interest rates. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve that reflects high-quality fixed income investments consistent with the maturity profile of the expected liability cash flows. The Company is exposed to the risk of having to make additional plan contributions if the plans’ investment returns, including from investments in fixed maturities, are lower than expected. (For further discussion of discounting pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, refer to Note 19 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $669 and $732, respectively, of unfunded liabilities for pension and post-retirement benefit obligations recorded within Other Liabilities in the accompanying Balance Sheets.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
Group Life and Disability Reserves and Invested Assets Supporting Them
Included in the following table is the before tax change in the net economic value of contracts issued by the Company’s Group Benefits segment, primarily group life and disability, for which fixed valuation discount rate assumptions are established based upon investment returns assumed in pricing, along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by the Company to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk in the investment portfolios supporting these contracts. This analysis does not include the assets and corresponding liabilities of other insurance products such as automobile, property, workers' compensation and general liability insurance. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis as the interest rate sensitivity of these investments is generally lower and less predictable than fixed income investments. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve.
The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ
materially from those illustrated below due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the analysis. The Company’s sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates.
Interest Rate Sensitivity of Group Benefits Short and Long-term Disability Reserves and Invested Assets Supporting Them
[1] Prior year numbers have been updated to include the invested assets supporting the surplus associated with group benefits short and long-term disability reserves.
The carrying value of assets related to the businesses included in the table above was $12.1 billion and $12.0 billion, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and included fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans and short-term investments. The assets are monitored and managed within set duration guidelines and are evaluated on a daily basis, as well as annually, using scenario simulation techniques in compliance with regulatory requirements.
Invested Assets not Supporting Group Life and Disability Reserves
The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated before tax change in the fair value of the Company’s investments and related derivatives, excluding assets supporting group life and disability reserves which are included in the table above, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis as the interest rate sensitivity of these investments is generally lower and less predictable than fixed income investments.
Interest Rate Sensitivity of Invested Assets Not Supporting Group Benefits Short and Long-term Disability Reserves
[1] Prior year numbers have been updated to exclude the invested assets supporting the surplus associated with group benefits short and long-term disability reserves.
The carrying value of fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans and short-term investments related to the businesses included in the table above was $40.7 billion and $37.3 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Long-term Debt
A 100 basis point parallel decrease in the yield curve would result in an increase in the fair value of long-term debt by $670 and $607 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A 100 basis point parallel increase in the yield curve would result in a decrease in the fair value of long-term debt by $551 and $499 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Changes in the value of long-term debt as a result of changes in interest rates will not impact the carrying value in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Plan Obligations
A 100 basis point parallel decrease in the yield curve would impact both the value of the underlying pension assets and the value of the liabilities, resulting in an increase in the unfunded liabilities for pension and other post-retirement plan obligations of $196 and $185 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A 100 basis point parallel increase in the yield curve would have the inverse effect and result in a decrease in the unfunded liabilities for pension and other post-retirement plan obligations of $148 and $138 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gains or losses due to changes in interest rates on the pension and post-retirement plan obligations are recorded within AOCI and are amortized into the actuarial loss component of net periodic benefit cost when they exceed a threshold.
Discontinuation of LIBOR In July 2017, the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA") announced that by the end of 2021 it intends to stop persuading or compelling banks to report information used to set LIBOR, which could result in LIBOR no longer being published after 2021 or a determination by regulators that LIBOR is no longer representative of its underlying market. The Company continues to monitor the potential impacts of the discontinuation of LIBOR, which is used as a benchmark or reference rate for certain investments and derivatives the Company owns and floating rate debt the Company has issued. In December 2020, based on feedback from the banks that report information used to set LIBOR, Intercontinental Exchange ("ICE") Benchmark Administration released a consultation on the potential for banks to continue to publish U.S. dollar LIBOR rates until the end of June 2023. Subject to the results of the consultation, it is possible that some U.S. dollar LIBOR rates will continue to be available for a limited period beyond the end of 2021.
The Company has identified three principal types of outstanding contracts that may be affected by the discontinuation of or transition from LIBOR to an alternative reference rate, including floating rate fixed maturity investments the Company holds in its investment portfolio; derivative instruments that hedge interest rate risk; and two classes of junior subordinated debentures that the Company has issued and are currently outstanding.
•Using our best estimate of expected future cash flows including prepayments and maturities, the book value of LIBOR referenced floating rate fixed maturities that the Company owns as of December 31, 2020 and that the Company expects to be outstanding at the end of 2021 is approximately $3.6 billion. The Company has performed a review of the LIBOR replacement language on these assets and believes that greater than 85% have language that supports a transition to a new standard benchmark rate. The
Company will continue to assess the remaining holdings and work with counterparties, as appropriate, to determine LIBOR replacement language or manage the assets in other ways, such as through asset sales.
•The notional amount of derivative instruments as of December 31, 2020 with a floating rate component that references LIBOR that the Company expects to be outstanding at the end of 2021, considering maturities, is $9.6 billion, with $9.4 billion being cleared through an exchange or clearinghouse. The Company anticipates that substantially all existing derivatives referencing LIBOR, whether or not cleared through an exchange or clearing house, will transition from LIBOR to SOFR or other market alternative rates in line with new market standards currently being developed and adopted.
•The Company has issued $1.1 billion of junior subordinated debentures that mature after 2021 with LIBOR referenced floating interest rates. The Company is assessing options to manage the risk associated with the transition away from LIBOR related to these outstanding securities.
The uncertainty regarding the continued use and reliability of LIBOR, including the timing of such transition, could reduce the value of some of our floating rate fixed maturity investments and increase the interest the Company pays on the junior subordinated debentures.
There is also a risk that certain derivatives may no longer qualify for hedge accounting if reference rates change on derivative contracts but the reference interest rate of the instruments being hedged do not change in a substantially similar manner, particularly for cash flow hedges of floating rate investments the Company owns and junior subordinated debentures the Company has issued. The loss of hedge accounting could result in the recognition of gains or losses on derivatives in the income statement rather than in accumulated other comprehensive income. The Company has adopted the FASB's temporary guidance which allows The Hartford to account for contract modifications made solely due to rate reform (such as replacing LIBOR with another reference rate) as continuations of existing contracts and to maintain hedge accounting when the hedging effectiveness between the financial instrument and its hedge is only affected by the change to a replacement rate. The guidance expires for contract modifications made and hedge relationships entered into or evaluated after December 31, 2022, after which, there is uncertainty whether certain outstanding derivative contracts will continue to qualify for hedge accounting either because the replacement rate of the financial instrument being hedged is not sufficiently matched to the reference rate of the derivative contract or because replacement rate language for the hedged instrument has not been determined.
Equity Risk
Equity risk is the risk of financial loss due to changes in the value of global equities or equity indices.
Sources of Equity Risk The Company has exposure to equity risk from invested assets, assets that support the Company’s pension and other post-retirement benefit plans, and fee income derived from Hartford Funds assets under management. In addition, the Company has equity exposure through its 9.7% ownership interest in the limited partnership, Hopmeadow Holdings LP, that owns the life and annuity business
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
sold in 2018. For further information, see Note 22 - Business Dispositions and Discontinued Operations of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact The investment portfolio is exposed to losses from market declines affecting equity securities and derivatives, which could negatively impact the Company's reported earnings. In addition, investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments generally have a level of correlation to domestic equity market levels and can expose the Company to losses in earnings if valuations decline; however, earnings impacts are recognized on a lag as results from private equity investments and other funds are generally reported on a three-month delay. For assets supporting pension and other post-retirement benefit plans, the Company may be required to make additional plan contributions if equity investments in the plan portfolios decline in value. Hartford Funds earnings are also significantly influenced by the U.S. and other equity markets. Generally, declines in equity markets will reduce the value of average daily assets under management and the amount of fee income generated from those assets. Increases in equity markets will generally have the inverse impact.
For a discussion of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the Impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity section of this MD&A.
Management The Company uses various approaches in managing its equity exposure, including limits on the proportion of assets invested in equities, diversification of the equity portfolio, and, at times, hedging of changes in equity indices. For assets supporting pension and other post-retirement benefit plans, the asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments and impose concentration limits and investment quality requirements on permissible investment options.
Assets and Liabilities Subject to Equity Risk
Investment portfolio The investment portfolio is exposed to losses from market declines affecting equity securities and derivatives, and certain alternative assets and limited partnerships. Generally, declines in equity markets will reduce the value of these types of investments and could negatively impact the Company’s earnings while increases in equity will have the inverse impact. For equity securities, the changes in fair value are reported in net realized capital gains and losses. For
alternative assets and limited partnerships, the Company's share of earnings for the period is recorded in net investment income, though typically on a delay based on the availability of the underlying financial statements. For a discussion of equity sensitivity, see below.
Assets supporting pension and other post-retirement benefit plans The Company may be required to make additional plan contributions if equity investments in the plan portfolios decline in value. For a discussion of equity sensitivity, see below.
Declines in value are recognized as unrealized losses in AOCI. Increases in equity markets are recognized as unrealized gains in AOCI. Unrealized gains and losses in AOCI are amortized into the actuarial loss component of net periodic benefit cost when they exceed a threshold. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see Note 19 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Assets under management Assets under management in Hartford Funds may decrease in value during equity market declines, which would result in lower earnings because fee income is earned based upon the value of assets under management.
Equity Sensitivity
Investment portfolio and the assets supporting pension and other post-retirement benefit plans
Included in the following tables are the estimated before tax change in the economic value of the Company’s invested assets and assets supporting pension and other post-retirement benefit plans with sensitivity to equity risk. The calculation of the hypothetical change in economic value below assumes a 20% upward and downward shock to the Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500"). For limited partnerships and other alternative investments, the movement in economic value is calculated using a beta analysis largely derived from historical experience relative to the S&P 500.
The selection of the 20% shock to the S&P 500 was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated below due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the analysis. These calculations do not capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations.
Equity Sensitivity [1]
[1]Table excludes the Company's investment in Hopmeadow Holdings LP which is reported in other assets on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Hartford Funds assets under management
Hartford Funds earnings are significantly influenced by the U.S.
and other equity markets. If equity markets were to hypothetically decline 20% and remain depressed for one year,
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
the estimated before tax impact on reported earnings for that one year period is approximately $60 as of December 31, 2020. The selection of the 20% shock to the S&P 500 was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the analysis.
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk
Foreign currency exchange risk is the risk of financial loss due to changes in the relative value between currencies.
Sources of Currency Risk The Company has foreign currency exchange risk in non-U.S. dollar denominated cash, fixed maturities, equities, and derivative instruments. In addition, the Company has non-U.S. subsidiaries, some with functional currencies other than U.S. dollar, and which transact business in multiple currencies resulting in assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies.
Impact Changes in relative values between currencies can create variability in cash flows and realized or unrealized gains and losses on changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities. The impact on the fair value of fixed maturities, AFS due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, in relation to functional currency, is reported in unrealized gains or losses as part of other comprehensive income. The realization of gains or losses resulting from investment sales or from changes in investments that record changes in fair value through the income statement due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates is reflected through net realized capital gains and losses.
In regards to insurance and reinsurance contracts that the Company enters into for which we are obligated to pay losses in a foreign currency, the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on assets and liabilities related to these contracts is reflected through net realized capital gains and losses. These assets or liabilities include, but are not limited to, cash and cash equivalents, premiums receivable, reinsurance recoverables, and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. Additionally, the Company translates the assets, liabilities, and income of non-U.S. dollar functional currency legal entities into U.S. dollar. This translation amount is reported as a component of other comprehensive income.
Management The Company manages its foreign currency exchange risk primarily through asset-liability matching and through the use of derivative instruments. However, legal entity
capital is invested in local currencies in order to satisfy regulatory requirements and to support local insurance operations. The foreign currency exposure of non-U.S. dollar denominated investments will most commonly be reduced through the sale of the assets or through hedges using foreign currency swaps and forwards.
Assets and Liabilities Subject to Foreign Currency Exchange Risk
Investment portfolio The Company is exposed to foreign exchange risk affecting non-U.S. dollar denominated cash, fixed maturities, equities and derivative instruments. Changes in relative values between currencies can positively or negatively impact net realized capital gains and losses or unrealized gains (losses) as part of other comprehensive income.
Assets supporting pension plan Changes in relative values between currencies can positively or negatively impact unrealized gains and losses in AOCI. Unrealized gains and losses in AOCI are amortized into the actuarial loss component of net periodic benefit cost when they exceed a threshold. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had pension plan assets of $95 and $83, respectively, of non-U.S. dollar investments in multiple currencies. These amounts are excluded from the sensitivity analysis below.
Insurance contract related assets and liabilities The Company has non-U.S. dollar denominated insurance contracts and associated premiums receivable, reinsurance recoverables and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, that are exposed to foreign exchange risk. For contracts that are within U.S, dollar functional currency legal entities, changes in foreign currency exchange rates can positively or negatively impact net realized capital gains and losses. For contracts within non-U.S. dollar functional currency legal entities, changes in foreign currency exchange rates can positively or negatively impact other comprehensive income.
Foreign Currency Sensitivity
For the Company’s primary currencies that create foreign exchange risk, the following table provides the estimated impact of a hypothetical 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates. Actual results could differ materially due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the analysis. The amounts presented are in U.S. dollars and before-tax.
Foreign Currency Sensitivity [1]
[1]Amount excludes currencies where the value of net assets in U.S. dollar equivalent is less than 1% of total net assets of the Company.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Financial Risk on U.S. Statutory Capital
U.S. Statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease in any period depending upon a variety of factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. Factors include:
•A decrease in the value of certain fixed-income and equity securities in our investment portfolio, due in part to credit spreads widening or a decline in equity market levels, may result in a decrease in statutory surplus and RBC ratios.
•A decline in interest rates may reduce our net investment income, which may result in a decrease in statutory surplus and RBC ratios.
•Decreases in the value of certain derivative instruments that do not get hedge accounting, may reduce statutory surplus and RBC ratios.
•Non-market factors can also impact the amount and volatility of either our actual or potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and RBC ratios.
Most of these factors are outside of the Company’s control. Among other factors, rating agencies consider the level of statutory capital and surplus of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries as
well as the level of a measure of GAAP capital held by the Company in determining the Company’s financial strength and credit ratings. Rating agencies may implement changes to their internal models that have the effect of increasing or decreasing the amount of capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings.
Investment Portfolio Risk
The following table presents the Company’s fixed maturities, AFS, by credit quality. The credit ratings referenced throughout this section are based on availability and are generally the midpoint of the available ratings among Moody’s, S&P, and Fitch. If no rating is available from a rating agency, then an internally developed rating is used. Accrued interest receivable related to fixed maturities are recorded in other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and are not included in the amortized cost or fair value of the fixed maturities. For further information refer to Note 6 - Investments.
Fixed Maturities, AFS by Credit Quality
The fair value of fixed maturities, AFS increased as compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to net additions of corporate securities and an increase in valuations as a result of a decline in interest rates.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Fixed Maturities, AFS by Type
[1]Represents the ACL recorded following the adoption of accounting guidance for credit losses on January 1, 2020. For further information refer to Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
[2]Includes securities with pools of loans issued by the Small Business Administration which are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
The fair value of fixed maturities, AFS increased as compared with December 31, 2019, primarily due to net additions of corporate securities and an increase in valuations as a result of a decline in interest rates. The Company increased holdings in consumer cyclical and non-cyclical, financial services and technology/communication corporate bonds as well as in CLOs and taxable municipal bonds, while reducing holdings in tax-exempt municipal bonds, RMBS, and foreign government/government agencies.
Energy Exposure
Oil prices came under significant pressure during the first half of
2020, particularly during March and April, largely due to the unprecedented reduction in demand stemming from the global pandemic as well as a decision by Saudi Arabia to raise production despite declining demand. The uncertain outlook caused credit spreads to widen for corporate and sovereign issuers that participate in the exploration, production, transportation and refining of oil and gas. Subsequently, OPEC Plus' agreement to reduce production in combination with recovering demand from economic re-openings has contributed to a strong recovery in oil prices to average levels for the post 2014 cycle. With the stabilization of oil prices, credit spreads have recovered
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
meaningfully. Ultimately, the impact of price volatility in the Company’s energy sector investments will be determined by the durability of the recovery in energy prices and the ability of issuers to maintain liquidity, manage indebtedness, and navigate changing regulations and growing consolidation trends within the industry.
The Company's direct exposure within its investment portfolio to
the energy sector totals approximately 3% of invested assets as of December 31, 2020 and is primarily comprised of investment grade corporate debt. These investments are diversified by issuer and different sub-sectors of the energy market, with the highest exposure to the midstream industry and the lowest to refining services. The following table summarizes the Company's exposure to the energy sector by security type and credit quality.
The Company manages the credit risk associated with the energy sector within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis. The Company considers alternate scenarios including oil prices remaining at low levels for an extended period and/or declining significantly below current levels. For additional details regarding the Company’s management of credit risks, see the Credit Risk Section of this MD&A. The Company has evaluated available-for-sale securities with exposure to energy for a potential ACL as of December 31, 2020 and concluded that for all but one of the securities in an unrealized loss position, it is more likely than not that the Company will recover the entire amortized cost basis of the securities. In addition, no other securities in the table above have been identified as intent-to-sell, nor is the Company required to sell. For additional details regarding the Company’s credit loss assessment process, see the Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS and Intent-to-Sell Impairments section below.
Commercial & Residential Real Estate
The following table presents the Company’s exposure to CMBS and RMBS by current credit quality included in the preceding Fixed Maturities, AFS by Type table.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Exposure to CMBS and RMBS as of December 31, 2020
Exposure to CMBS and RMBS as of December 31, 2019
[1]Includes securities with pools of loans issued by the Small Business Administration which are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
The Company also has exposure to commercial mortgage loans. These loans are collateralized by real estate properties that are diversified both geographically throughout the United States and by property type. These commercial loans are originated by the Company as high quality whole loans, and the Company may sell participation interests in one or more loans to third parties. A loan participation interest represents a pro-rata share in interest and principal payments generated by the participated loan, and the relationship between the Company as loan originator, lead participant and servicer and the third party as a participant are governed by a participation agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, mortgage loans had an amortized cost of $4.5 billion and carrying value of $4.5 billion, with an ACL of $38. As of December 31, 2019, mortgage loans had an amortized cost of $4.2 billion and carrying value of $4.2 billion with no valuation allowance. The increase in the allowance is attributable
to both the recognition of an ACL in connection with the adoption of accounting guidance for credit losses on January 1, 2020 and the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on the economic forecasts, as well as lower estimated property values and operating income as compared to the prior year. For further information refer to Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company funded $647 of commercial mortgage loans with a weighted average loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio of 59% and a weighted average yield of 3.2% during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company continues to originate commercial mortgage loans in high growth markets across the country focusing primarily on institutional-quality industrial and multi-family properties with strong LTV ratios. There were no
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
mortgage loans held for sale as of December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Municipal Bonds
The following table presents the Company’s exposure to
municipal bonds by type and weighted average credit quality included in the preceding Securities by Type table.
Available For Sale Investments in Municipal Bonds
[1]Pre-refunded bonds are bonds for which an irrevocable trust containing sufficient U.S. treasury, agency, or other securities has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest.
[2]Leasing revenue bonds are generally the obligations of a financing authority established by the municipality that leases facilities back to a municipality. The notes are typically secured by lease payments made by the municipality that is leasing the facilities financed by the issue. Lease payments may be subject to annual appropriation by the municipality or the municipality may be obligated to appropriate general tax revenues to make lease payments.
As of December 31, 2020, the largest issuer concentrations were the New York Dormitory Authority, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and the New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio and were primarily comprised of general obligation and revenue bonds. As of December 31, 2019, the largest issuer concentrations were the New York Dormitory Authority, the New York City Transitional Finance Authority, and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio and were primarily comprised of general obligation and revenue bonds. In total, municipal bonds make up 17% of the fair value of the Company's investment portfolio. While COVID-19 has had an impact on many municipal issuers, the average credit quality of the Company’s holdings is AA-, and the Company believes the issuers in which it invests have multiple levers to maintain the strength of their credit profile.
Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments
The following table presents the Company’s investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments which include hedge funds, real estate funds, and private equity funds. Real estate funds consist of investments primarily in real estate joint ventures and, to a lesser extent, equity funds. Private equity funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small to mid-sized non-public businesses with high growth potential, and
strong owner sponsorship, as well as limited exposure to public markets.
Income or losses on investments in limited partnerships and alternative investments are recognized on a lag as results from private equity investments and other funds are generally reported on a three-month delay.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments - Net Investment Income
Investments in Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments
[1]Consists of an insurer-owned life insurance policy which is primarily invested in fixed income, private equity, and hedge funds.
Fixed Maturities, AFS - Unrealized Loss Aging
The total gross unrealized losses were $63 as of December 31, 2020, and have increased $8 from December 31, 2019, primarily due to wider credit spreads within higher yielding corporates and CMBS. As of December 31, 2020, $49 of the gross unrealized losses were associated with fixed maturities, AFS depressed less than 20% of amortized cost. The remaining $14 of gross unrealized losses were associated with fixed maturities, AFS depressed greater than 20%. The fixed maturities, AFS depressed more than 20% were primarily related to one variable-rate coupon corporate issuer with a long-dated maturity date as well as commercial real estate securities that were purchased at tighter credit spreads.
As part of the Company’s ongoing investment monitoring process, the Company has reviewed its fixed maturities, AFS in an unrealized loss position and concluded that these fixed maturities are temporarily depressed and are expected to recover in value as the investments approach maturity or as market spreads tighten. For these fixed maturities in an unrealized loss position where an ACL has not been recorded, the Company’s best estimate of expected future cash flows are sufficient to recover the amortized cost basis of the investment. Furthermore, the Company neither has an intention to sell nor does it expect to be required to sell these investments. For further information regarding the Company’s ACL analysis, see the Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS and Intent-to-Sell Impairments section below.
Unrealized Loss Aging for Fixed Maturities, AFS
[1]Represents the ACL recorded following the adoption of accounting guidance for credit losses on January 1, 2020. For further information refer to Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Unrealized Loss Aging for Fixed Maturities, AFS Continuously Depressed Over 20%
Credit Losses on Fixed Maturities, AFS and Intent-to-Sell Impairments
For the year ended December 31, 2020
The Company recorded net credit losses on fixed maturities, AFS of $28. The losses were primarily attributable to corporate fixed maturities, mainly one private regional and commercial aircraft lessor and to a lesser extent, one tax-exempt municipal bond impacted by COVID-19. Unrealized losses on securities with ACL recognized in other comprehensive income were $1. For further information, refer to Note 6 - Investments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Intent-to-sell impairments of $5 were primarily related to one corporate issuer in the energy sector and one issuer with exposure to India.
The Company incorporates its best estimate of future performance using internal assumptions and judgments that are informed by economic and industry specific trends, as well as our expectations with respect to security specific developments.
Future intent-to-sell impairments or credit losses may develop as the result of changes in our intent to sell specific securities that are in an unrealized loss position or if modeling assumptions, such as macroeconomic factors or security specific developments, change unfavorably from our current modeling assumptions, resulting in lower cash flow expectations. For a discussion of impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the Impact of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity section of this MD&A.
For the year ended December 31, 2019
Impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $3 primarily related to two corporate securities experiencing issuer-specific financial difficulties.
Non-credit impairments recognized in other comprehensive income were $3.
ACL on Mortgage Loans
The Company reviews mortgage loans on a quarterly basis to estimate the ACL with changes in the ACL recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. Apart from an ACL recorded on
individual mortgage loans where the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, the Company records an ACL on the pool of mortgage loans based on lifetime expected credit losses. For further information, refer to Note 6 - Investments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
For the year-ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an increase in the ACL on mortgage loans of $19. The increase in the allowance was due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on the economic forecasts, as well as lower estimated property values and operating income as compared to the prior year. The Company did not record an ACL on any individual mortgage loans.
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
The following section discusses the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its insurance operations including their ability to generate cash flows from each of their business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs over the next twelve months.
SUMMARY OF CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Capital available to the holding company as of December 31, 2020:
•$1.8 billion in fixed maturities, short-term investments, investment sales receivable and cash at the HFSG Holding Company.
•A senior unsecured five-year revolving credit facility that provides for borrowing capacity up to $750 of unsecured credit through March 29, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding.
•An intercompany liquidity agreement that allows for short-term advances of funds among the HFSG Holding Company and certain affiliates of up to $2.0 billion for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
2021 expected dividends and other sources of capital:
The future payment of dividends from our subsidiaries is dependent on several factors including the extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity
•P&C - The Company's U.S. property and casualty insurance subsidiaries have dividend capacity of $1.7 billion for 2021, with $850 to $900 of net dividends expected in 2021.
•Group Benefits - HLA has dividend capacity of $295 in 2021 with $250 to $295 of dividends expected in 2021.
•Hartford Funds - HFSG Holding Company expects to receive $125 to $150 in dividends from Hartford Funds in 2021.
Expected liquidity requirements for the next twelve months as of December 31, 2020:
•$215 of interest on debt.
•$21 dividends on preferred stock, subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors.
•$500 of common stockholders' dividends, subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors and before share repurchases.
Equity repurchase program:
In December, 2020, the Company announced a $1.5 billion share repurchase authorization by the Board of Directors, which is effective from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2022. The Company’s 2019 share repurchase program expired on December 31, 2020.
Liquidity Requirements and Sources of Capital
The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ("HFSG Holding Company")
The liquidity requirements of the holding company of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. will primarily be met by HFSG Holding Company’s fixed maturities; short-term investments and cash; and dividends, principally from its subsidiaries.
The Company maintains sufficient liquidity and has a variety of contingent liquidity resources to manage liquidity across a range of economic scenarios. To date, the impact of the pandemic and resulting economic downturn on net operating cash flows have been relatively modest. The amount of such impacts will ultimately depend on the length and severity of the pandemic and its effects on the economy. We continue to expect to successfully manage our liquidity throughout the pandemic.
In parts of the second and third quarters of 2020, the Company waived late payment fees for a period of time for business and personal insurance customers and temporarily suspended the
policy cancellation process for policyholders of our Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Group Benefits segments. Due to those actions and the economic effects of the pandemic, we experienced an increase in uncollectible premiums receivable and, accordingly, increased our current expected credit loss allowance on premiums receivable by $40 before tax for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The HFSG Holding Company expects to continue to receive dividends from its operating subsidiaries in the future and manages capital in its operating subsidiaries to be sufficient under significant economic stress scenarios . Dividends from subsidiaries and other sources of funds at the holding company may be used to repurchase shares under the authorized share repurchase program at the discretion of management.
Under significant economic stress scenarios that could arise due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has the ability to meet short-term cash requirements, if needed, by borrowing under its revolving credit facility or by having its insurance subsidiaries take collateralized advances under a facility with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”). The Company could also choose to have its insurance subsidiaries sell certain highly liquid, high quality fixed maturities or the Company could issue debt in the public markets under its shelf registration. No borrowings or advances have occurred to date.
During the second quarter of 2020, fixed maturities, with a value of $63 as of December 31, 2020, were deposited by Hartford Fire Insurance Company into a Lloyd’s trust account to provide required capital to The Hartford’s Lloyd’s Syndicate. During the fourth quarter of 2020, additional fixed maturities, with a value of $112 as of December 31, 2020, were deposited by Hartford Fire Insurance Company into this trust account. This transaction provided required capital to The Hartford's Lloyd's syndicate, by which we reduced the amount of letters of credit under the Lloyd's Letter of Credit Facility supporting Lloyd's capital requirements. This was in accordance with the Lloyd's requirements reducing the maximum amount of letters of credit permitted to support Lloyd's capital requirements as of the end of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, a total of $175 of fixed maturities were held by Hartford Fire Insurance Company in this trust account.
In July 2020, the Company contributed €18 million to Navigators Holdings (Europe) N.V., a Belgium holding company.
In September 2020, the Company received a $30 dividend from its retained equity interest in the legal entity that acquired the life and annuity business sold in May 2018.
Through December 30, 2020, HFSG Holding Company received cash tax receipts of $533, including realization of net operating losses and refunds of prior period AMT credits.
Debt
On March 30, 2020, The Hartford repaid at maturity the $500 principal amount of its 5.5% senior notes.
For additional information on Debt, see Note 14 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Equity
In December, 2020, the Company announced a $1.5 billion share repurchase authorization by the Board of Directors which is effective from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2022.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
During the period from January 1, 2021 through February 18, 2021, the Company repurchased 1.1 million shares for $56. The timing of any future repurchases will be dependent upon several factors, including the market price of the Company's securities, the Company's capital position, consideration of the effect of any repurchases on the Company's financial strength or credit ratings, and other considerations.
Under the previous $1.0 billion share repurchase authorization that was effective through December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 2.7 million and 3.4 million shares for $150 and $200 during the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s 2019 share repurchase program expired on December 31, 2020.
For further information, see Note 16 - Equity of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Dividends
The Hartford's Board of Directors declared the following quarterly dividends since October 1, 2020:
Common Stock Dividends
Preferred Stock Dividends
There are no current restrictions on HFSG Holding Company's ability to pay dividends to its stockholders.
For a discussion of restrictions on dividends to HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries, see the following "Dividends from Subsidiaries" discussion. For a discussion of potential restrictions on the HFSG Holding Company's ability to pay dividends, see Part I, Item 1A, - Risk Factors for the risk factor "Our ability to declare and pay dividends is subject to limitations."
Dividends from Subsidiaries
Dividends to HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted by insurance regulation. Upon the acquisition of Navigators Group, the Company’s principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled in the United States, the United Kingdom and Belgium.
The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer’s statutory policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under
statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer’s earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner.
Property casualty insurers domiciled in New York, including Navigators Insurance Company ("NIC") and Navigators Specialty Insurance Company ("NSIC"), generally may not, without notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner, pay dividends out of earned surplus in any twelve-month period that exceeds the lesser of (i) 10% of the insurer’s statutory policyholders’ surplus as of the most recent financial statement on file, or (ii) 100% of its adjusted net investment income, as defined, for the same twelve month period. As part of the New York state insurance commissioner's approval of the Navigators Group acquisition, and as is common practice, any dividend from NIC and NSIC before May 2021 will require prior approval from the state insurance commissioner.
The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford’s insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. In addition to statutory limitations on paying dividends, the Company also takes other items into consideration when determining dividends from subsidiaries. These considerations include, but are not limited to, expected earnings and capitalization of the subsidiaries, regulatory capital requirements and liquidity requirements of the individual operating company.
Corporate members of Lloyd's Syndicates may pay dividends to its parent to the extent of available profits that have been distributed from the syndicate in excess of the Funds at Lloyd's ("FAL") capital requirement. The FAL is determined based on the syndicate’s solvency capital requirement under the Solvency II capital adequacy model, the current regulatory framework governing UK domiciled insurers, plus a Lloyd’s specific economic capital assessment.
Insurers domiciled in the United Kingdom may pay dividends to their parent out of their statutory profits subject to restrictions imposed under U.K. Company law and Solvency II. Belgium domiciled insurers may only pay dividends if, at the end of their previous fiscal year, the total amount of their assets, as reduced by its provisions and debts, are in excess of certain minimum capital thresholds calculated under Belgian law.
In 2020, HFSG Holding Company received $350 of dividends from HLA and $127 from Hartford Funds. In addition, HFSG Holding Company received $900 of net dividends from P&C subsidiaries in 2020 which excludes $50 of P&C dividends that were subsequently contributed to a run-off P&C subsidiary and $78 of P&C dividends related to interest payments on an intercompany note owed by Hartford Holdings, Inc. ("HHI") to Hartford Fire Insurance Company.
Other Sources of Capital for the HFSG Holding Company
The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the "Ratings" section below for further discussion), and stockholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of debt, common equity, preferred stock, equity-related debt or
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
other capital securities and is continuously evaluating strategic opportunities. The issuance of debt, common equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of stockholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense.
Shelf Registrations
The Hartford filed an automatic shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("the SEC") on May 17, 2019 that permits it to offer and sell debt and equity securities during the three-year life of the registration statement.
For further information regarding Shelf Registrations, see Note 14 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revolving Credit Facilities
The Company has a senior unsecured five-year revolving credit facility (the "Credit Facility") that provides up to $750 of unsecured credit through March 29, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, no borrowings were outstanding, no letters of credit were issued under the Credit Facility and the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants.
Commercial Paper
On December 17, 2020, the Board of Directors terminated the HFSG Holding Company's commercial paper program, under which the maximum borrowings available were $750. The Company maintains sufficient liquidity and continues to have a variety of other contingent liquidity resources to meet its short-term liquidity requirements.
Intercompany Liquidity Agreements
The Company has $2.0 billion available under an intercompany liquidity agreement that allows for short-term advances of funds among the HFSG Holding Company and certain affiliates of up to $2.0 billion for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Connecticut Department of Insurance ("CTDOI") granted approval for certain affiliated insurance companies that are parties to the agreement to treat receivables from a parent, including the HFSG Holding Company, as admitted assets for statutory accounting purposes.
As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding at the HFSG Holding Company.
Collateralized Advances with Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston
The Company’s subsidiaries, Hartford Fire Insurance Company (“Hartford Fire”) and HLA, are members of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (“FHLBB”). Membership allows these subsidiaries access to collateralized advances, which may be short- or long-term with fixed or variable rates. Advances may be used to support general corporate purposes, which would be presented as short- or long-term debt, or to earn incremental investment income, which would be presented in other liabilities consistent with other collateralized financing transactions. As of December 31, 2020, there were no advances outstanding. The Connecticut Department of Insurance permits Hartford Fire and HLA to pledge up to $1.2 billion and $0.6 billion in qualifying assets, respectively, without prior approval, to secure FHLBB advances in 2021. For further information regarding the Company's collateralized advances with Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston, see Note 14 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Lloyd's Letter of Credit Facilities
As a result of the acquisition of Navigators Group, The Hartford had two letter of credit facility agreements: the Club Facility and the Bilateral Facility, which were used to provide a portion of the capital requirements at Lloyd's. As of September 30, 2020, uncollateralized letters of credit with an aggregate face amount of $165 and £60 million, or $78, were outstanding under the Club Facility and £18 million, or $23, was outstanding under the $25 Bilateral Facility. These agreements terminated on November 5, 2020.
On November 5, 2020, The Hartford entered into a new committed credit facility agreement with a syndicate of lenders (the “Club Facility”). The Club Facility has two tranches with one tranche extending a $104 commitment and the other tranche extending a £85 million ($116 as of December 31, 2020) commitment. In addition, on November 5, 2020, The Hartford entered into a new non-committed $25 credit facility with a lender (the “Bilateral Facility”). The term of both of these facilities is two years. The purpose of these facilities is to issue letters of credit to provide Funds at Lloyd’s to support underwriting capacity provided by the Navigators Corporate Underwriters Limited to the Lloyd’s Syndicate for the 2021 and 2022 underwriting years of account (and prior open years). As of December 31, 2020, letters of credit with an aggregate face amount of $104 and £85 million, or $116, were outstanding under the Club Facility and no letters of credit were outstanding under the Bilateral Facility.
Among other covenants, the Club Facility and Bilateral Facility contain financial covenants regarding The Hartford’s consolidated net worth and financial leverage and that limit the amount of letters of credit that can support Funds at Lloyd’s, consistent with Lloyd’s requirements. As of December 31, 2020, The Hartford was in compliance with all financial covenants of both facilities.
Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits
While the Company has significant discretion in making voluntary contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan, minimum contributions are mandated in certain circumstances pursuant to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006, the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, the Preservation of Access to Care for Medicare Beneficiaries and Pension Relief Act of 2010, the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act of 2012 (MAP-21) and Internal Revenue Code regulations. The Company made contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan of approximately $70, $70 and $101 in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2020, 2019 and 2018. The Company’s 2020, 2019 and 2018 required minimum funding contributions were immaterial. The Company does not have a 2021 required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan and the funding requirements for all pension plans are expected to be immaterial. The Company has not determined whether, and to what extent, contributions may be made to the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2021. The Company will monitor the funded status of the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan during 2021 to make this determination.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Derivative Commitments
Certain of the Company’s derivative agreements contain provisions that are tied to the financial strength ratings, as set by nationally recognized statistical agencies, of the individual legal entity that entered into the derivative agreement. If the legal entity’s financial strength were to fall below certain ratings, the counterparties to the derivative agreements could demand immediate and ongoing full collateralization and in certain instances enable the counterparties to terminate the agreements and demand immediate settlement of all outstanding derivative positions traded under each impacted bilateral agreement. For further information, refer to Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 31, 2020, no derivative positions would be subject to immediate termination in the event of a downgrade of one level below the current financial strength ratings. This could change as a result of changes in our hedging activities or to the extent changes in contractual terms are negotiated.
Insurance Operations
While subject to variability period to period, underwriting and investment cash flows continue to provide sufficient liquidity to meet anticipated demands over the next twelve months. For information about the impact of COVID-19 on the Company's cash flows see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company’s current contractual obligations by period, refer to Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations within the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A.
The principal sources of operating funds are premiums, fees earned from assets under management and investment income, while investing cash flows primarily originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, claim adjustment expenses, commissions and other underwriting and insurance operating costs, to pay taxes, to purchase new investments and to make dividend payments to the HFSG Holding Company.
The Company’s insurance operations consist of property and casualty insurance products (collectively referred to as “Property & Casualty Operations”) and Group Benefits.
The Company's insurance operations hold fixed maturity securities including a significant short-term investment position (securities with maturities of one year or less at the time of purchase) to meet liquidity needs. Liquidity requirements that are
unable to be funded by the Company's insurance operations' short-term investments would be satisfied with current operating funds, including premiums or investing cash flows, which includes proceeds received through the sale of invested assets. A sale of invested assets could result in significant realized capital losses.
The following tables represent the fixed maturity holdings, including the aforementioned cash and short-term investments available to meet liquidity needs, for each of the Company’s insurance operations.
Property & Casualty
Group Benefits Operations
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments, private placements, and mortgage loans as disclosed in Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Aggregate Contractual Obligations as of December 31, 2020
[1]The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations (gross of reinsurance) under property and casualty contracts:
•Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include IBNR and case reserves. While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future.
•In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments.
•Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants. As of December 31, 2020, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $367.
•Amounts shown do not consider $5.7 billion of reinsurance and other recoverables the Company expects to collect related to property and casualty obligations.
[2] Estimated group life and disability obligations are based on assumptions comparable with the Company’s historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. As of December 31, 2020, the total group life and disability obligations in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $1.4 billion.
[3]Includes undiscounted lease payments on operating lease agreements, including leases that have not yet commenced. See Note 21 - Leases of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments.
[4] Long-term debt obligations include payments of contractual principal and interest through final maturity. Contractual interest payments are based on stated rates for fixed rate notes and based on prevailing rates at December 31, 2020 for the period of time the Company’s junior subordinated debentures have floating rates. Interest payments do not consider the impact of future rate movements. Payments exclude amounts associated with an interest rate swap of the Company’s $500 junior subordinated debenture. See Note 14 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations.
[5]Includes $1.1 billion in commitments to purchase investments including approximately $804 of limited partnership and other alternative investments, $79 of private debt and equity securities, and $236 of mortgage loans. Of the $1.1 billion in commitments to purchase investments, $149 are related to mortgage loan commitments which the Company can cancel unconditionally. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. In addition, $904 relates to commitments to purchase investments which are reflected on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. The remaining balance relates to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, and information technology in the normal course of business, as well as unfunded tax credit investments. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancellable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased.
[6]Includes cash collateral of $30 which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company’s derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year.
Capitalization
Total capitalization increased $1,790, or 8%, as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily due to an
increase in AOCI and net income in excess of stockholder dividends, partially offset by a paydown of debt.
For additional information on AOCI, net of tax, including
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
unrealized capital gains from securities, see Note 18 - Changes in and Reclassifications From Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) and Note 6 - Investments of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements. For additional information on debt, see Note 14 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cash Flow [1][2]
[1]Cash activities in 2018 include cash flows from Discontinued Operations; see Note 22 - Business Dispositions and Discontinued Operations of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information on cash flows from Discontinued Operations.
[2]Cash activities in 2020 include cash flows related to Continental Europe Operations classified as held for sale beginning in the third quarter of 2020. See Note 2 - Business Acquisition and Disposition of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of this transaction.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities increased as compared to the prior year period primarily driven by the inclusion of Navigators Group for the full year in 2020, subrogation benefit distributions collected of $227 arising from the PG&E settlement agreement, a decrease in claims paid for Group Benefits and P&C excluding Navigators, lower operating expenses paid and the deferral of paying payroll taxes as a result of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, partially offset by lower P&C premiums received excluding Navigators and a lower refund of AMT credits.
Cash used for investing activities decreased primarily due to the acquisition of Navigators Group for $1.9 billion in 2019, an increase in net proceeds from equity securities, and a decrease in net payments from mortgage loans, partially offset by a change from net proceeds to net payments from short-term investments, and an increase in net purchases of partnerships and fixed maturities.
Cash used for financing activities increased primarily due to a decrease in proceeds from issuing debt and a larger net decrease in securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase, partially offset by a decrease in repayments of debt.
Operating cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements.
Equity Markets
For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Financial Risk on Statutory Capital and Liquidity Risk section in this MD&A.
Ratings
Ratings are an important factor in establishing a competitive position in the insurance marketplace and impact the Company's ability to access financing and its cost of borrowing. There can be no assurance that the Company’s ratings will continue for any given period of time, or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company’s ratings are downgraded, the Company’s competitive position, ability to access financing, and its cost of borrowing, may be adversely impacted.
On June 19, 2020, A.M. Best raised its financial strength rating on Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company ("HLA") to A+ from A. The upgrade is reflective of the support provided by The Hartford, as well as the group benefits business' growing contribution to consolidated revenue and earnings and the overall diversification it provides.
Insurance Financial Strength Ratings as of February 18, 2021
These ratings are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any of The Hartford’s securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. Each agency’s rating should be evaluated independently of any other agency’s rating. The system and the number of rating categories can vary across rating agencies.
Among other factors, rating agencies consider the level of statutory capital and surplus of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries as well as the level of a measure of GAAP capital held by the Company in determining the Company's financial strength and credit ratings. Rating agencies may implement changes to their capital formulas that have the effect of increasing the amount of capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - “Downgrades in our financial strength or credit ratings may make our products less attractive, increase our cost of capital and inhibit our ability to refinance our debt.”
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Statutory Capital
[1]The statutory capital for property and casualty insurance subsidiaries in this table does not include the value of an intercompany note owed by HHI to Hartford Fire Insurance Company.
[2]Excludes insurance operations in the U.K. and Continental Europe.
[3]P&C insurance subsidiaries dividends to Parent of $898 includes $900 of net dividends from P&C subsidiaries, offset by $2 related to the interest on the HHI note.
Stat to GAAP Differences
Significant differences between U.S. GAAP stockholders’ equity and aggregate statutory capital prepared in accordance with U.S. STAT include the following:
•U.S. STAT excludes equity of non-insurance and foreign insurance subsidiaries not held by U.S. insurance subsidiaries.
•Costs incurred by the Company to acquire insurance policies are deferred under U.S. GAAP while those costs are expensed immediately under U.S. STAT.
•Temporary differences between the book and tax basis of an asset or liability which are recorded as deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability under U.S. GAAP while these amounts are then subject to further admissibility tests under U.S. STAT.
•The assumptions used in the determination of Group Benefits reserves (i.e. for Group Benefits contracts) are prescribed under U.S. STAT, while the assumptions used under U.S. GAAP are generally the Company’s best estimates.
•The difference between the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity and other investments, net of tax, is recorded as an increase or decrease to the carrying value of the related asset and to equity under U.S. GAAP, while, under U.S. STAT, most investments are carried at amortized cost with only certain securities carried at fair value, such as equity securities and certain lower rated bonds required by the NAIC to be recorded at the lower of amortized cost or fair value.
•U.S. STAT for life insurance companies like HLA establishes a formula reserve for realized and unrealized losses due to default and equity risks associated with certain invested assets (the Asset Valuation Reserve), while U.S. GAAP does not. Also, for those realized gains and losses caused by changes in interest rates, U.S. STAT for life insurance companies defers and amortizes the gains and losses, caused by changes in interest rates, into income over the original life to maturity of the asset sold (the Interest Maintenance Reserve) while U.S. GAAP does not.
•Goodwill arising from the acquisition of a business is tested for recoverability on an annual basis (or more frequently, as necessary) for U.S. GAAP, while under U.S. STAT goodwill is amortized over a period not to exceed 10 years and the amount of goodwill admitted as an asset is limited.
•The deferred gain on retroactive reinsurance for losses ceded to the Navigators and A&E ADC agreements is recognized within a special category of surplus under U.S. STAT but is recognized within other liabilities under U.S. GAAP.
In addition, certain assets, including a portion of premiums receivable and fixed assets, are non-admitted (recorded at zero value and charged against surplus) under U.S. STAT. U.S. GAAP generally evaluates assets based on their recoverability.
Risk-Based Capital
The Company's U.S. insurance companies' states of domicile impose RBC requirements. The requirements provide a means of measuring the minimum amount of statutory capital appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations based on its size and risk profile. Companies below specific trigger points or ratios are classified within certain levels, each of which requires specified corrective action. All of the Company's U.S. operating insurance subsidiaries had RBC ratios in excess of the minimum levels required by the applicable insurance regulations.
Similar to the RBC ratios that are employed by U.S. insurance regulators, regulatory authorities in the international jurisdictions in which the Company operates generally establish minimum solvency requirements for insurance companies. All of the Company's international insurance subsidiaries expect to maintain capital levels in excess of the minimum levels required by the applicable regulatory authorities.
Sensitivity
In any particular period, statutory capital amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease depending upon a variety of factors. The amount of change in the statutory capital or RBC ratios can vary based on individual factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. For further discussion on these factors, see
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Financial Risk on Statutory Capital.
Statutory capital at the insurance subsidiaries has been maintained at capital levels commensurate with the Company's desired RBC ratios and ratings from rating agencies. The amount of statutory capital can increase or decrease depending on a number of factors affecting insurance results including, among other factors, the level of catastrophe claims incurred, the amount of reserve development, the effect of changes in interest rates on investment income and the discounting of loss reserves, and the effect of realized gains and losses on investments.
Contingencies
Legal Proceedings
For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford’s legal proceedings, see the information
contained under “Litigation” and “Run-off Asbestos and Environmental Claims,” in Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 3 Legal Proceedings, which are incorporated herein by reference.
Legislative and Regulatory Developments
COVID-19 Global Pandemic
State and federal retroactive business interruption coverage and other insurance regulatory relief initiatives - State and federal lawmakers are continuing to consider legislation and regulation in response to COVID-19. There have been proposals to impose retroactive coverage of COVID-19 claims under existing business interruption coverage provisions. If such proposals were enacted, they could represent a material exposure for the Company. Further, some states have adopted, or are considering incorporating, a presumption that if certain workers become infected with COVID-19, such infection would constitute an occupational disease triggering workers’ compensation coverage. In addition, state insurance regulators, including California, New Jersey and New York, have encouraged (and in some cases required) insurers to offer immediate relief to policyholders including refunding and offering discounts for drivers, incorporating flexible payment solutions for families, individuals, and businesses, providing additional time to make payments, waiving insurance premium late fees, pausing cancellation of coverage for personal and commercial policies due to non-payment and policy expiration, and suspending personal automobile exclusions for restaurant employees who are transitioning to meal delivery services using their personal automobile policy as coverage. The Hartford has offered consumer financial relief including a 15 percent refund on policyholders’ April and May 2020 personal automobile insurance premiums, waived late payments fees for a period of time for business and personal insurance customers and temporarily suspended policy cancellations for policyholders of our Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Group Benefits segments. As the COVID-19 global pandemic continues, regulators may require us to or we may elect to provide additional consumer and/or business financial relief. The duration and scope of such regulatory/Company actions are uncertain, and the impacts of
such actions could adversely affect the Company’s insurance business.
Federal pandemic risk insurance - Congress is considering possible action for future pandemic risk insurance coverage through a risk sharing mechanism between insurers and the federal government. Timing for any Congressional action with respect to these efforts is uncertain at this time. If such a program were to be enacted, it could represent a significant obligation for the company in terms of deductible and co-share obligations.
Federal emergency leave legislation - On March 18, 2020, the Families First Coronavirus Response Act ("FFCRA") was signed into law by the President, and was effective from April 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020. This legislation included a number of funding provisions and worker protections including mandated emergency paid sick leave and paid family and medical leave programs. For private employers with fewer than 500 employees, and most public employers, new programs were put in place to guarantee individuals 10 days of paid sick leave, and up to 10 weeks of paid family and medical leave to deal directly with COVID-19. Eligible employers have access to a tax credit to reimburse for costs related to the emergency leave programs. On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 was signed into law and included a bipartisan COVID-19 relief bill. Although the mandatory paid leave provisions from the FFCRA expired on December 31, 2020, the new law extends FFCRA tax credits through March 31, 2021, for covered employers that voluntarily continue to offer paid leave under the FFCRA framework. The Hartford is providing support for the administration of the family and medical leave component of the FFCRA for our Group Benefits customers. Congress also approved a $2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security ("CARES") Act. The bill, signed into law on March 27, 2020, focused on providing financial support for small businesses, individuals, emergency workers, airlines and other industries of national security. The CARES Act included several technical corrections to the emergency leave programs and created advance refunding credits, which allow the U.S. Treasury to develop regulations or guidance to permit advancement of the tax credit for both the emergency paid sick leave and paid family and medical leave. While any further Congressional action could trigger a significant increase in claims volume and compliance requirements for Group Benefits, the timing of additional legislation is unclear at this time.
Federal tax legislation - In response to the COVID-19 Global Pandemic, Congress, various states and other global jurisdictions have passed various pieces of legislation which contain various changes to the tax laws in order to aid impacted businesses and individuals, as well as provide economic stimulus. The Company deferred the employer’s portion of the Social Security tax on wages from March 27, 2020 to year-end 2020. Such deferred amounts would be due and payable over a two-year period, 50% by December 31, 2021 and 50% by December 31, 2022. Refer to Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about the impact of these new tax laws on the Company. The U.S. Treasury and IRS continue to develop guidance implementing these new tax law provisions, and Congress may consider additional technical corrections to these laws. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the U.S. Treasury Department could have a material effect on the Company and its insurance businesses. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear.
Index to MD&A
Part II - Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (the "Affordable Care Act") It is unclear whether the Administration, Congress or the courts will seek to reverse, amend or alter the ongoing operation of the Affordable Care Act ("ACA"). If such actions were to occur, they may have an impact on various aspects of our business, including our insurance businesses. It is unclear what an amended ACA would entail, and to what extent there may be a transition period for the phase out of the ACA. The impact to The Hartford as an employer would be consistent with other large employers. The Hartford’s core business does not involve the issuance of health insurance, and we have not observed any material impacts on the Company’s workers’ compensation business or group benefits business from the enactment of the ACA. We will continue to monitor the impact of the ACA and any reforms on consumer, broker and medical provider behavior for leading indicators of changes in medical costs or loss payments primarily on the Company's workers' compensation and disability liabilities.
Tax Reform At the end of 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ("TCJA") was enacted. The TCJA made significant reforms to the U.S. tax code. The major areas of interest to the Company included the reduction of the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% and the repeal of the corporate alternative minimum tax (AMT) and the refunding of AMT credits. The U.S. Treasury and IRS continue to develop guidance implementing TCJA, and Congress may consider additional technical corrections to the law. In addition, President Biden has indicated he will propose to
increase the corporate tax rate to as high as 28% and revisit other aspects of TCJA. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the U.S. Treasury Department could have a material effect on the Company and its insurance businesses. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. For additional information on risks to the Company related to TCJA, see the risk factor entitled "Changes in federal or state tax laws could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity" under "Risk Factors" in Part I.
Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments
For a discussion regarding Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments, see Note 15 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
ACRONYMS
A&E Asbestos and Environmental
HHI Hartford Holdings, Inc.
ABS Asset Backed Securities
HIMCO Hartford Investment Management Company
ACL Allowance for Credit Losses
IBNR Incurred But Not Reported
ADC Adverse Development Cover
IT Information Technology
AFS Available-For-Sale
LCL Liability for Credit Losses
ALAE Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses
LIBOR London Inter-Bank Offered Rate
AMT Alternative Minimum Tax
LTD Long-Term Disability
AOCI Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
LTV Loan-to-Value
AUM Assets Under Management
MD&A Management's Discussion and Analysis
CAY Current Accident Year
NAIC National Association of Insurance Commissioners
CLO Collateralized Loan Obligation
NIC Navigators Insurance Company
CMBS Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities
NICO National Indemnity Company, a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. (“Berkshire”)
CMT Crisis Management Team
NM Not Meaningful
DAC Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs
NOLs Net Operating Loss Carryforwards or Carrybacks
DLR Disabled Life Reserve
NSIC Navigators Specialty Insurance Company
DSCR Debt Service Coverage Ratio
OCI Other Comprehensive Income
ERCC Enterprise Risk and Capital Committee
OTC Over-the-Counter
ESPP The Hartford Employee Stock Purchase Plan
P&C Property and Casualty
ETF Exchange-Traded Funds
PG&E PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
ETP Exchange-Traded Products
PYD Prior Year Development
FAL Funds at Lloyd's
RBC Risk-Based Capital
FASB Financial Accounting Standards Board
RMBS Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities
FHLBB Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston
ROE Return on Equity
GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
SCR Solvency Capital Requirement
GB Group Benefits
SOFR Secured Overnight Funding Rate
HFSG The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.
ULAE Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expenses
Part II -