Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this report, including the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in Part I, “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A.“Risk Factors.” We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We earn revenue by deploying professionals to provide services to our clients, including project management, construction management facilities management and related consulting. These services are primarily delivered on a “cost plus” or “time and materials” ("T&M") basis in which we bill negotiated hourly or monthly rates or a negotiated multiple of the direct cost of these professionals, plus actual out-of-pocket expenses. Our direct expenses are the actual cost of these professionals, including most payroll and benefits, except for paid time-off, which is recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A"). We also provide services under fixed price contracts and T&M contracts with a cap.
Our revenue consists of two components: CFR and reimbursable expenses. The professionals we deploy are occasionally subcontractors. We generally bill the actual cost of these subcontractors and recognize this cost as both revenue (reimbursable expenses) and direct expense. CFR refers to our revenue excluding amounts paid or due to subcontractors. We believe CFR is an important measure because it represents the revenue on which we earn gross profit, whereas total revenue includes the costs for subcontractors on which we generally pass through and earn minimal or no gross profit.
We compete for business based on a variety of factors such as technical capability, global resources, price, reputation and past experience, including client requirements for substantial experience in similar projects. We have developed significant long-standing relationships, which bring us repeat business and would be very difficult to replicate. We believe we have an excellent reputation for attracting and retaining professionals. In addition, we believe there are high barriers to entry for new competitors especially in the project management market.
SG&A expenses consist primarily of personnel costs that are not billable and corporate or regional costs such as sales, business development, proposals, operations, finance, human resources, legal, marketing, management and administration.
The Company operates in a single reporting segment, known as the Project Management Group which provides fee-based project, construction and facilities management services to our clients. Our experienced professionals are capable of managing all phases of the construction process from concept through completion, including cost and budget controls, scheduling, estimating, expediting, inspection, contract administration and management of contractors, subcontractors and suppliers.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In December 2019, COVID-19 was identified in Wuhan, China. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic as a result of the further spread of the virus into all regions of the world, including those regions where our primary operations occur.
We instituted a work-from-home policy for all offices and employees globally in late March 2020, except for field-based employees who normally work on-site at our client’s facilities. These field-based employees are complying with our respective clients’ policies. The majority of our field employees are located in the regions where they deliver their services, so travel restrictions enacted by various government authorities did not impair their ability to continue to perform services for our clients. Employees have been returning to their assigned offices, on a modified basis, as their city, state and country reopens, consistent with the applicable requirements of local law.
Most of the projects to which we provide services have been classified as essential services by the relevant governmental authority and as such have continued despite restrictions on the operation of "non-essential" businesses by certain governmental authorities. The majority of our billable employees have continued to provide billable services to our clients, either on-site or remotely at the same or at a slightly reduced volume as in effect prior to the spread of COVID-19. We estimate that COVID-19 resulted in loss of CFR of approximately $25,000 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, inclusive of delayed projects awards and cancellations brought on by the virus.
Nearly all our employees had company laptop computers and the ability to work remotely prior to the institution of our work-at-home policy. The work-at-home policy did not have a significant impact on our employees’ ability to perform their job requirements. Our internal control structure does not generally require physical access to our office locations, and has not to date and is not expected in the future to be adversely impacted by the spread of COVID-19 and the corresponding response by certain governmental authorities. Processes that require physical access to our offices, such as receiving mail (including collections) and processing and mailing manual checks, are being performed by designated individuals at a reduced frequency while certain of our offices remain closed.
The main impacts on our business observed to date other than those discussed above are delays in the procurement processes of a number of our current and potential clients and a temporary slowing of certain collections. We expect these delays in the procurement process to adversely impact the timing of our new bookings, resulting in lower bookings, CFR and backlog for the duration of the economic slowdown caused by the pandemic.
We also experienced a slightly lower than normal amount of collections during the latter part of March. Collections returned to a more normal level during the second quarter and remained at a more normal level through the remainder of the year. We had unrestricted cash of $34,229 and available borrowing capacity on our credit facilities totaling $11,711 at December 31, 2020.
Management implemented various actions and policies that resulted in approximately $11,000 in cost reductions to partially offset the expected reduction in CFR. This is higher than the $10,000 estimated previously due to the continuation of cost reductions as COVID-19 has continued to impact the business beyond the time initially contemplated. We expect costs in 2021 to increase modestly in line with an anticipated rebound in activity, as the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subside and the Company's activity increases. The Company will continue to manage costs and its association with CFR relative to the evolving effects of COVID-19.
The full extent and duration of the impact of COVID-19 on our operations and financial performance is currently unknown, and depends on future developments that are uncertain and unpredictable, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, its impact on capital and financial markets on a macro-scale and any new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus, its spread to other regions and the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, among others.
We will continue to evaluate the potential short-term and long-term implications of COVID-19 on our consolidated financial statements and operations. We believe that the lower backlog reflected in the financial statements at December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The potential additional future impacts to our consolidated financial statements of operations include, but are not limited to: decreased CFR, lower gross and operating margins, impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and fair value and collectability of receivables.
Any of these outcomes could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Management currently believes that it has adequate liquidity and business plans to continue to operate the business and mitigate the risks associated with COVID-19 for at least the next 12 months from the date of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates that affect the consolidated financial statements, areas that management considers critical are discussed below. We believe our assumptions are reasonable and appropriate, however, actual results may be materially different than estimated.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from providing professional services to our clients under various types of contracts. We evaluate contractual arrangements to determine how to recognize revenue. Below is a description of the basic types of contracts from which we may earn revenue:
Time and Materials Contracts
Under the T&M arrangements, contract fees are based upon time and materials incurred. The contracts may be structured as basic T&M, cost plus a margin or time and materials subject to a maximum contract value (the "cap value"). Due to the potential limitation of the cap value, the economic factors of the contracts subject to a cap value differ from the economic factors of basic T&M and cost plus a margin contracts.
The majority of our contracts are for consulting projects where we bill the client monthly at hourly billing rates. The hourly billing rates are determined by contractual terms. Under cost plus a margin contracts, we charge our clients for our costs, plus a fixed fee or rate.
Under T&M contracts with a cap value, we charge our clients for time and materials based upon the work performed, subject to a cap or a not to exceed value. There are often instances that a contract is modified to extend the contract value past the cap. As the consideration is variable depending on the outcome of the contract renegotiation, we estimate the total contract price in accordance with the variable consideration guidelines and only include consideration we expect to receive. When we expect to reach the cap value, we generally renegotiate the contract or cease work when the maximum contract value is reached. We continue to work if it is probable that the contract will be extended. We only include consideration on contract renegotiations to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. If we continue to work and are uncertain that a contract change order will be processed, the variable consideration will be constrained until it is probable that the contract will be renegotiated. We are only entitled to consideration for the work we have performed, and the cap value is not a guaranteed contract value.
Fixed Price Contracts
Under fixed price contracts, our clients pay an agreed amount negotiated in advance for a specified scope of work. We are guaranteed to receive the consideration to the extent that we deliver under the contract. We recognize revenue over a period of time on fixed price contracts using the input method based upon direct costs incurred to date, which are compared to total projected direct costs. Costs are the most relevant measure to determine the transfer of the service to the client. We assess contracts quarterly and will recognize any expected future loss before actually incurring the loss. When we expect to reach the total consideration under the contract, we begin to negotiate a change order.
Change Orders and Claims
Change orders are modifications of an original contract that effectively change the provisions of the contract without adding new provisions. Either we or our client may initiate change orders. They may include changes in specifications or design, manner of performance, facilities, equipment, materials, sites and period of completion of the work. Management evaluates when a change order is probable based upon its experience in negotiating change orders, the client’s written approval of such changes or separate documentation of change order costs that are identifiable. Change orders may take time to be formally documented and terms of such change orders are agreed with the client before the work is performed. Sometimes circumstances require that work progresses before an agreement is reached with the client. If we are having difficulties in renegotiating the change order, we will stop work if possible, record all costs incurred to date, and determine, on a project by project basis, the appropriate final revenue recognition.
Claims are amounts in excess of the agreed contract price that we seek to collect from clients or others for client-caused delays, errors in specifications and designs, contract terminations, change orders that are either in dispute or are unapproved as to both scope and price, or other causes of unanticipated additional contract costs. Costs related to change orders and claims are recognized when they are incurred.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We make ongoing estimates relating to the collectability of our accounts receivable and maintain an allowance for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our clients to make required payments. Estimates used in determining accounts receivable allowances are based on our evaluation of specific client accounts and contracts involved and the financial condition of our clients. The factors we consider in our evaluations include, but are not limited to, client type (U.S. federal and other national governments, state and local governments or private sector), historical contract performance, historical collection and delinquency trends, client credit worthiness, and general economic and political conditions. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $53,450 and $59,131, respectively. The allowance for doubtful accounts balance included approximately $33,242 and $32,864 related to our receivables in Libya at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Contingencies
Estimates are inherent in the assessment of our exposure to insurance claims that fall below policy deductibles and to litigation and other legal claims and contingencies, as well as in determining our liabilities for incurred but not reported insurance claims. Significant judgments by us and reliance on third-party experts are utilized in determining probable and/or reasonably estimable amounts to be recorded or disclosed in our financial statements. The results of any changes in accounting estimates are reflected in the financial statements of the period in which the changes are determined. We do not believe that material changes to these estimates are reasonably likely to occur.
2020 Business Overview
Consolidated Results
(In thousands)
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total Revenue:
Consulting Fee Revenue:
Total revenue decreased approximately $7,913 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same time period in the prior year. CFR was $296,615 and $308,620 of the total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was approximately 80.5% and 82.0% of total revenues, respectively.
The decrease in total revenue and the corresponding decrease in CFR for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to delayed project starts and project suspensions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit:
The change in gross margin as a percentage of CFR for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to the following:
Americas:
The increase in gross margin as a percentage of CFR in the region is primarily due to a $1,700 decrease in direct benefit expenses as a result of the suspension of the employers 401(k) match during the second half of 2020. This match has been reinstated for 2021.
Middle East/Asia/Pacific:
The decrease in gross margin as a percentage of CFR in the region is primarily due to work on a large project in Qatar which started during the second half of 2019 with lower than average margin, an increase in expense related to the liquidation of a bond and a reduction in the revenue of an ongoing project related to updated cost projections. A settlement on a project in Kuwait, which terminated during 2020, also contributed to the decrease in gross margin.
Africa:
The increase in gross margin as a percentage of CFR in the region is primarily due to receiving a $1,200 credit from one of our partners.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses:
Our total selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") was approximately the same amount for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During 2020, labor expenses were reduced by approximately $900 and travel expenses were reduced by approximately $2,800, as a result of the COVID-19 stay at home orders issued throughout the world. In addition, legal expenses were lower in 2020 by approximately $2,200 primarily as a result of a settlement and return of previously incurred legal expenses, professional fees were reduced by approximately $1,800 due to lower fees being charged and bad debt expense was reduced by $2,000 as a result of payments received on accounts receivables previously reserved. Offsetting these reductions were a $7,124 net benefit in 2019 from the collection of a fully-reserved receivable and a $1,600 of additional depreciation charge for the write-off of leasehold improvements related to the Company subletting office space in Philadelphia to a third party during the first quarter of 2020, an approximate $350 increase in computer equipment and software costs primarily related to remote working and increases in other indirect expenses.
During 2019, we received a payment of more than $9,400, which netted to $7,124 after payments to subcontractors and other costs, against the approximately $42,000 outstanding accounts receivable that we had been owed from the Organization for the Development of Administrative Centres ("ODAC"), an agency of the Libyan national government, which we had previously fully reserved. Upon receiving payment, the reserve was reversed in the amount received, which decreased the bad debt expense for 2019.
SG&A expenses represented approximately 36.8% and 35.6% of CFR for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Foreign Currency Exchange Loss
Foreign currency exchange losses were approximately $1,800 greater for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The currency exchange losses were primarily caused by an 18% weakening of the Brazilian Real against the Euro prior to declaring bankruptcy of our Brazilian subsidiary and a 12% strengthening of the Egyptian pound against the Euro in 2019 compared to a 4% weakening during the same period in 2020.
Interest and related financing fees, net
Interest and related financing fees, net, include interest expense of $5,357, net of $133 in interest income, and interest expense of $6,082, net of $287 in interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which decreased as a result of higher weighted-average interest rates billed to us on our secured credit facilities with Société Générale throughout the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
The effective income tax rates for 2020, and 2019 were (1636.2)% and (8.4)% respectively. The Company’s effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate, for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to additional uncertain tax position accruals, as well as the inability to recognize any tax benefit for losses in certain jurisdictions, particularly Brazil.
The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to benefits recognized from provision to return adjustments and the reversal of an outstanding tax accrual related to the Claims Construction Group sale. This is partially offset by additional uncertain tax position accruals, as well as additional increases in our valuation allowances.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities and projected future taxable income in making this assessment. Management evaluates the need for valuation allowances on the deferred tax assets according to the provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes. We consider both positive and negative evidence. In making this determination, management assesses all of the evidence available at the time including recent earnings, internally-prepared income projections, and historical financial performance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash obligations are our payroll and our project subcontractors. Our primary source of cash is receipts from clients. We generally pay our employees semi-monthly in arrears and invoice our clients monthly in arrears. Our clients generally remit payment approximately three months, on average, after invoice date. This creates a lag between the time we pay our employees and the time we receive payment from our clients. We bill our clients for any subcontractors used and pay those subcontractors after receiving payment from our clients, so no such timing lag exists for the payments we make to subcontractors.
We utilize cash on hand and our revolving credit facilities to fund the working capital requirement caused by the lag discussed above and other operating needs. We believe our expected cash receipts from clients, together with current cash on hand and revolving credit facilities, are sufficient to support the reasonably anticipated cash needs of our operations over the next twelve months.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our primary sources of liquidity consisted of $34,229 and $15,915 in cash and cash equivalents, respectively, of which $28,842 and $15,260 was on deposit in foreign locations, respectively, and $11,711 and $14,735 of available borrowing capacity under our various credit facilities, respectively. We also have relationships with other foreign banks for the issuance of letters of credit, letters of guarantee and performance bonds in a variety of foreign currencies. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had approximately $52,236 and $50,779 of availability under these arrangements. Our sources of liquidity under arrangements with foreign banks are available for repatriation as deemed necessary by us with some restrictions and tax implications.
We believe that we have sufficient liquidity to support the reasonably anticipated cash needs of our operations over the next twelve months from the date of this filing.
Sources of Additional Capital
A significant increase in our current backlog may require us to obtain additional financing. If additional financing is required in the future due to an increase in backlog or changes in strategic or operating plans, we cannot provide any assurance that any other sources of financing will be available, or if available, that the financing will be on terms acceptable to us.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
The increase in cash from operations during 2020 was primarily due to increased collection activity of our outstanding accounts receivable balances, the deferral of payroll taxes permitted under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), the suspension of the 401(k) match by the Company for most of the year and the deferral of certain rent payments.
Cash held in restricted accounts is primarily collateral for the issuance of performance and advance payment bonds, letters of credit and escrow and was $7,184 and $9,067 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to the release of cash collateral and reduction of certain performance bonds.
We manage our operating cash flows by managing the working capital accounts in total. The primary elements of our working capital are accounts receivable, prepaid and other current assets, accounts payable and deferred revenue.
From year to year, the components of our working capital accounts may reflect significant changes. The changes are primarily due to the timing of cash receipts and payments with our working capital accounts combined with changes in our receivables and payables relative to the changes in our overall business.
Investing Activities
During 2020 and 2019, cash was used in investing activities primarily for the purchase of fixed assets. In 2020, cash was also used to purchase an engineering license in New York. Fixed asset purchases in 2019 include leasehold improvements at our Philadelphia office to consolidate space and sublease our unused floor.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was from net borrowings on revolving debt of $5,800 and $1,300 of term loans. Net cash used in financing activities during 2019 was due to the net pay-downs on revolving debt of $4,065 and term loans of $1,060.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to new accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" hereof.
Quarterly Fluctuations
Our operating results vary from period to period as a result of the timing of projects and assignments. We do not believe that our business is seasonal.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table provides information with respect to off-balance sheet arrangements with domestic and foreign banks for the issuance of performance bonds, advance payment guarantees and other letters of credit that are scheduled to expire in 2021 and beyond. The total amount of these arrangements in the following table includes amounts issued in various foreign currencies and are based on the foreign currency exchange rates as of December 31, 2020, where applicable.
(1)At December 31, 2020, the Company had provided cash collateral amounting to $7,184 for certain of these items. That collateral is reflected in restricted cash on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. See Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding these arrangements.
(2)Represents guarantee of service performance bonds and advance payments through domestic and international banks required under certain client contracts.
(3)Represents tender and bid bonds issued through international banks as part of the bidding process for new work to assure our client that we will enter into the service contract.
(4)Includes off-balance sheet arrangements with open-ended expiration dates.
Contractual Obligations
The following table reflects contractual debt obligations under our notes payable and credit facilities, fees paid on our off-balance sheet arrangements and minimum cash rental payments due for our operating lease obligations over the next five years and thereafter as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Reduced by the amortization of deferred financing costs related to our term loan debt. Balances due partially include amounts payable in various foreign currencies and are reflected based on foreign currency exchange rates as of December 31, 2020, where applicable.
(2)Estimated using the weighted average effective interest rates as of December 31, 2020 on our notes payable and credit facilities. Includes the amortization of deferred financing costs related to our term loan and revolving credit facilities.
(3)Fees paid on our off-balance sheet arrangements are included in interest and related financing fees, net, in our consolidated statements of operations.
(4)Represents future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable lease terms. Amounts exclude contingent rental payments, where applicable, that may be payable based on lease provisions where annual rent increases are based on certain economic indexes, among other items. We expect to fund these commitments with existing cash and cash flow from operations.
(5)Amounts presented are partially payable in various foreign currencies and are based on the foreign currency rates at December 31, 2020.
The liability for unrecognized tax benefits is not included in the table above due to the subjective nature of the costs and timing of anticipated payments.