Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us,” “we,” or “Hims & Hers” refer to Hims & Hers Health, Inc. (formerly known as Oaktree Acquisition Corp.) The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and prior to the Merger, OAC was a blank check company incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. For more information on the Merger, see “Basis of Presentation” elsewhere in this Report.
Following the Merger, we offer a range of health and wellness products and services available for purchase on our websites directly by customers. Most of the offerings on the Hims & Hers websites are sold to customers on a subscription basis. Subscription plans provide an easy and convenient way for customers to get the ongoing treatment they need while simultaneously providing the company with predictability through a recurring revenue stream.
For subscription plans, customers select a desired cadence to receive products, which can range from every month to every two to twelve months, depending on the product. The customer is billed on a recurring basis on the selected cadence and a specified quantity of product is shipped at each billing. Customers can cancel subscriptions in between billing periods to stop receiving additional products and can reactivate subscriptions to continue receiving additional products. Hims & Hers’ integrated technology platform allows it to serve its customers efficiently from start to finish: initially from customer discovery and purchase of offerings on its websites, to connecting customers with healthcare providers for telehealth consultations, to the fulfilment and delivery of customer orders, and finally through ongoing clinical management by healthcare providers. This technology-driven efficiency provides cost advantages that allow Hims & Hers to offer customers affordable prices and to generate robust gross margins.
Hims & Hers acquires new customers and drives brand awareness through various marketing channels, including social media, online search, television, radio, and other media channels. The Company intends to invest in growth in its current offerings and additionally in new products and services. The Hims & Hers platform is purpose-built to scale efficiently and to accommodate the seamless addition of new products and services. Hims & Hers plans to launch new subscription-based offerings which it expects will have a similar margin profile and unit economics to current offerings. As it implements its product roadmap, Hims & Hers expects to grow revenue through additional subscription-based recurring revenue offerings. The recent launches of new products and services in behavioral health, dermatology, and primary care demonstrate the scalability of the platform.
Key Factors Affecting Results of Operations after the Merger
New Customer Acquisition
Hims & Hers’ ability to attract new customers will be a key factor for our future growth. To date we have successfully acquired new customers through marketing and the development of our brands. As a result, Hims & Hers’ historical revenue has increased each year since our launch. If we are unable to acquire enough new customers in the future, revenue might decline. New customer acquisition could be negatively impacted if our marketing efforts are less effective in the future. Increases in advertising rates could also negatively impact our ability to acquire new customers. Consumer tastes, preferences, and sentiment for our brands may also change and result in decreased demand for our products and services. Changes in law or regulatory enforcement could also negatively impact our ability to acquire new customers.
Retention of Customers
Hims & Hers’ ability to retain customers will be a key factor in our ability to generate revenue. Most of our customers purchase products through subscription-based plans, where customers are billed and sent products on a recurring basis. The recurring nature of this revenue provides us with a certain amount of predictability for future revenue if past customer behavior stays consistent in the future. If customer behavior changes, and customer retention decreases in the future, then future revenue will be negatively impacted. The ability of our customers to continue to pay for our products and services will impact the future results of our operations.
Investments in Growth
Hims & Hers expects to continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in product offerings and customer experience. We are working to enhance our offerings and expand the breadth of the products and services offered on our websites. We expect to make significant investments in marketing to acquire new customers. Additionally, we intend to continue to invest in our fulfillment and operating capabilities, including by opening our own affiliated pharmacy dedicated to our operations. In the short term, we expect these investments to increase our operating expenses; however, in the long term, we anticipate that these investments will positively impact our results of operations. If we are unsuccessful at improving our offerings or are unable to generate additional demand for our offerings, we may not recover the financial investments we make into the business and revenue may not increase in the future.
Expansion into New Categories
Hims & Hers expects to expand into new categories with our offerings. Category expansion allows us to increase the number of customers for whom we can provide products and services. It also allows us to offer access to treatment of additional conditions that may already affect our current customers. Expanding into new categories will require financial investments in additional headcount, marketing and customer acquisition expenses, additional operational capabilities and may require the purchase of new inventory. If we are unable to generate sufficient demand in new categories, we may not recover the financial investments we make into new categories and revenue may not increase in the future.
Key Business Metrics after the Merger
•
Average Order Value (“AOV”) is defined as Online Revenue divided by Net Orders (each as defined below). Hims & Hers’ Online Revenue is driven by a combination of AOV and Net Orders.
•
Net Orders (“Net Orders”) are defined as the number of online customer orders minus transactions related to refunds, credits, chargebacks and other negative adjustments. Net Orders represent transactions made on Hims & Hers’ platform during a defined period of time and exclude revenue recognition adjustments recorded pursuant to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). We monitor the absolute number of Net Orders as a key indicator of our performance. Our Online Revenue is driven by a combination of AOV and Net Orders. Net Orders are driven primarily by the number of new customers acquired and the number of returning customers that make additional purchases. In the third quarter of 2019, we began implementing a strategy to acquire higher value and higher AOV customers and to enhance the customer experience with new offerings and subscription options.
In order to reconcile the key business metrics described above to total revenue, Hims & Hers’ management tracks the following financial results:
•
Online Revenue (“Online Revenue”) represents the sales of products and services on our platform, net of refunds, credits, chargebacks and includes revenue recognition adjustments recorded pursuant to U.S. GAAP, primarily relating to deferred revenue and returns reserve.
•
Wholesale Revenue (“Wholesale Revenue”) represents non-prescription product sales to retailers through wholesale purchasing agreements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures after the Merger
In addition to financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, Hims & Hers believes Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, is useful in evaluating our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is a key performance measure that our management uses to assess our operating performance. Because Adjusted EBITDA facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use this measure for business planning purposes. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as net loss before depreciation and amortization, provision for income taxes, interest expense, interest income, non-cash debt issuance expense, stock-based compensation and warrant mark-to-market expense (income).
Results of Operations
OAC’s entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to formation, the preparation for its initial public offering, and since the closing of its initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. It neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, OAC had a net loss of approximately $3.0 million, which consisted of approximately $4.8 million in general and administrative expenses primarily related to the Merger, which was partially offset by $1.7 million in interest earned on investments and marketable securities held in the trust account.
For the period from April 9, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, OAC had net income of approximately $1.1 million, which consisted of approximately $1.9 million in interest earned on investments and marketable securities held in the trust account, offset by approximately $0.7 million in general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Unless noted otherwise, the below discussion of liquidity and capital resources refers to OAC prior to the closing of the Merger and to Hims & Hers after the closing of the Merger.
As of December 31, 2020, OAC had approximately $1.1 million in its operating bank account and approximately $3.0 million of interest income available in the trust account for Regulatory Withdrawals (as defined herein and subject to an annual limit of $325,000) and for our tax obligations, if any. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, OAC used these funds to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
Prior to the Merger, OAC’s liquidity needs were satisfied prior to the completion of the initial public offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from its sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares to its sponsor, the advancement of funds by its sponsor of approximately $62,000 to cover for offering costs in connection with the initial public offering, and the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. On November 18, 2019, OAC repaid the advance in full to its sponsor. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with the Merger, its sponsor or an affiliate of its sponsor, or its officers and directors were permitted but not obligated to provide OAC working capital loans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan, and no working capital loans were provided in connection with the Merger.
Hims & Hers historically incurred negative cash flows from operating activities and significant losses from operations. We expect to continue to incur operating losses at least for the next 12 months due to the investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business. We believe that current cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. As of December 31, 2020, Hims & Hers’ principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $27.3 million, which were primarily invested in money market funds; and short-term investments in the amount of $72.9 million, which were primarily invested in corporate, government and asset backed bonds. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, Hims & Hers received gross proceeds of $197.7 million from the Merger and $75.0 million from private investors. In connection with the Merger, Hims & Hers paid $11.5 million of closing costs as well as $22.0 million for the repurchase of Class A common stock.
We expect to purchase up to approximately $3 million in property and equipment for the purposes of building our own pharmacy operations and related facilities and capabilities, inclusive of $1.7 million invested as of December 31, 2020. We estimate initial annual selling, general, and administrative expenses of approximately $10 million to manage our own pharmacy, warehousing, and fulfillment operations. These expenses include labor for dispensing and fulfillment activities, facility and employee management, rent, utilities, maintenance, and other related overhead. These selling, general, and administrative expenses are expected to partially offset third-party pharmacy, warehousing, and fulfillment expenses that would have been otherwise incurred by the Company.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the number of orders we receive, the size of our customer base, the timing and extent of spend to support the expansion of sales, marketing and development activities, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations would be harmed. In order to support the growth of our business, we may need to incur additional indebtedness under our existing loan agreement or seek capital through new equity or debt financings, which sources of additional capital may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
OAC Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Prior to the Merger
OAC Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
OAC Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable OAC Class A ordinary shares (including OAC Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within OAC’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, OAC Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. OAC Class A
ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of OAC’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, 18,854,302 and 19,159,203, respectively, OAC Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of OAC’s balance sheets.
Net Income per Ordinary Share
Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. OAC has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in its initial public offering and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 10,725,000 of OAC Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
OAC’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for OAC Class A ordinary shares are calculated by dividing the interest income earned on investments and marketable securities held in the trust account of approximately $1.7 million, net of $325,000 annual limit of Regulatory Withdrawal available to be withdrawn from the trust account, resulting in a total of approximately $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of OAC Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for OAC Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $3.0 million, less income attributable to OAC Class A ordinary shares of approximately $1.4 million, resulted to a net loss of approximately $4.4 million, by the weighted average number of OAC Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Hims & Hers Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates after the Merger
Revenue Recognition
Hims & Hers recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Hims & Hers adopted ASC 606 on January 1, 2017, at the inception of its operations.
For Online Revenue, Hims & Hers defines its customer as an individual who purchases products or services through the website. The transaction price in contracts with customers is the total amount of consideration to which Hims expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring products or access to services to the customer.
Contracts that contain prescription products include two performance obligations: access to (i) products and (ii) consultation services. Hims & Hers contracts that do not contain prescription products have a single performance obligation. Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring the promised product to the customer and, in contracts that contain service, by the provision of consultation services to the customer. Hims & Hers satisfies its performance obligation for products at a point in time, which is upon delivery of the products to a third-party carrier. Hims & Hers satisfies its performance obligation for services over the period of the consultation service, which is typically a few days. The customer obtains control of the products and services upon the Hims & Hers’ completion of its performance obligations.
For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. The stand-alone selling price is based on the prices at which Hims & Hers separately sells the products and services, as well as market and cost-plus-margin-based estimates.
To fulfill its promise to customers for contracts that include professional medical consultations, Hims & Hers maintains relationships with various Affiliated Medical Groups, which are professional corporations or other professional entities owned by licensed physicians that engage licensed medical professionals (medical doctors, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners; collectively referred to as “Providers”) to provide consultation services. Hims & Hers accounts for service revenue as a principal in the arrangement with its customers. This conclusion is reached because (i) Hims & Hers determines which Affiliated Medical Group and Provider provides the consultation to the customer; (ii) Hims & Hers is primarily responsible for the satisfactory fulfillment and acceptability of the services; (iii) Hims & Hers incurs costs for consultation services even for visits that do not result in a prescription and the sale of products; and (iv) Hims & Hers, at its sole discretion, sets all listed prices charged on its website for products and services.
Additionally, to fulfill its promise to customers for contracts that include professional medical consultations, Hims & Hers maintains relationships with third-party pharmacies to fill prescriptions that are ordered by the Hims & Hers’ customers. Hims & Hers made the judgement to account for prescription product revenue as a principal in the arrangement with its customers. This conclusion is reached because (i) it has sole discretion in determining which pharmacy fills a customer’s prescription; (ii) the pharmacy fills the prescription based on fulfillment instructions provided by Hims including using Hims branded packaging for generic products; (iii) Hims & Hers is primarily responsible to the customer for the satisfactory fulfillment and acceptability of the order; (iv) Hims & Hers is responsible for refunds of the prescription medication after transfer of control to the customer; and (v) Hims & Hers, at its sole discretion, sets all listed prices charged on its websites for products and services.
Hims & Hers estimates refunds using the expected value method based on historical refunds granted to customers. Hims updates its estimate at the end of each reporting period and recognizes the estimated amount as contra-revenue with a corresponding refund liability. Sales, value-added, and other taxes are excluded from the transaction price and, therefore, from revenue.
Hims & Hers has made an accounting policy election to account for shipping and handling activities performed after the control of a product has been transferred to the customer as fulfillment costs, with direct costs to ship products to customers included in cost of revenue. Contracts with customers do not contain costs to obtain or costs to fulfill contracts with customers in accordance with ASC 340-40, Other Assets and Deferred Costs-Contracts with Customers.
For online sales, payment for prescription medication and nonprescription products is typically collected from the customer a few days in advance of product shipment. Contract liabilities are recorded when payments have been received from the customer for undelivered products or services and are recognized as revenue when the performance obligations are later satisfied. Contract liabilities consisting of balances related to customer prepayments are recognized as current deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheets of which substantially all of the balance is recognized in the following month. For wholesale arrangements, payments are collected in accordance with contract terms.
Warrant Liability
Hims & Hers classifies warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock that are contingently puttable or redeemable as liabilities. Such warrants are measured and recognized at fair value and are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date.
As of December 31, 2020 the fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability is measured using a Black-Scholes-Merton (“BSM”) option-pricing model. Inputs to that model include the purchase right’s expected remaining term, the risk-free interest rate, expected volatility based on representative peer companies, and the fair value of the Company’s total equity based on the publicly trading stock price. Changes to the fair value measurement are recognized within other income (expense), net on the condensed consolidated statements of
operations and comprehensive loss. In prior periods, fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability had been measured using the BSM option-pricing model, Monte Carlo simulation, and probability weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). The changes in valuation method prior to December 31, 2020 occurred as a result of increased probability the Company’s common shares would be publicly listed in the near-term. As of December 31, 2020, the valuation method changed as a result of the Company expecting to close the Merger after obtaining approval from the Securities Exchange Commission to file a proxy statement on December 29, 2020.
Hims & Hers adjusts the warrant liability for changes in the fair value until the earlier of the exercise or expiration of the warrants or the completion of a liquidation event, including completion of an initial public offering, at which time all such preferred stock warrants will be converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock and the liability will be reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Stock-Based Compensation
Hims & Hers accounts for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the fair value recognition and measurement provisions of GAAP, which require compensation cost for the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards to be recognized over the requisite service period. Hims & Hers determines the fair value of stock-based awards granted or modified on the grant date or modification date using appropriate valuation techniques.
The fair value of employee and nonemployee stock options are determined using the BSM option-pricing model using various inputs, including estimates of expected term, volatility, risk-free rate, and future dividends. The fair value of the performance stock options granted to the CEO of Hims & Hers in June 2020 is measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Excluding stock options with performance conditions, Hims & Hers recognizes compensation costs on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the employee and nonemployee, which is generally the option vesting term of four years. For stock options with performance conditions, stock-based compensation expense will be recognized when it is probable that the performance criteria will be achieved. Hims accounts for forfeitures as they occur.
The fair value of RSUs is determined based on the fair value of Hims & Hers’ common stock at the grant date. The RSUs generally have a vesting term of four years in addition to a performance-based vesting condition, which was satisfied upon the closing of the Merger.
Changes in the following assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. Hims & Hers continues to use judgment in evaluating the expected term and expected volatility utilized in stock-based compensation expense calculation on a prospective basis. As Hims & Hers continues to accumulate additional data related to its common stock, Hims & Hers may refine its estimates of expected volatility and expected term, which could materially impact future stock-based compensation expense.
Fair Value of Common Stock-Prior to the Merger, the Hims board of directors determined the fair value of Hims Class A Common Stock using various valuation methodologies, including valuation analyses performed by third-party valuation firms. After the Merger, we use the publicly quoted market closing price as reported on the New York Stock Exchange as the fair value of our Class A common stock.
Expected Term-Hims & Hers calculates the expected term using the simplified method based on the options vesting term and contractual terms as it did not have sufficient relevant historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior.
Expected Volatility-The volatility is derived from the average historical stock volatilities of a peer group of public companies that Hims & Hers considers to be comparable to its business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the share-based grants.
Risk-free Interest Rate-Hims & Hers derives the risk-free interest rate assumption from the United States Treasury’s rates for the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds with maturities similar to those of the expected term of the awards being valued.
Dividend Yield-Hims & Hers bases the assumed dividend yield on its expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, the expected dividend yield used is zero.
Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities
U.S. GAAP requires variable interest entities to be consolidated if an entity’s interest in the variable interest entity is a controlling financial interest. Under the variable interest model, a controlling financial interest is determined based on which entity, if any, has (i) the power to direct the activities of the variable interest entity that most significantly impacts the variable interest entity’s economic performance and (ii) the obligations to absorb losses that could potentially be significant to the variable interest entity or the right to receive benefits from the variable interest entity that could potentially be significant to the variable interest entity.
Hims & Hers determined that it is the primary beneficiary of the Affiliated Medical Groups and XeCare for accounting purposes because it has the ability to direct the activities that most significantly affect the entities’ economic performance and has the obligation to absorb the entities’ losses.
Hims & Hers performs ongoing reassessments of whether changes in the facts and circumstances regarding its involvement with the Affiliated Medical Groups and XeCare would cause its consolidation conclusion to change. The consolidation status of the variable interest entities with which Hims & Hers is involved may change as a result of such reassessments. Changes in consolidation status are applied in accordance with applicable U.S. GAAP.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.