ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 11, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
On August 26, 2020, we entered into the AHA Merger Agreement, pursuant to which our merger subsidiary was to merge with and into AHA, with AHA surviving the merger as our wholly owned subsidiary. The aggregate consideration payable at the closing of this transaction to the stockholders of AHA was the issuance of 5,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. However, as discussed above, the AHA Merger Agreement was terminated on November 24, 2020. Pursuant to the AHA Merger Agreement, AHA provided us with the Transaction Deposit of $575,000 at execution which funds were utilized to fund the deposit required to extend the existence of GreenVision from November 21, 2020 to February 21, 2021. Effective upon termination of the AHA Merger agreement on November 24, 2020, we became entitled to receive a break-up fee of $3,750,000 less the Transaction Deposit. As of December 31, 2020, the $575,000 was reflected as a contribution to equity in our consolidated balance sheets. At present, it is not determinable if or when the break-up fee of $3,175,000 will be received.
On February 8, 2021, we entered into the Helbiz Merger Agreement, pursuant to which Merger Sub will merge with and into Helbiz, with Helbiz surviving the merger as our wholly owned subsidiary. The aggregate consideration payable at the closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”) to the stockholders of Helbiz will be the issuance of such number of shares of our Common Stock as shall be determined by subtracting the “Closing Net Debt” of Helbiz (as defined in the Helbiz Merger Agreement) from the agreed valuation of $300,000,000, and dividing such difference by $10.00, which represents the agreed valuation of one share of the Company’s common stock. Of the shares to be delivered at Closing, the holders of Helbiz common stock will receive, in exchange for the Helbiz shares owned by such persons, shares of a class of our Common Stock to be established and designated as “Class A Common Stock”, except that Helbiz shares owned by Salvatore Palella, the Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Helbiz will instead be exchanged for a number of shares of a class of our Common Stock to be established and designated as “Class B Common Stock”. The number of shares of our Common Stock (whether Class A or Class B) that each Helbiz shareholder shall receive will be equal to the product obtained by multiplying the number of shares of common stock of Helbiz held by such stockholders by the Closing Consideration Conversion Ratio (as defined in the Merger Agreement). The Helbiz Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the Closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Upon execution of the Helbiz Merger Agreement, Helbiz provided a transaction deposit in the sum of $750,000 to us, of which, $575,000 was utilized to provide all or a portion of the deposit required to extend the existence of GreenVision from February 21, 2021 to May 21 2021. On February 9, 2021, we elected to extend the date by which we are required to complete a business combination to May 21, 2021 and deposited $575,000 of the funds provided by Helbiz into our trust account.
Nasdaq Notification
On January 5, 2021, we received a notice from the staff of the Listing Qualifications Department of Nasdaq (the “Staff”) stating that we were no longer in compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5620(a) for continued listing due to its failure to hold an annual meeting of stockholders within twelve months of the end of our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. We were provided with 45 calendar days within which to submit a plan to regain compliance with the Rules, which plan was submitted in a timely manner. If our plan is accepted by Nasdaq, we will be granted up to 180 calendar days from our fiscal year end, or until June 30, 2021, to regain compliance. The notification has no immediate effect on the listing of the Company’s common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Helbiz and activities in connection with the announced and subsequently terminated acquisition of AHA. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $509,907, which consisted of operating costs of $849,432 and a provision for income taxes of $3,424, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $342,949.
For the period from September 11, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of $12,879, which consisted of operating costs of $107,938 and an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $1,651, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $93,286 and a benefit from income taxes of $3,424.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 21, 2019, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 5,750,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 750,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $57,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 2,100,000 Private Warrants to GreenVision Capital Holding LLC at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $2,100,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, a total of $57,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $1,597,032 in transaction costs, including $1,150,000 of underwriting fees and $447,032 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $605,668. Net loss of $509,907 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $342,949 and a deferred tax provision of $3,424. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $243,764 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $58,390,918 (including $435,000 of interest income) consisting of shares in a money market fund that are invested in U.S. treasury securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we withdrew $118,666 of interest earned on the Trust Account for our franchise and income taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $4,282 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. As of December 31, 2020, we have received working capital loans in the aggregate principal amount of $20,000 from the Sponsor. Subsequently, we received an additional working capital loan from the Sponsor in January 2021 in the principal amount of $9,000. Such working capital loans are evidenced by promissory notes, are payable upon the consummation of the business combination are otherwise on the terms as described above.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsors, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our sponsors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through May 21, 2021, the date that we will be required to cease all operations, except for the purpose of winding up, if a Business Combination is not consummated. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
We have engaged I-Bankers Securities, Inc. as our advisor in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with its stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination simultaneously upon the firm commitment of this offering. We will pay I-Bankers Securities, Inc. a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to 2.5% of the aggregate amount sold to the public in Initial Public Offering, or $1,437,500.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted, for Common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable shares as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable share’s proportionate interest.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.