Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The discussions of results, causes and trends should not be construed to imply any conclusion that these results or trends will necessarily continue into the future.
Our audited financial statements are stated in United States dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Results of Operations for our Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Our operating results for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Revenue
We had no revenues in the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses increased for the year ended June 30, 2021 to $113,347 from $26,511 for the year ended June 30, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase in professional and filing fees .
Cash Requirements
Based on our planned expenditures, we will require approximately $200,000 over the next 12 months. In order to provide funds, we plan to pursue additional equity financing from private investors or possibly a registered public offering. We do not currently have any definitive arrangements in place for the completion of any further private placement financings and there is no assurance that we will be successful in completing any further private placement financings. If we are unable to achieve the necessary additional financing, then we plan to reduce the amounts that we spend on our business activities and administrative expenses in order to be within the amount of capital resources that are available to us.
We have not investigated the availability of commercial loans or other debt financing to supplement or meet our cash requirements. In the uncertain event that any such debt financing alternatives were available to us on acceptable terms, they would increase our liabilities and future cash commitments
Liquidity and Financial Condition
Working Capital
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $47,557 for our year ended June 30, 2021 compared with cash used in operating activities of $20,836 in the same period 2020. The increase of $26,721 is primarily attributed to an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Investing Activities
The Company did not have any investing activities for the years ended June 30, 2021 or 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $46,210 for our year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $22,183 in the same period in 2020. The change was primarily attributable to advances from related parties.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Going Concern
As at June 30, 2021, our company has not generated any revenues, has a working capital deficit of $282,725, and has an accumulated deficit of $326,725 since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The continuation of our company as a going concern is dependent upon the continued financial support from its shareholders and note holders, the ability of our company to obtain necessary equity financing to continue operations, and ultimately the attainment of profitable operations. These financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should our company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon the accompanying financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and are expressed in United States dollars. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management’s application of accounting policies. We believe that understanding the basis and nature of the estimates and assumptions involved with the following aspects of our financial statements is critical to an understanding of our financial statements.
Income Taxes
Potential benefits of income tax losses are not recognized in the accounts until realization is more likely than not. The Company has adopted ASC 740, Income Taxes as of its inception. Pursuant to ASC 740 the Company is required to compute tax asset benefits for net operating losses carried forward. The potential benefits of net operating losses have not been recognized in these financial statements because the Company cannot be assured it is more likely than not it will utilize the net operating losses carried forward in future years. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company had no accrued interest or penalties related to uncertain tax positions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.