Item 7.
Management
’
s Discussion and Analysis o
f Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Part I, Item 1A,
Risk Factors; Part II, Item 6,
Selected Financial Data; and our consolidated financial statements and related notes, each included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
can be found in Part II, Item 7,
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2019, or the 2019 10-K.
Overview
We are a global nutrition company that sells weight management, targeted nutrition, energy, sports, and fitness, and outer nutrition products to and through independent members, or Members. In China, we sell our products to and through independent service providers and sales representatives to customers and preferred customers, as well as through Company-operated retail platforms when necessary. We refer to Members that distribute our products and achieve certain qualification requirements as “sales leaders.”
We provide high-quality, science-backed products to Members and their customers who seek a healthy lifestyle and we also offer a business opportunity to those Members who seek additional income. We believe enhanced consumer awareness and demand for our products due to global trends such as the obesity epidemic, increasing interest in a fit and active lifestyle, living healthier and the rise of entrepreneurship, coupled with the effectiveness of personalized selling through a direct sales channel, have been the primary reasons for our continued success.
Our products are grouped in four principal categories: weight management; targeted nutrition; energy, sports, and fitness; and outer nutrition, along with literature, promotional, and other items. Our products are often sold through a series of related products and literature designed to simplify weight management and nutrition for consumers and maximize our Members’ cross-selling opportunities.
While we continue to monitor the current global financial environment and the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain focused on the opportunities and challenges in retailing our products and enhancing the customer experience, sponsoring and retaining Members, improving Member productivity, further penetrating
existing markets, globalizing successful Daily Methods of Operation, or DMOs, such as Nutrition Clubs, Fit Clubs, and Weight Loss Challenges, introducing new products and globalizing existing products, developing niche market segments and further investing in our infrastructure.
We sell our products in six geographic regions:
•
North America;
•
Mexico;
•
South and Central America;
•
EMEA, which consists of Europe, the Middle East, and Africa;
•
Asia Pacific (excluding China); and
•
China.
On July 15, 2016, we reached a settlement with the FTC and entered into the Consent Order, which resolved the FTC’s multi-year investigation of the Company. We continue to monitor the impact of the Consent Order and our board of directors established the Implementation Oversight Committee in connection with the Consent Order, and more recently, our Audit Committee assumed oversight of continued compliance with the Consent Order. The Implementation Oversight Committee had met regularly with management to oversee our compliance with the terms of the Consent Order. While we currently do not expect the settlement to have a long-term and materially adverse impact on our business and our Member base, our business and our Member base, particularly in the U.S., may be negatively impacted. The terms of the Consent Order do not change our going to market through direct selling by independent distributors, and compensating those distributors based upon the product they and their sales organization sell. See Part I, Item 1, Business
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for further discussion about the Consent Order and Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a discussion of risks related to the settlement with the FTC.
COVID-19
Pandemic
During March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019, or COVID-19,
as a pandemic. The outbreak and subsequent global spread of the virus has impacted the general public, companies and state, local and national governments and economies worldwide, as well as global financial markets, and caused unemployment to increase. Public health organizations and international, federal, state and local governments have implemented measures to combat the spread of COVID-19,
including restrictions on movement such as quarantines, “stay-at-home”
orders and social distancing ordinances and restricting or prohibiting outright some or all forms of commercial and business activity. These measures, or others that may be implemented in the future, although temporary in nature, may become more restrictive or continue indefinitely.
Our business and operations have been affected by the pandemic in manners and degrees that vary by market and we expect that the effects will extend beyond 2020. For the health and safety of our employees, our Members, and their customers, we implemented temporary access restrictions at many of our physical business locations and locations where Members conduct their business activities, some of which measures continue. Generally, we have been able to satisfy current levels of demand. While demand for our nutritional products continues to be at or above pre-pandemic
levels and pandemic constraints have been lessened in most markets by the designation of our nutritional business as “essential” or other similar characterization, our operations have been and continue to be disrupted. The most significant impacts we have seen, depending on market, include:
•
Constrained ability to deliver product to Members and/or have Members pick product up from our access points due to facility closures and other precautionary measures we have implemented;
•
Restrictions or outright prohibitions on in-person
training and promotional meetings and events for Members that are a key aspect of our business model, such as our annual regional Extravaganzas;
•
Constrained ability of Members to have face-to-face
contact with their customers, including at Nutrition Clubs; and
•
Slowed office operations as many of our employees have limited access to their regular place of employment.
We and our Members have responded to the pandemic and its impacts on our business and theirs by adapting operations and taking a number of proactive measures to mitigate those impacts. The most significant measures include:
•
Adapting product access to the varying market-specific challenges, including shifting to more home product delivery from Member pick-up,
and shifting to online or phone orders only from in-person
ordering;
•
Enhancing our training and promotion of technological tools offered to support Members’ online operations and accelerating the launch of certain functionalities, such as functions that facilitate our Members’ ability to communicate and transact with Nutrition Club customers;
•
Members continuing to or increasing the ways they leverage the Internet and social media for customer contact including training, order-taking, and acceptance of payment;
•
Member-operated Nutrition Clubs adding to or shifting from on-site
offerings of single servings to carry-out
and home delivery of single servings, as well as sales of fully packaged products;
•
Instituting product purchase limitations for certain in-demand
products to help ensure as many Members and their customers have fair access to these products and to minimize out-of-stock
conditions; and
•
Physical changes at our major facilities, such as our manufacturing plants and distribution centers, including pre-entry
temperature checks, face masks for employees, and plexiglass barriers, and employees working from home where possible rather than at company offices.
We believe our cash on hand as of December 31, 2020 and as of the date of this filing, combined with cash flows from operating activities, is sufficient to meet our foreseeable needs for the next twelve months. We also have access to our revolving credit facility to supplement our cash-generating ability if necessary.
Although we believe that our responsive measures have been effective in limiting the adverse impact of the pandemic on most markets, the ongoing impact of the COVID-19
pandemic will affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations in future quarters, including their comparability to prior periods. Given the unpredictable, unprecedented, and fluid nature of the pandemic and its economic consequences, we are unable to predict the duration and extent to which the pandemic and its related impacts will impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations. A more detailed discussion of the pandemic’s impact on net sales for 2020 and its expected impact in future periods, as well as the impacts specific to each geographic region, are discussed further in the Sales by Geographic Region
section below. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion of risks related to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Volume Points by Geographic Region
A key non-financial
measure we focus on is Volume Points on a Royalty Basis, or Volume Points, which is essentially our weighted-average measure of product sales volume. Volume Points, which are unaffected by exchange rates or price changes, are used by management as a proxy for sales trends because in general, excluding the impact of price changes, an increase in Volume Points in a particular geographic region or country indicates an increase in our local currency net sales while a decrease in Volume Points in a particular geographic
region or country indicates a decrease in our local currency net sales. The criteria we use to determine how and when we recognize Volume Points are not identical to our revenue recognition policies under U.S. GAAP. Unlike net sales, which are generally recognized when the product is delivered and when control passes to the Member, as discussed in greater detail in Note 2, Basis of Presentation
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
we recognize Volume Points when a Member pays for the order, which is generally prior to the product being delivered. Further, the periods in which Volume Points are tracked can vary slightly from the fiscal periods for which we report our results under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, there can be timing differences between the product orders for which net sales are recognized and for which Volume Points are recognized within a given period. However, historically these timing differences generally have been immaterial in the context of using changes in Volume Points as a proxy to explain volume-driven changes in net sales.
The specific number of Volume Points assigned to a product, which is generally consistent across all markets, is based on a Volume Point to suggested retail price ratio for similar products. If a product is available in different quantities, the various sizes will have different Volume Point values. In general, once assigned, a Volume Point value is consistent in each region and country and does not change from year to year. For strategic reasons, certain Volume Point values were adjusted during 2018 for certain markets in the North America and South and Central America regions. Volume Point adjustments during 2020 and 2019 were not material. We use Volume Points for Member qualification and recognition purposes, as well as a proxy for sales trends, and therefore we generally keep Volume Points for a similar or like product consistent on a global basis. However, because Volume Points are a function of value rather than product type or size, they are not a reliable measure for product mix. As an example, an increase in Volume Points in a specific country or region could mean a significant increase in sales of less expensive products or a marginal increase in sales of more expensive products.
(1) Excluding Volume Point adjustments made during 2018 for certain products in certain markets, the percent change for the year ended December 31, 2019 would have been an increase of 6.2%.
(2) Excluding Volume Point adjustments made during 2018 for certain products in certain markets, the percent change for the year ended December 31, 2019 would have been a decrease of 8.6%.
(3) Excluding the Volume Point adjustments made during 2018 for certain products in certain markets in the North America and South and Central America regions noted above, the percent change for the year ended December 31, 2019 would have been an increase of 2.8%.
Volume Points increased 14.1% for 2020, including a mixed impact of COVID-19
pandemic conditions across our markets, after having increased 3.0% for 2019. Although pandemic conditions had adverse operational impacts across all markets, we believe our Members in certain markets where we have seen increased net sales and Volume Point growth are more focused on their business, particularly the North America region and certain EMEA markets. Despite our expectation of Volume Point growth in 2021, it is not certain that we will be able to sustain the same rate of Volume Point growth in 2021 compared to that of 2020.
We believe North America’s Volume Point increase for 2020, which was well above the increase for the prior year, reflects the continuing success and expansion of our Distributors as supported by our product line expansion and technological tools, as well as targeted communications and promotions. We believe Mexico’s slight decrease for the year, after a somewhat larger decrease for the prior year, reflects continuing difficult economic conditions for the market, offset somewhat in the second half of the year by our program of promotions to encourage Member sponsorship and activity. After some years of declines, the South and Central America region saw an increase in Volume Points for 2020 despite pandemic-related continuing declines in several markets including Brazil, as we believe efforts to build more sustainable business for our Members through a focus on daily product consumption and retailing take hold in certain markets in the region. EMEA saw increased Volume Point growth for the year versus 2019, a result we believe of customer-oriented efforts including Member training, brand awareness, and product line expansion, as well as strong business momentum including new Member recruitment. The Asia Pacific region saw Volume Point increases for the year, continuing favorable long-term trends seen in the region, although the growth rate was below that seen in 2019 due to the adverse impact of pandemic conditions in the region, especially in India and South Korea. China achieved Volume Point increases for the year, compared to a decline for 2019 which was weakened by disruption from the Chinese government’s 100-day
review, concluded in April 2019, of the health product industry. China saw year-over-year Volume Point declines in the latter part of the year. Across most markets, we expect COVID-19
pandemic conditions to continue to impact Volume Point results; however, we are unable to predict the duration or magnitude of these effects. Results and more regional or country-specific impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic are discussed further below in the applicable sections of Sales by Geographic Region
.
Presentation
“Net sales
” represents product sales to our Members, net of distributor allowances
, and inclusive of any shipping and handling revenues, as described further below.
Our Members purchase product from us at a suggested retail price, less discounts referred to as “distributor allowance
.” Each Member’s level of discount is determined by qualification based on their volume of purchases. In cases where a Member has qualified for less than the maximum discount, the remaining discount, which we also refer to as a wholesale commission, is received by their sponsoring Members. Distributor allowances may also vary by country depending upon regulatory restrictions that limit or otherwise restrict distributor allowances. We also offer reduced distributor allowances with respect to certain products worldwide.
For U.S. GAAP purposes, shipping and handling services relating to product sales are recognized as fulfillment activities on our performance obligation to transfer products and are therefore recorded within net sales as part of product sales and are not considered as separate revenues.
In certain geographic markets, we have introduced segmentation of our Member base into two categories: “preferred members” - who are simply consumers who wish to purchase product for their own household use, and “distributors” - who are Members who also wish to resell products or build a sales organization. Additionally, in certain markets we are simplifying our pricing by eliminating certain shipping and handling charges and recovering those costs within suggested retail price. As we continue to extend the segmentation of our distributors and preferred members to additional geographic markets and consider other pricing simplification efforts for our Members, the utility of, and therefore management’s reliance on, total retail value has decreased and we are discontinuing the disclosure of this non-GAAP
retail value information.
Our international operations have provided and will continue to provide a significant portion of our total net sales. As a result, total net sales will continue to be affected by fluctuations in the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. In order to provide a framework for assessing how our underlying businesses performed excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, in addition to comparing the percent change in net sales from one period to another in U.S. dollars, we also compare the percent change in net sales from one period to another period using “net sales in local currency
.” Net sales in local currency is not a U.S. GAAP financial measure. Net
sales in local currency removes from net sales in U.S. dollars the impact of changes in exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and the local currencies of our foreign subsidiaries, by translating the current period net sales into U.S. dollars using the same foreign currency exchange rates that were used to translate the net sales for the previous comparable period. We believe presenting net sales in local currency is useful to investors because it allows a meaningful comparison of net sales of our foreign operations from period to period. However, net sales in local currency measures should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net sales in U.S. dollar measures that reflect current period exchange rates, or to other financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Additionally, the impact of foreign currency fluctuations in Venezuela and the price increases we implement as a result of the highly inflationary economy in that market can each, when considered in isolation, have a disproportionately large impact to our consolidated results despite the offsetting nature of these drivers and that net sales in Venezuela, which represent less than 1% of our consolidated net sales, are not material to our consolidated results. Therefore, in certain instances, we believe it is helpful to provide additional information with respect to these factors as reported and excluding the impact of Venezuela to illustrate the disproportionate nature of Venezuela’s individual pricing and foreign exchange impact to our consolidated results. However, excluding the impact of Venezuela from these measures is not in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to the presentation and discussion thereof calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Our “gross profit
” consists of net sales less “cost of sales
,” which represents our manufacturing costs, the price we pay to our raw material suppliers and manufacturers of our products as well as shipping and handling costs including duties, tariffs, and similar expenses.
While certain Members may profit from their activities by reselling our products for amounts greater than the prices they pay us, Members that develop, retain, and manage other Members may earn additional compensation for those activities, which we refer to as “Royalty overrides
.” Royalty overrides are our most significant operating expense and consist of:
•
royalty overrides and production bonuses;
•
the Mark Hughes bonus payable to some of our most senior Members; and
•
other discretionary incentive cash bonuses to qualifying Members.
Royalty overrides are compensation to Members for the development, retention and improved productivity of their sales organizations and are paid to several levels of Members on each sale. Royalty overrides are compensation for services rendered to us and, as such, are recorded as an operating expense.
In China, our independent service providers are compensated for marketing, sales support, and other services instead of the distributor allowances and royalty overrides utilized in our global Marketing Plan. Service fees to China independent service providers are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Because of local country regulatory constraints, we may be required to modify our Member incentive plans as described above. We also pay reduced royalty overrides with respect to certain products worldwide. Consequently, the total Royalty override percentage may vary over time.
Our “contribution margins
” consist of net sales less cost of sales and Royalty overrides.
“Selling, general, and administrative expenses
” represent our operating expenses, which include labor and benefits, service fees to China independent service providers, sales events, professional fees, travel and entertainment, Member promotions, occupancy costs, communication costs, bank fees, depreciation and amortization, foreign exchange gains and losses, and other miscellaneous operating expenses.
Our “other operating income
” consists of government grant income related to China and the finalization of insurance recoveries in connection with the flooding at one of our warehouses in Mexico during September 2017.
Our “other expense (income), net”
consists of non-operating
income and expenses such as gains or losses on extinguishment of debt and gains or losses due to subsequent changes in the fair value of the non-transferable
contractual contingent value right, or CVR, provided for each share tendered in the October 2017 modified Dutch auction tender offer. See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for further information on the CVR.
Most of our sales to Members outside the United States are made in the respective local currencies. In preparing our financial statements, we translate revenues into U.S. dollars using average exchange rates. Additionally, the majority of our purchases from our suppliers generally are made in U.S. dollars. Consequently, a strengthening of the U.S. dollar versus a foreign currency can have a negative impact on our reported sales and contribution margins and can generate foreign currency losses on intercompany transactions. Foreign currency exchange rates can fluctuate significantly. From time to time, we enter into foreign currency derivatives to partially mitigate our foreign currency exchange risk as discussed in further detail in Part II, Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations for the periods below are not necessarily indicative of results of operations for future periods, which depend upon numerous factors, including our ability to sponsor Members and retain sales leaders, further penetrate existing markets, introduce new products and programs that will help our Members increase their retail efforts and develop niche market segments.
The following table sets forth selected results of our operations expressed as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
(1) Service fees to our independent service providers in China are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses while Member compensation for all other countries is included in Royalty overrides.
Changes in net sales are directly associated with the retailing of our products, recruitment of new Members, and retention of sales leaders. Our strategies involve providing quality products, improved DMOs, including daily consumption approaches such as Nutrition Clubs, easier access to product, systemized training and education of Members on our products and methods, and continued promotion and branding of Herbalife products.
Management’s role, in-country
and at the region and corporate level, is to provide Members with a competitive, broad, and innovative product line, offer leading-edge business tools and technology services, and encourage strong teamwork and Member leadership to make doing business with Herbalife simple. Management uses the Marketing Plan, which reflects the rules for our global network marketing organization that specify the qualification requirements and general compensation structure for Members, coupled with educational and motivational tools and promotions to encourage Members to increase retailing, retention, and recruiting, which in turn affect net sales. Such tools include sales events such as Extravaganzas, Leadership Development Weekends and World Team Schools where large groups of Members gather, thus allowing them to network with other Members, learn retailing, retention, and recruiting techniques from our leading Members and become more familiar with how to market and sell our products and business opportunities. Accordingly, management believes that these development and motivation programs increase the productivity of the sales leader network. The expenses for such programs are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses. We also use event and non-event
product promotions to motivate Members to increase retailing, retention, and recruiting activities. These promotions have prizes ranging from qualifying for events to product prizes and vacations. A program that we have seen success with in many markets is the Member Activation Program, under which new Members, who order a modest number of Volume Points in each of their first three months, earn a prize. Our objective is to improve the quality of sales leaders by encouraging new Members to begin acquiring retail customers before attempting to qualify for sales leader status. Additionally, in certain markets we have begun to utilize the segmentation of our Member base into “preferred members” and “distributors” for more targeted and efficient communication and promotions for these two differently motivated types of Members. In certain other markets that have not been segmented, we have begun using Member data to similarly categorize Members for communication and promotion efforts.
DMOs are being generated in many of our markets and are globalized where applicable through the combined efforts of Members and country, regional and corporate management. While we support a number of different DMOs, one of the most popular DMOs is the daily consumption DMO. Under our traditional DMO, a Member typically sells to its customers on a somewhat infrequent basis (e.g., monthly) which provides fewer opportunities for interaction with their customers. Under a daily consumption DMO, a Member interacts with its customers on a more frequent basis, including such activities as weekly weigh-ins,
which enables the Member to better educate and advise customers about nutrition and the proper use of the products and helps promote daily usage as well, thereby helping the Member grow his or her business. Specific examples of DMOs include the Nutrition Club concept in Mexico, the Healthy Breakfast concept in Russia, and the Internet/Sampling and Weight Loss Challenge in the United States. Management’s strategy is to review the applicability of expanding successful country initiatives throughout a region, and where appropriate, support the globalization of these initiatives.
As discussed further by market in the Sales by Geographic Region
below, the Company has responded to COVID-19
pandemic conditions by adapting how it communicates with, services, and transacts with our Members and our Members have similarly adapted their DMOs and other activities. These responsive actions have varied by region and by market due to the differing market- and regional-specific impacts of the pandemic and the conditions and challenges unique to a particular market or region independent of the impacts of the pandemic.
The factors described above help Members increase their business, which in turn helps drive Volume Point growth in our business, and thus, net sales growth. The discussion below of net sales details some of the specific drivers of changes in our business and causes of sales fluctuations during the year ended December 31, 2020 as
compared to the same period in 2019, as well as the unique growth or contraction factors specific to certain geographic regions or significant countries within a region during these periods. Net sales fluctuations, both Company-wide and within a particular geographic region or country, are primarily the result of changes in volume, changes in prices, or changes in foreign currency translation rates. The discussion of changes in net sales quantifies the impact of those drivers that are quantifiable such as changes in foreign currency translation rates, and cites the estimated impact of any significant price changes. The remaining drivers, which management believes are the primary drivers of changes in volume, are typically qualitative factors whose impact cannot be quantified. We use Volume Points as an indication for changes in sales volume.
We expect the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic to impact our results of operations in future quarters and their comparability to prior periods, both on a consolidated basis and at the regional level. However, given the unpredictable, unprecedented, and fluid nature of the pandemic and its economic consequences, we are unable to predict the extent to which the pandemic and its related impacts will adversely impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations, including the impact it may have on our regions and individual markets. See the Sales by Geographic Region
below for a more detailed discussion of the pandemic’s impact on net sales for the year for each geographic region and individual market.
Financial Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales were $5,541.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $664.7 million, or 13.6% ($664.6 million, or 13.6% excluding Venezuela), for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 17.5% (16.6% excluding Venezuela) for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 13.6% increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by an increase in sales volume, as indicated by a 14.1% increase in Volume Points, and a 3.6% favorable impact of price increases (2.7% favorable impact excluding Venezuela), partially offset by a 3.8% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates (2.9% unfavorable impact excluding Venezuela). As described in the Sales by Geographic Region
section below, despite our expectation of net sales growth in 2021, it is not certain that we will sustain the same rate of net sales growth in 2021 compared to that of 2020.
Net income was $372.6 million, or $2.77 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income increased $61.6 million, or 19.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly due to $230.2 million higher contribution margin driven by higher net sales and $8.2 million lower interest expense, net; partially offset by $134.7 million higher selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily driven by $84.1 million in higher labor and benefits costs and $43.1 million in higher expenses relating to the SEC and DOJ investigations relating to the FCPA matter in China (See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
$17.0 million lower China government grant income; and a $15.7 million unfavorable impact from other expense (income), net relating to CVR revaluations in 2019 as described below.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a $85.9 million unfavorable impact ($85.4 million post-tax)
from expenses related to regulatory inquiries and a legal accrual, which includes $83.1 million of expenses relating to the SEC and DOJ investigations relating to the FCPA matter in China; a $21.8 million unfavorable impact of non-cash
interest expense related to the 2024 Convertible Notes (See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
a $21.2 million pre-tax
unfavorable impact ($19.2 million post-tax)
from expenses related to the COVID-19
pandemic, and such expenses are expected to continue in future periods; and a $0.5 million pre-tax
unfavorable impact ($0.4 million post-tax)
of debt issuance costs related to the amendment of our 2018 Credit Facility.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a $75.5 million pre-tax
unfavorable impact ($74.1 million post-tax)
from expenses related to regulatory inquiries, the SEC investigation relating to our
disclosures regarding our marketing plan in China (See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K),
and the SEC and DOJ investigations relating to the FCPA matter in China; a $38.2 million unfavorable impact of non-cash
interest expense related to the 2019 Convertible Notes, 2024 Convertible Notes, and the Forward Transactions (See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
a $19.0 million pre-tax
unfavorable impact ($17.2 million post-tax)
of an accrual for Mexico VAT assessments; a $1.2 million pre-tax
unfavorable impact ($0.9 million post-tax)
of debt issuance costs related to the amendment of our 2018 Term Loan B; a $15.7 million favorable impact of gain on the revaluation of the CVR (See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
and a $6.0 million pre-tax
favorable impact ($5.9 million post-tax)
related to the finalization of insurance recoveries in connection with the flooding at one of our warehouses in Mexico during September 2017, which damaged certain of our inventory stored within the warehouse (See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018, or the 2018 10-K).
Reporting Segment Results
We aggregate our operating segments, excluding China, into a reporting segment, or the Primary Reporting Segment. The Primary Reporting Segment includes the North America, Mexico, South and Central America, EMEA, and Asia Pacific regions. China has been identified as a separate reporting segment as it does not meet the criteria for aggregation. See Note 10, Segment Information
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for further discussion of our reporting segments. See below for discussions of net sales and contribution margin by our reporting segments.
Net Sales by Reporting Segment
The Primary Reporting Segment reported net sales of $4,732.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $607.1 million, or 14.7% ($606.9 million, or 14.7% excluding Venezuela), as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 19.2% (18.2% excluding Venezuela) for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 14.7% increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in sales volume, as indicated by a 14.9% increase in Volume Points, and a 4.2% favorable impact of price increases (3.1% favorable impact excluding Venezuela); partially offset by a 4.5% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates (3.4% unfavorable impact excluding Venezuela).
For a discussion of China’s net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019, see the China section of Sales by Geographic Region
below.
Contribution Margin by Reporting Segment
As discussed above under “Presentation,” contribution margin consists of net sales less cost of sales and Royalty overrides.
The Primary Reporting Segment reported contribution margin of $1,983.6 million, or 41.9% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $190.0 million, or 10.6% ($189.3 million, or 10.5% excluding Venezuela), as compared to the same period in 2019. The 10.6% increase in contribution margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of a 14.9% favorable impact of volume increases and a 6.5% favorable impact of price increases (4.9% favorable impact excluding Venezuela); partially offset by a 5.9% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates (4.2% unfavorable impact excluding Venezuela) and a 3.2% unfavorable impact of other cost changes related to self-manufacturing and sourcing and increased freight costs from orders shifting toward home delivery versus Member pick-up.
China reported contribution margin of $717.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $40.2 million, or 5.9%, as compared to the same period in 2019. The 5.9% increase in contribution margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of a 5.3% favorable impact of volume increases.
Sales by Geographic Region
Net sales by geographic region were as follows:
North America
The North America region reported net sales of $1,372.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $347.4 million, or 33.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 33.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 33.9% increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in sales volume, as indicated by a 31.7% increase in Volume Points, and a 2.9% favorable impact of price increases.
Net sales in the U.S. were $1,334.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $331.9 million, or 33.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
Growth in the region continues to be supported by product line expansion and deployment of enhanced technology tools to support our distributors’ businesses and optimize their customers’ experiences with Herbalife. The number of active Nutrition Clubs in the region has continued to grow and the Nutrition Club DMO is a focus area for training and technological support of our Members. Our communications, promotions, and other operations in the region are targeted to our distributors, or their preferred members or retail customers as appropriate. Our promotional program is designed to encourage consistency and sustainability in our Members’ businesses. Strengthened momentum, including increased Membership, for the market has resulted in a higher rate of growth in net sales for 2020 compared to that for 2019.
In response to pandemic conditions, product distribution to our Members was altered to allow online and phone-in
orders only; our two major U.S. distribution centers were shipping product only, with no in-person
pick-ups
permitted; and our sales centers were for pick-up
only, with no orders taken on-site
as of yet; however, our Members’ ability to obtain product has not materially decreased. Late in the third quarter, our Memphis distribution center began allowing pick-up
orders; however, we continue to not allow in-person
orders at any of our sales centers. Members’ Nutrition Clubs, which represent a major DMO for the region, are operating in some areas as pick-up
points for product only versus their more traditional on-site
consumption approach. Nutrition Club sales volume increased versus the prior year, including the impact of home deliveries from Nutrition Clubs to their customers, an approach that has seen increased use as a response to the pandemic. Our Member training and promotion events, such as our Success Training Seminars and our Leadership Development Weekends, have shifted to a “virtual” online approach. Promotional activities aimed at our Members continue, though prizes that have involved travel to events have shifted to cash and other awards.
As evidenced by continuing Volume Point growth for the region, we believe that our responsive efforts to pandemic conditions have been effective to date and we believe that pandemic conditions may have been a contributing factor in the motivation and focus of our Members. Certain modified practices by us and our Members may prove to be lasting improvements, such as an increased focus on customer-direct orders, and events and trainings that are offered virtually as well as in-person.
Mexico
The Mexico region reported net sales of $436.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales decreased $36.7 million, or 7.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 2.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 7.7% decrease in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a 9.9% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and a decrease in sales volume, as indicated by a 0.4% decrease in Volume Points, partially offset by a 3.0% favorable impact of price increases.
We believe the Volume Point decrease for the year reflects difficult economic conditions in the region and a consequent slowing of our business momentum for the market prior to the third quarter. Sales volume weakness was offset somewhat by additional promotions offered as a response to pandemic conditions. Despite the pandemic conditions, nearly all product access points in Mexico, both Company-operated and third party, have remained open, although in some areas Nutrition Clubs are operating under restrictions such as for product pick-up
only.
South and Central America
The South and Central America region reported net sales of $366.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales decreased $12.6 million, or 3.3% ($12.8 million, or 3.4% excluding Venezuela), for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 20.8% (9.1% excluding Venezuela) for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 3.3% decrease in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a 24.1% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates (12.5% unfavorable impact excluding Venezuela), partially offset by a 16.9% favorable impact of price increases (5.6% favorable impact excluding Venezuela) and an increase in sales volume, as indicated by a 3.6% increase in Volume Points. The region saw a sales volume increase for the year versus the prior year led by Colombia and Chile, as markets adapted to pandemic conditions and efforts to build more sustainable business for our Members through a focus on daily product consumption and retailing take hold in certain markets in the region. The region is seeing success leveraging social media, utilizing cash prize promotions, and using the weight loss challenge DMO. COVID-19
pandemic conditions, however, have impacted the region adversely, and significantly so for certain markets in the region including Brazil, Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia. Pandemic impacts have varied by market across the region and have been intermittent, but have included product shipping delays and widespread suspension of product access points and Members’ Nutrition Clubs, requiring reliance on shipping product to Members’ and customers’ homes.
Net sales in Brazil were $84.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales decreased $27.0 million, or 24.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales decreased 2.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $24.3 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. In May 2019, we segmented our Member base in the market into distributors and preferred members; we are leveraging this segmentation for communication and promotion purposes, and have made preferred members a strategic focus in order to drive a larger base of new customers. We have expanded our product line to meet consumer demands in new product segments. However, COVID-19
pandemic conditions have constrained our business in Brazil since March 2020. Although most Members’ Nutrition Clubs are now permitted to be open, broader pandemic conditions in the country have adversely impacted sales volumes for this important DMO for the market. Home delivery is operating and is the primary
distribution channel for the market, though the majority of other product access points are now open for pick-up.
We believe a price increase announced in December 2020 and effective in January 2021 had a favorable impact on sales volumes late in 2020 and may be an adverse factor for sales volumes for the first quarter of 2021.
Net sales in Peru were $61.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales decreased $2.5 million, or 4.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 0.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $2.9 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales volumes that were above the volumes for the prior year through mid-March
declined significantly from that time through most of the second quarter due to pandemic conditions. We are taking orders by Internet and phone and shipping product to Member homes; during October 2020, our sales centers began to open for product pick-up
as well as home delivery. Members’ Nutrition Clubs were also modified for home delivery only or are open for partial operation. We believe these adaptations to pandemic conditions, as well as Members’ success leveraging social media and using the weight loss challenge DMO, contributed to strengthened business momentum during the second half of the year and a slight sales volume increase for the year versus the prior year.
EMEA
The EMEA region reported net sales of $1,208.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $210.3 million, or 21.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 24.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 21.1% increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in sales volume, as indicated by a 21.1% increase in Volume Points, and a 3.8% favorable impact of price increases; partially offset by a 3.1% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Volume Points were generally higher across the region for the year. The Volume Point growth that has been seen across the EMEA region for a number of years reflects, we believe, efforts to enhance the quality and activity of sales leaders including Member training, brand awareness, and product line expansion, as well as enhanced technology tools for ordering, business performance, and customer retailing. In addition to the major markets discussed below, strong business momentum in the United Kingdom, South Africa, and France contributed to region net sales growth for the year.
Due to COVID-19
pandemic conditions, our sales centers and other product access points in many markets within the region are currently closed or open for limited operations only, leaving shipping for home delivery as the primary distribution channel while these conditions persist. Members are turning further to social media to carry out their sales and oversight activities. These adaptations have been successful in limiting the adverse impact of the pandemic and we believe that pandemic conditions may have been a contributing factor in the motivation and focus of our Members in certain markets of the region.
Net sales in Spain were $172.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $35.6 million, or 26.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 23.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact of $3.8 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. In recent years, Spain has seen sales volume increases as it benefited from programs of promotions and sponsorships, as well as enhanced technology tools, that have raised brand awareness through healthy active lifestyle and contributed to broad-based success across Member sales organizations in the market. In response to pandemic conditions, we have temporarily shifted our operations to primarily online activities to mitigate the negative impacts of being unable to conduct in-person
meetings, trainings, and selling activities. Home delivery continues to be our prevailing distribution channel and has not seen significant disruption. After the first quarter of 2020 saw a small sales volume decline, subsequent quarters have seen significant volume increases as our Members appear to have adapted to pandemic conditions, such as leveraging online tools to reach their customers, and business momentum has increased.
Net sales in Russia were $147.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $7.2 million, or 5.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 17.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $16.9 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Russia achieved sales volume increases for the year versus the prior year despite some pandemic disruption commencing late in the first quarter. Our sales centers are now reopened for product pick-up,
although we continue to support home delivery for the market. Due to pandemic conditions, Nutrition Clubs are operating primarily online in the market and remain a key DMO, supported by new products, training, and promotion for all levels of Membership. Product access expansion in the market has enabled growth in smaller cities. During the third quarter of 2020, we introduced Member segmentation to the market by adding a preferred customer program option for new Members. Russia had an approximate 5% price increase in September 2020.
Net sales in Italy were $141.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $15.8 million, or 12.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 10.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact of $3.0 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales volume increased for the year versus the prior year. After weakened momentum in our business and pandemic conditions in the country contributed to a sales volume decline for the first quarter of the year, we believe adaptation by Members to pandemic conditions, such as online communication with Members and home delivery, has been a contributing factor to our sales volume increase and strengthened momentum for subsequent quarters.
Asia Pacific
The Asia Pacific region, which excludes China, reported net sales of $1,347.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $98.7 million, or 7.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 9.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 7.9% increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in sales volume, as indicated by an 8.0% increase in Volume Points, and a 2.0% favorable impact of price increases, partially offset by a 1.3% unfavorable impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Volume Point and net sales increases in recent years for most markets in the region are a result, we believe, of a customer-focused business and daily consumption DMOs, including Nutrition Clubs, as well as product line and access point expansion. However, COVID-19
pandemic conditions, such as closed sales centers and Members’ Nutrition Clubs and an increased reliance on home delivery for product distribution, had an adverse impact on results at times throughout the year, most significantly for India, South Korea, and Indonesia. The region has adapted to pandemic conditions to varying degrees by market, and many markets achieved sales volume increases for the year compared to the prior year. Volume increases were led by Vietnam and India, and ongoing pandemic conditions contributed to volume decreases for South Korea and Indonesia.
Net sales in India were $349.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $27.8 million, or 8.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 13.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $16.9 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales volumes have increased in India in recent years as we continued to expand our product line and make it easier for our Members to do business, such as through online signup and adding product access points and payment methods. Pandemic-related operating constraints seen earlier during 2020 have now begun to ease or we and our Members have adjusted our operations to partially mitigate these constraints, with Member activities such as Nutrition Clubs and trainings mainly operating online.
Although certain Indian states have continued pandemic-related operating constraints and we have seen some reduced product manufacturing capacity, our manufacturing capacity has met demand. We continue to take Member orders and payments online. Company locations are now open for the taking of orders and payments and
pick-up
of product, though home delivery volumes continue to exceed pre-pandemic
levels. Disruption to our collections and expenditures of cash have eased, though we continue to move transactions to electronic collection and payment for operating efficiency purposes and for Member convenience.
Regulatory restrictions on direct selling, including registration requirements for our distributors implemented in February 2020, have reduced the number of new distributors, despite certain subsequent relaxations of regulations by the government in response to pandemic conditions. We have seen an increase in new Preferred Members since these do not have similar registration requirements. The regulatory relaxations ended effective January 2021. We continue to work with our distributors to adapt to these regulatory changes.
Net sales in Vietnam were $212.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $49.5 million, or 30.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 30.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates did not have a material impact on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Vietnam continues to have strong momentum, having adapted to increased direct-selling regulatory requirements and as sales leadership continues to focus on sustainable, consumption-oriented business practices. COVID-19
pandemic-related operating constraints that we saw in the second quarter have eased somewhat and we and our Members have adapted to constraints by moving events, trainings, and product ordering online. Further changes to direct-selling regulations in the market are expected to be proposed for late 2021 implementation. We continue to assess and monitor these preliminary draft regulations.
Net sales in Indonesia were $181.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales decreased $2.3 million, or 1.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 1.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $4.7 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Although Indonesia has increased sales volumes in recent years by focusing on a customer-based business and daily consumption through Nutrition Clubs and training activities, supported by increased product access, pandemic conditions have had an adverse impact on our operations and results. Our sales centers have continued to operate via online ordering, home delivery, and pick-up,
which were already established methods for the market. Many Members’ Nutrition Clubs, the major DMO for the market, have experienced pandemic-related constraints on their activities. Our responsive measures include online training and promotions targeted to sales leaders, non-sales
leader Members, and their customers as appropriate.
Net sales in South Korea were $129.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales decreased $14.6 million, or 10.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales decreased 9.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $1.7 million on net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. South Korea achieved Volume Point and net sales growth for 2019 after several years of transitionary impact from Marketing Plan changes that led to contraction in our business in the market, and this growth continued in the early part of 2020. Pandemic conditions, however, including the suspension of our training facilities and our Members’ Nutrition Clubs and restrictions on gatherings, have affected the market since mid-February
and we believe contributed to sales volume declines for the year versus the prior year. Nutrition Clubs have been open intermittently and on a limited basis, sales and training activities continue online, and delivery of product continues.
China
The China region reported net sales of $809.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net sales increased $57.6 million, or 7.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. In local currency, net sales increased 7.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The 7.7% increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an
increase in sales volume, as indicated by a 5.3% increase in Volume Points and a 2.3% favorable impact of sales mix.
The volume growth for the year versus the prior year, despite some disruption due to the COVID-19
viral outbreak, was partially attributable to comparison to a weakened 2019. During 2019, our China net sales were negatively impacted by the Chinese government’s 100-day
review, or Review, of the health products industry, which concluded in April 2019. The Review, combined with negative media coverage about the Review, impacted our business as Members significantly reduced activities and sales meetings during and following the Review. These activities and sales meetings are important to our business as they are a central channel for attracting and retaining customers, providing personal and professional development for our Members, and promoting our products. While our Members had begun conducting meetings again toward the end of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19
pandemic resulted in travel restrictions and other temporary measures which commenced early in the first quarter and also negatively impacted our business, including renewed sales meeting restrictions and Nutrition Club closures. We and our Members have been able to partially mitigate the impact of these restrictions through 2020 by taking many sales and promotional activities online, including sales meetings. By April 2020, though subject to additional changes in conditions, China operations had largely resumed on an adapted basis. Manufacturing plants and distribution centers are open and operating normally, as well as Nutrition Clubs, subject to certain social distancing measures. Some in-person
sales meetings have begun to be held again, based on location and size and subject to government approval, though sales meetings also continue to be successfully held online. The market still has not returned to the same levels of in-person
sales meetings that existed prior to the Review; however, in-person
meetings are supplemented by online meetings.
Focus areas for China have included expanding our e-commerce
platform to, for example, provide the ability for our China Members to service their customers via personalized sites, and for their retail customers to purchase products directly from the Company. We have also expanded our product line for the China market, launched social media-based marketing campaigns, and continued to conduct sales promotions in the region.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we saw year-over-year net sales declines in China. We have seen a decline in the number of new independent service providers and net sales for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to those of the third quarter of 2020. In addition to some macroeconomic challenges in China, we believe one factor contributing to these declines is a recent enhancement made to the requirements for our sales representatives in China to be eligible to apply to become independent service providers. While we believe this change was a contributing factor to the declines in the fourth quarter, we believe this enhancement will ultimately strengthen our business by improving the quality of our independent service providers.
Sales by Product Category
Net sales by product category were as follows:
(1) Product buybacks and returns in all product categories are included in the literature, promotional, and other category.
Net sales increased for all product categories for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The trends and business factors described in the above discussions of the individual geographic regions apply generally to all product categories.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $4,391.2 million and $3,919.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 79.2% and 80.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, or an unfavorable net decrease of 112 basis points.
The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 included unfavorable cost changes of 64 basis points relating to increased freight costs due to orders shifting toward home delivery versus Member pick-up,
the unfavorable impact of foreign currency fluctuations of 44 basis points (unfavorable impact of 27 basis points excluding Venezuela), unfavorable cost changes related to self-manufacturing and sourcing of 30 basis points, which includes decreased costs related to Mexico tariffs, unfavorable changes in country mix of 16 basis points, the unfavorable impact of higher inventory write-downs of 15 basis points, and unfavorable other cost changes of 11 basis points, partially offset by the favorable impact of retail price increases of 68 basis points (favorable impact of 52 basis points excluding Venezuela). The net unfavorable impact of foreign currency fluctuations and retail price increases in Venezuela for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 was 1 basis point.
Generally, gross profit as a percentage of net sales may vary from period to period due to the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, changes in country mix as volume changes among countries with varying margins, retail price increases, cost changes related to self-manufacturing and sourcing, and inventory write-downs.
Royalty Overrides
Royalty overrides were $1,690.1 million and $1,448.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Royalty overrides as a percentage of net sales were 30.5% and 29.7% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Service fees to our independent service providers in China are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses while Member compensation for all other countries is included in Royalty overrides. Generally, Royalty overrides as a percentage of net sales may vary from period to period due to changes in the mix of products and countries because full royalty overrides are not paid on certain products and in certain countries.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $2,075.0 million and $1,940.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Selling, general, and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales were 37.4% and 39.8% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 was driven by $84.1 million in higher labor and benefits costs primarily driven by headcount increases to support our sales growth; $43.1 million in higher expenses relating to the SEC and DOJ investigations relating to the FCPA matter in China (See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
$35.1 million in higher service fees for China independent service providers due to higher sales in China; and $12.8 million in higher foreign exchange losses; partially offset by $24.4 million in lower Member event and promotion costs, mostly resulting from cancellations of events and promotions due to the COVID-19
pandemic; $19.0 million of expenses relating to the SEC investigation relating to our disclosures regarding our marketing plan in China in 2019 (See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial
Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K);
and $17.4 million in lower travel and entertainment costs resulting from travel restrictions due to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Other Operating Income
The $14.5 million of other operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $14.5 million of government grant income for China (See Note 2, Basis of Presentation
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K)
The $37.5 million of other operating income for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $31.5 million of government grant income for China and $6.0 million related to the finalization of insurance recoveries in connection with the flooding at one of our warehouses in Mexico during September 2017, which damaged certain of our inventory stored within the warehouse (See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of the 2018 10-K).
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was as follows:
The decrease in interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in our overall weighted-average interest rate and weighted-average borrowings, partially offset by lower interest income earned as a result of lower interest rates.
Other Expense (Income), Net
We did not recognize any other expense (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $15.7 million of other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a $15.7 million gain on the revaluation of the CVR (See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Income Taxes
Income taxes were $143.8 million and $140.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective income tax rate was 27.8% and 31.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to changes in the geographic mix of our income, partially offset by a decrease in net benefits from discrete events.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically met our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, including funding for expansion of operations, through net cash flows provided by operating activities. Variations in sales of our products directly affect the availability of funds. There are no material contractual restrictions on our ability to
transfer and remit funds among our international affiliated companies. However, there are foreign currency restrictions in certain countries which could reduce our ability to timely obtain U.S. dollars. Even with these restrictions and the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, we believe we will have sufficient resources, including cash flow from operating activities and access to capital markets, to meet debt service obligations in a timely manner and be able to continue to meet our objectives.
Historically, our debt has not resulted from the need to fund our normal operations, but instead has resulted primarily from our share repurchase programs. Since inception in 2007 through December 31, 2020, total share repurchases amounted to approximately $5.4 billion. While a significant net sales decline could potentially affect the availability of funds, many of our largest expenses are variable in nature, which we believe protects our funding in all but a dramatic net sales downturn. Our $1,045.4 million cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and our senior secured credit facility, in addition to cash flow from operations, can be used to support general corporate purposes, including, any future share repurchases, dividends, and strategic investment opportunities.
We have a cash pooling arrangement with a financial institution for cash management purposes. This cash pooling arrangement allows certain of our participating subsidiaries to withdraw cash from this financial institution based upon our aggregate cash deposits held by subsidiaries who participate in the cash pooling arrangement. We did not owe any amounts to this financial institution under the pooling arrangement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $628.6 million of operating cash flow as compared to $457.5 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in our operating cash flow was the result of $102.4 million of favorable changes in operating assets and liabilities and $68.7 million of higher net income excluding non-cash
items disclosed within our consolidated statement of cash flows. The $102.4 million change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of favorable changes in royalty overrides and other current liabilities, which included favorable changes in accrued compensation and income taxes payable; partially offset by unfavorable changes in prepaid expenses and other current assets. The $68.7 million of higher net income excluding non-cash
items was primarily driven by higher contribution margin driven by higher net sales (See Summary Financial Results
above for further discussion), partially offset by higher selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily from higher labor and benefits costs and higher expenses relating to the SEC and DOJ investigations relating to the FCPA matter in China.
Capital expenditures, including accrued capital expenditures, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $116.8 million and $110.2 million, respectively. The majority of these expenditures represented investments in management information systems, including initiatives to develop web-based
Member tools. We expect to incur total capital expenditures of approximately $175 million to $225 million for the full year of 2021.
In March 2020, our annual global Herbalife Honors event, where sales leaders from around the world meet and share best practices and conduct leadership training, was canceled due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Our management awarded Members $71.3 million of Mark Hughes bonus payments related to their 2019 performance. In March 2019, our management awarded Members $70.7 million of Mark Hughes bonus payments related to their 2018 performance.
Senior Secured Credit Facility
On February 15, 2017, we entered into a $1,450.0 million senior secured credit facility, or the 2017 Credit Facility, consisting of a $1,300.0 million term loan B, or the 2017 Term Loan B, and a $150.0 million revolving credit facility, or the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, with a syndicate of financial institutions as lenders. The 2017 Revolving Credit Facility was to mature on February 15, 2022 and the 2017 Term Loan B was to mature on February 15, 2023. The 2017 Credit Facility was amended, effective March 16, 2018, to make certain technical amendments in connection with the offering of the 2024 Convertible Notes, as defined below. We terminated the 2017 Credit Facility on August 16, 2018 and the $1,178.1 million outstanding was repaid in full.
On August 16, 2018, we entered into a $1.25 billion senior secured credit facility, or the 2018 Credit Facility, consisting of a $250.0 million term loan A, or the 2018 Term Loan A, a $750.0 million term loan B, or the 2018 Term Loan B, and a $250.0 million revolving credit facility, or the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility, with a syndicate of financial institutions as lenders. Prior to the amendment described below, the 2018 Term Loan A and 2018 Revolving Credit Facility both were to mature on August 16, 2023. The 2018 Term Loan B matures upon the earlier of: (i) August 18, 2025, or (ii) December 15, 2023 if the outstanding principal on the 2024 Convertible Notes, as defined below, exceeds $350.0 million and we exceed certain leverage ratios as of that date. All obligations under the 2018 Credit Facility are unconditionally guaranteed by certain direct and indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of Herbalife Nutrition Ltd. and secured by the equity interests of certain of Herbalife Nutrition Ltd.’s subsidiaries and substantially all of the assets of the domestic loan parties. Also on August 16, 2018, we issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes, or 2026 Notes as described below, and used the proceeds from the 2018 Credit Facility and the 2026 Notes to repay in full the $1,178.1 million outstanding under the 2017 Credit Facility. For accounting purposes, pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 470, Debt
, or ASC 470, these transactions were accounted for as an extinguishment of the 2017 Credit Facility. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of $35.4 million as a result, which was recorded in other expense (income), net within our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2018.
On December 12, 2019, we amended the 2018 Credit Facility which, among other things, reduced the interest rate for borrowings under the 2018 Term Loan B. We incurred approximately $1.2 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the amendment. For accounting purposes, pursuant to ASC 470, this transaction was accounted for as a modification of the 2018 Credit Facility. The debt issuance costs were recognized in interest expense within our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2019.
On March 19, 2020, we amended the 2018 Credit Facility which, among other things, extended the maturity of both the 2018 Term Loan A and 2018 Revolving Credit Facility to the earlier of: (i) March 19, 2025 or (ii) September 15, 2023 if the outstanding principal on the 2024 Convertible Notes, as defined below, exceeds $350.0 million and we exceed certain leverage ratios as of that date; increased borrowings under the 2018 Term Loan A from $234.4 million to a total of $264.8 million; increased the total available borrowing capacity under 2018 Revolving Credit Facility from $250.0 million to $282.5 million; and reduced the interest rate for borrowings under both the 2018 Term Loan A and 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. We incurred approximately $1.6 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the amendment. For accounting purposes, pursuant to ASC 470, this transaction was accounted for as a modification of the 2018 Credit Facility. Of the $1.6 million of debt issuance costs, approximately $1.1 million was recorded on our consolidated balance sheet and is being amortized over the life of the 2018 Credit Facility using the effective-interest method, and approximately $0.5 million was recognized in interest expense within our consolidated statement of income during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The 2018 Credit Facility requires us to comply with a leverage ratio. The 2018 Credit Facility also contains affirmative and negative covenants customary for financings of this type, including, among other things, limitations or prohibitions on repurchasing common shares, declaring and paying dividends and other distributions, redeeming and repurchasing certain other indebtedness, loans and investments, additional indebtedness, liens, mergers, asset sales and transactions with affiliates. In addition, the 2018 Credit Facility contains customary events of default. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were in compliance with our debt covenants under the 2018 Credit Facility.
The 2018 Term Loan A and 2018 Term Loan B are payable in consecutive quarterly installments which began on December 31, 2018. Interest is due at least quarterly on amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility. In addition, beginning in 2020, we may be required to make mandatory prepayments towards the 2018 Term Loan B based on our consolidated leverage ratio and annual excess cash flows as defined under the terms of the 2018 Credit Facility. We are also permitted to make voluntary prepayments. Amounts outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan A may be voluntarily prepaid without premium or penalty, subject to customary breakage fees in connection with the prepayment of a eurocurrency loan. Under the 2018 Credit Facility, amounts outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan B may be voluntarily prepaid without premium or penalty,
subject to customary breakage fees in connection with the prepayment of a eurocurrency loan. These prepayments, if any, will be applied against remaining quarterly installments owed under the 2018 Term Loan A and 2018 Term Loan B in order of maturity with the remaining principal due upon maturity, unless directed otherwise by us. Based on the 2020 consolidated leverage ratio and excess cash flow calculation, both as defined under the terms of the 2018 Credit Facility, we will not be required to make a mandatory prepayment in 2021 toward the 2018 Term Loan B.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we borrowed an aggregate amount of $30.4 million under the 2018 Credit Facility and repaid a total amount of $20.7 million on amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repaid a total amount of $20.0 million on amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the U.S. dollar amount outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility was $984.7 million and $975.0 million, respectively. Of the $984.7 million outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020, $251.6 million was outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan A and $733.1 million was outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan B. Of the $975.0 million outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility as of December 31, 2019, $234.4 million was outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan A and $740.6 million was outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan B. There were no borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019. There were no outstanding foreign currency borrowings under the 2018 Credit Facility as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the weighted-average interest rate for borrowings under the 2018 Credit Facility was 3.39% and 5.52%, respectively.
See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on the 2018 Credit Facility.
Convertible Senior Notes due 2019
In February 2014, we issued $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2019, or the 2019 Convertible Notes. The 2019 Convertible Notes were senior unsecured obligations which ranked effectively subordinate to any of our existing and future secured indebtedness, including amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. The 2019 Convertible Notes paid interest at a rate of 2.00% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2014. Unless earlier repurchased or converted, the 2019 Convertible Notes matured on August 15, 2019. The primary purpose of the issuance of the 2019 Convertible Notes was for share repurchase purposes.
In March 2018, we issued $550 million aggregate principal of new convertible senior notes due 2024 as described below, and subsequently used the proceeds, along with cash on hand, to repurchase $475.0 million of our existing 2019 Convertible Notes from a limited number of holders in privately negotiated transactions for an aggregate purchase price of $583.5 million, which included $1.0 million of accrued interest.
In August 2019, we repaid a total amount of $675.0 million to repay in full amounts outstanding on the 2019 Convertible Notes upon maturity, as well as $6.7 million of accrued interest. See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on our 2019 Convertible Notes.
Convertible Senior Notes due 2024
In March 2018, we issued $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2024, or the 2024 Convertible Notes. The 2024 Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations which rank effectively subordinate to any of our existing and future secured indebtedness, including amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. The 2024 Convertible Notes pay interest at a rate of 2.625% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on March 15
and September 15 of each year, beginning on September 15, 2018. Unless redeemed, repurchased or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date, the 2024 Convertible Notes mature on March 15, 2024. The primary purpose of the issuance of the 2024 Convertible Notes was to repurchase a portion of the 2019 Convertible Notes. See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on our 2024 Convertible Notes.
Senior Notes due 2025
In May 2020, we issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes due 2025, or the 2025 Notes. The 2025 Notes are senior unsecured obligations which rank effectively subordinate to any of our existing and future secured indebtedness, including amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. The 2025 Notes pay interest at a rate of 7.875% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning on March 1, 2021. The 2025 Notes mature on September 1, 2025, unless redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date. The primary purpose of the issuance of the 2025 Notes was for general corporate purposes, including share repurchases and other capital investment projects. See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on our 2025 Notes.
Senior Notes due 2026
In August 2018, we issued $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes due 2026, or the 2026 Notes. The 2026 Notes are senior unsecured obligations which rank effectively subordinate to any of our existing and future secured indebtedness, including amounts outstanding under the 2018 Credit Facility, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. The 2026 Notes pay interest at a rate of 7.250% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on February 15, 2019. The 2026 Notes mature on August 15, 2026, unless redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date. The primary purpose of the issuance of the 2026 Notes was to refinance a portion of our 2017 Credit Facility. See Note 5, Long-Term Debt
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on our 2026 Notes.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations, including interest, as of December 31, 2020, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1) The estimated interest payments on our 2018 Credit Facility are based on interest rates effective as of December 31, 2020.
(2) Our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 includes $60.1 million in unrecognized tax benefits. The future payments related to these unrecognized tax benefits have not been presented in the table above due to the uncertainty of the amounts and potential timing of cash settlements with the tax authorities and whether any settlement would occur.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The majority of our foreign subsidiaries designate their local currencies as their functional currencies. As of December 31, 2020, the total amount of our foreign subsidiary cash and cash equivalents was $463.4 million, of which $31.4 million was held in U.S. dollars. As of December 31, 2020, the total amount of cash and cash equivalents held by Herbalife Nutrition Ltd. and its U.S. entities, inclusive of U.S. territories, was $582.0 million.
For earnings not considered to be indefinitely reinvested deferred taxes have been provided. For earnings considered to be indefinitely reinvested, deferred taxes have not been provided. Should we make a determination to remit the cash and cash equivalents from our foreign subsidiaries that are considered indefinitely reinvested to our U.S. consolidated group for the purpose of repatriation of undistributed earnings, we would need to accrue and pay taxes. As of December 31, 2020, our U.S. consolidated group had approximately $147.7 million of permanently reinvested unremitted earnings from certain foreign subsidiaries, and if these monies were ever needed to be remitted, the impact of any tax consequences on our overall liquidity position would not be material. As of December 31, 2020, Herbalife Nutrition Ltd. had approximately $2.6 billion of permanently reinvested unremitted earnings relating to its operating subsidiaries. As a result of our decision to invest in the China Growth and Impact Investment Program, approximately $113.9 million of unremitted earnings were permanently reinvested as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we do not have any plans to repatriate these unremitted earnings to Herbalife Nutrition Ltd.; therefore, we do not have any liquidity concerns relating to these unremitted earnings and related cash and cash equivalents. See Note 12, Income Taxes
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for additional discussion on our unremitted earnings.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no material off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Dividends
We have not declared or paid cash dividends since 2014. The declaration of future dividends is subject to the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon various factors, including our earnings, financial condition, Herbalife Nutrition Ltd.’s available distributable reserves under Cayman Islands law, restrictions imposed by the 2018 Credit Facility and the terms of any other indebtedness that may be outstanding, cash requirements, future prospects, and other factors deemed relevant by our board of directors.
On November 4, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a pro rata distribution of stock purchase warrants to our shareholders of one warrant for every four common shares held. Each warrant would have entitled the holder to purchase an Herbalife Nutrition common share at an exercise price of $67.50 per share where we would have had the option to net share settle these warrants if they were exercised in the future. On November 10, 2020, our Board of Directors announced that, after considering additional feedback from our shareholders, we will no longer move forward with our intended distribution of warrants.
Share Repurchases
On October 30, 2018, our board of directors authorized a new five-year $1.5 billion share repurchase program that will expire on October 30, 2023, which replaced our prior share repurchase authorization that was set to expire on February 21, 2020 and had approximately $113.3 million of remaining authorized capacity when it was replaced. This share repurchase program allows us, which includes an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of
Herbalife Nutrition Ltd., to repurchase our common shares at such times and prices as determined by management, as market conditions warrant, and to the extent Herbalife Nutrition Ltd.’s distributable reserves are available under Cayman Islands law. The 2018 Credit Facility permits us to repurchase our common shares as long as no default or event of default exists and other conditions, such as specified consolidated leverage ratios, are met. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining authorized capacity under our $1.5 billion share repurchase program was $607.9 million.
In conjunction with the issuance of the 2019 Convertible Notes during February 2014, we paid approximately $685.8 million to enter into prepaid forward share repurchase transactions, or the Forward Transactions, with certain financial institutions, or the Forward Counterparties, pursuant to which we purchased approximately 19.9 million common shares, at an average cost of $34.51 per share, for settlement on or around the August 15, 2019 maturity date for the 2019 Convertible Notes, subject to the ability of each Forward Counterparty to elect to settle all or a portion of its Forward Transactions early. The shares are treated as retired shares for basic and diluted EPS purposes. See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on the Forward Transactions.
In August 2020, we completed our modified Dutch auction tender offer and then subsequently paid cash to repurchase and retire a total of approximately 15.4 million of our common shares at an aggregate cost of approximately $750.0 million, or $48.75 per share. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased approximately 3.0 million of our common shares through open market purchases at an aggregate cost of approximately $142.1 million, or an average cost of $47.40 per share, and subsequently retired these shares. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not repurchase any of our common shares through open market purchases.
As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, we held approximately 10.0 million of treasury shares for U.S. GAAP purposes. These treasury shares increased our shareholders’ deficit and are reflected at cost within our accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Although these shares are owned by an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of ours and remain legally outstanding, they are reflected as treasury shares under U.S. GAAP and therefore reduce the number of common shares outstanding within our consolidated financial statements and the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding used in calculating earnings per share. The common shares of Herbalife Nutrition Ltd. held by the indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, however, remain outstanding on the books and records of our transfer agent and therefore still carry voting and other share rights related to ownership of our common shares, which may be exercised. So long as it is consistent with applicable laws, such shares will be voted by such subsidiary in the same manner, and to the maximum extent possible in the same proportion, as all other votes cast with respect to any matter properly submitted to a vote of Herbalife Nutrition Ltd.’s shareholders.
See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, and Note 15, Subsequent Events
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion on our share repurchases.
In connection with our October 2017 modified Dutch auction tender offer, we incurred $1.6 million in transaction costs and also provided a non-transferable
CVR for each share tendered, allowing participants in the tender offer to receive a contingent cash payment in the event Herbalife is acquired in a going-private transaction (as defined in the CVR Agreement) within two years of the commencement of the tender offer. The initial fair value of the CVR was $7.3 million, which was recorded as a liability in the fourth quarter of 2017 with a corresponding decrease to shareholders’ equity. In determining the initial fair value of the CVR, we used a lattice model, which included inputs such as the underlying stock price, strike price, time to expiration, and dividend yield. Subsequent changes in the fair value of the CVR liability, using a similar valuation approach as the initial fair value determination, were recognized within our consolidated balance sheets with corresponding gains or losses being recognized in other expense (income), net within our consolidated statements of income during each reporting period until the CVR expired in August 2019 or was terminated due to a going-private transaction, which was also
incorporated in the valuation of the CVR; this going-private probability input was considered to be a Level 3 input in the fair value hierarchy and any increase or decrease in this input could have significantly impacted the fair value of the CVR as of the reporting date. The CVR expired without value on August 21, 2019, the two-year
anniversary of August 21, 2017, the date we commenced the related modified Dutch auction tender offer.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a $15.7 million gain in other expense (income), net within our consolidated statement of income due to the change in the fair value of the CVR, which was driven by its expiration during August 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized an $8.8 million loss in other expense (income), net within our consolidated statement of income due to the change in the fair value of the CVR, which was primarily driven by an increase in the market price of our common shares, partially offset by a decrease in the probability of a going-private transaction as a result of the shortening term of the CVR before it expired pursuant to its terms.
See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
for a further discussion on the CVR.
Capped Call Transactions
In February 2014, in connection with the issuance of the 2019 Convertible Notes, we paid approximately $123.8 million to enter into capped call transactions with respect to our common shares, or the Capped Call Transactions, with certain financial institutions. The Capped Call Transactions were expected generally to reduce the potential dilution upon conversion of the 2019 Convertible Notes in the event that the market price of the common shares was greater than the strike price of the Capped Call Transactions, initially set at $43.14 per common share, with such reduction of potential dilution subject to a cap based on the cap price initially set at $60.39 per common share.
During March 2018, in connection with our repurchase of a portion of the 2019 Convertible Notes, we entered into partial settlement agreements with the option counterparties to the Capped Call Transactions to terminate a portion of the Capped Call Transactions, in each case, in a notional amount corresponding to the aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Convertible Notes that were repurchased.
On August 15, 2019, the 2019 Convertible Notes matured and the remaining Capped Call Transactions expired unexercised. The expiration of the Capped Call Transactions did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements. See Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion of the Capped Call Transactions.
Working Capital and Operating Activities
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had working capital of $648.5 million and $523.8 million, respectively, or an increase of $124.7 million. The increase was primarily due to increases in cash and cash equivalents and inventories, partially offset by increases in royalty overrides and other current liabilities.
We expect that cash and funds provided from operations, available borrowings under the 2018 Credit Facility, and access to capital markets will provide sufficient working capital to operate our business, to make expected capital expenditures, and to meet foreseeable liquidity requirements for the next twelve months and thereafter.
The majority of our purchases from suppliers are generally made in U.S. dollars, while sales to our Members generally are made in local currencies. Consequently, strengthening of the U.S. dollar versus a foreign currency can have a negative impact on net sales and contribution margins and can generate transaction gains or losses on intercompany transactions. For discussion of our foreign exchange contracts and other hedging arrangements, see Part II, Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Quarterly Results of Operations
(1) The fourth quarter of 2019 includes a net favorable adjustment to our unrecognized tax benefit liability of $11.4 million primarily attributable to transfer pricing matters in various foreign jurisdictions, and a legal accrual of $40 million relating to the SEC and DOJ investigations relating to the FCPA matter in China as described further in Note 7, Contingencies
,
to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contingencies
See Note 7, Contingencies
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for information on our contingencies as of December 31, 2020.
Subsequent Events
See Note 15, Subsequent Events
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for information regarding subsequent events, including the $600 million share repurchase agreement that was entered into on January 3, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the year. We regularly evaluate our estimates and assumptions related to revenue recognition, allowance for product returns, inventory, goodwill and purchased intangible asset valuations, deferred income tax asset valuation allowances, uncertain tax positions, tax contingencies, and other loss contingencies. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of revenue, costs and expenses. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We consider the following policies to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact our operating results, financial condition and cash flows.
We are a nutrition company that sells a wide range of weight management; targeted nutrition; energy, sports, and fitness; and outer nutrition products. Our products are manufactured by us in our Changsha, Hunan, China extraction facility, Suzhou, China facility, Nanjing, China facility, Lake Forest, California facility, and in our Winston-Salem, North Carolina facility, and by third-party providers, and then are sold to Members who consume and sell Herbalife products to retail consumers or other Members. As of December 31, 2020, we sold products in 95 markets throughout the world and we are organized and managed by geographic region. We aggregate our operating segments into one reporting segment, except China, as management believes that our operating segments have similar operating characteristics and similar long-term operating performance. In making this determination, management believes that the operating segments are similar in the nature of the products sold, the product acquisition process, the types of customers to whom products are sold, the methods used to distribute the products, the nature of the regulatory environment, and their economic characteristics.
We generally recognize revenue upon delivery when control passes to the Member. Product sales are recognized net of product returns, and discounts referred to as “distributor allowances.” We generally receive the net sales price in cash or through credit card payments at the point of sale. Royalty overrides are generally recorded when revenue is recognized. See Note 2, Basis of Presentation
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion of distributor compensation in the U.S.
Allowances for product returns, primarily in connection with our buyback program, are provided at the time the sale is recorded. This accrual is based upon historical return rates for each country and the relevant return pattern, which reflects anticipated returns to be received over a period of up to 12 months following the original sale. Historically, product returns and buybacks have not been significant. Product returns and buybacks were approximately 0.1% of net sales for both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We adjust our inventories to lower of cost and net realizable value. Additionally we adjust the carrying value of our inventory based on assumptions regarding future demand for our products and market conditions. If future demand and market conditions are less favorable than management’s assumptions, additional inventory write-downs could be required. Likewise, favorable future demand and market conditions could positively impact future operating results if previously written down inventories are sold. We have obsolete and slow moving inventories, which have been adjusted downward $23.0 million and $15.1 million to present them at their lower of cost and net realizable value in our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Goodwill and marketing-related intangible assets not subject to amortization are tested annually for impairment, and are tested for impairment more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired.
As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, which is performed at the reporting unit level, we may conduct an assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. In a qualitative assessment, we would consider the macroeconomic conditions, including any deterioration of general conditions and industry and market conditions, including any deterioration in the environment where the reporting unit operates, increased competition, changes in the products/services and regulatory and political developments, cost of doing business, overall financial performance, including any declining cash flows and performance in relation to planned revenues and earnings in past periods, other relevant reporting unit specific facts, such as changes in management or key personnel or pending litigation, and events affecting the reporting unit, including changes in the carrying value of net assets. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then we would perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test as required. If we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, then no further testing is required. During fiscal year 2020, we performed a qualitative assessment and determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit is less than its respective carrying value.
For our marketing-related intangible assets, we may also utilize a qualitative assessment similar to the one described above, with the exception that the test is performed at the consolidated level rather than at the reporting unit level. During fiscal year 2020, we performed a qualitative assessment of our marketing-related intangible assets and determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the assets is less than their carrying value.
If we are required to determine the fair value of each reporting unit using the quantitative method, we primarily use an income approach in order to determine the fair value of a reporting unit and compare it to its carrying amount. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include estimates of future revenues and expense growth rates, capital expenditures and the depreciation and amortization related to these capital expenditures, discount rates, and other inputs. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual future results could differ. Changes in assumptions regarding future results or other underlying assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit over its fair value.
If we are required to determine the fair value of our marketing-related intangible assets using the quantitative method, we use a discounted cash flow model, or the income approach, under the relief-from-royalty method to determine the fair value of our marketing related intangible assets in order to confirm there is no impairment required. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the assets exceeds their fair value.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had goodwill of approximately $100.5 million and $91.5 million, respectively, or an increase of $9.0 million. Of the $9.0 million increase, $7.0 million was due to an immaterial acquisition and $2.0 million was due to foreign currency translation adjustments. As of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had marketing-related intangible assets of approximately $310.0 million. No marketing-related intangibles or goodwill impairment was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 2, Basis of Presentation
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion.
Contingencies are accounted for in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 450, Contingencies,
or ASC 450. ASC 450 requires that we record an estimated loss from a loss contingency when information available prior to issuance of our financial statements indicates that it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. We also disclose material contingencies when we believe a loss is not probable but reasonably possible as required by ASC 450. Accounting for contingencies such as legal and non-income
tax matters requires us to use judgment related to both the likelihood of a loss and the estimate of the amount or range of loss. Many of these legal and tax contingencies can take years to be resolved. Generally, as the time period increases over which the uncertainties are resolved, the likelihood of changes to the estimate of the ultimate outcome increases.
We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. Although realization is not assured, we believe it is more likely than not that the net carrying value will be realized. The amount of the carryforwards that is considered realizable, however, could change if estimates of future taxable income are adjusted. In the ordinary course of our business, there are many transactions and calculations where the tax law and ultimate tax determination is uncertain. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate prior to the completion and filing of tax returns for such periods. These estimates involve complex issues and require us to make judgments about the likely application of the tax law to our situation, as well as with respect to other matters, such as anticipating the positions that we will take on tax returns prior to us actually preparing the returns and the outcomes of disputes with tax authorities. The ultimate resolution of these issues may take extended periods of time due to examinations by tax authorities and statutes of limitations. In addition, changes in our business, including acquisitions, changes in our international corporate structure, changes in the geographic location of business functions or assets, changes in the geographic mix and amount of income, as well as changes in our agreements with tax authorities, valuation allowances, applicable accounting rules, applicable tax laws and regulations, rulings and interpretations thereof, developments in tax audit and other matters, and variations in the estimated and actual level of annual pre-tax
income can affect the overall effective income tax rate.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes,
or ASC 740, which provides guidance on the determination of how tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under ASC 740, we must recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, or U.S. Tax Reform, which contains several key tax provisions that affect us, including, but not limited to, a one-time
mandatory transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings, changes in the sourcing and calculation of foreign income, and a reduction of the corporate income tax rate to 21% effective January 1, 2018. We are required to recognize the effect of the tax law changes in the period of enactment, such as determining the transition tax, remeasuring our U.S. deferred tax assets and liabilities as well as reassessing the net realizability of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. In December 2017, the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118, Income Tax Accounting Implications of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
, which allows us to record provisional amounts during a measurement period not to extend beyond one year of the enactment date. See Note 12, Income Taxes
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a further discussion of U.S. Tax Reform. We have made an accounting policy election to account for global intangible low-taxed
income as a period cost if and when incurred.
We account for foreign currency transactions in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 830, Foreign Currency Matters
. In a majority of the countries where we operate, the functional currency is the local currency. Our foreign subsidiaries’ asset and liability accounts are translated for consolidated financial reporting purposes into U.S. dollar amounts at period-end
exchange rates. Revenue and expense accounts are translated at the average rates during the year. Our foreign currency translation adjustments are included in accumulated other comprehensive loss on our accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses and foreign currency remeasurements are generally included in selling, general, and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See discussion under Note 2, Basis of Presentation
, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15, Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for information on new accounting pronouncements.