Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and those listed under Item 1A, Risks Factors.
Business Overview
We are a leading global provider of (i) versatile and high performance video delivery software, products, system solutions and services that enable our customers to efficiently create, prepare, store, playout and deliver a full range of high-quality broadcast and streaming video services to consumer devices, including televisions, personal computers, laptops, tablets and smart phones and (ii) cable access solutions that enable cable operators to more efficiently and effectively deploy high-speed internet, for data, voice and video services to consumers’ homes.
We classify our total revenue in two categories, “Appliance and integration” and “SaaS and service.” The “Appliance and integration” revenue category includes hardware, licenses and professional services and is reflective of non-recurring revenue, while the “SaaS and service” category includes usage fees for our SaaS platform and support service revenue from our appliance-based customers and reflects our recurring revenue stream.
We conduct business in three geographic regions - the Americas, EMEA and APAC - and operate in two segments, Video and Cable Access. Our Video business sells video processing, production and playout solutions, and services worldwide to cable operators and satellite and telecommunications (“telco”) Pay-TV service providers, which we refer to collectively as “service providers,” as well as to broadcast and media companies, including streaming media companies. Our Video business infrastructure solutions are delivered either through shipment of our products, software licenses or as SaaS subscriptions. Our Cable Access business sells cable access solutions and related services, including our CableOS software-based cable access solution, primarily to cable operators globally.
Historically, our revenue has been dependent upon capital spending in the cable, satellite, telco, broadcast and media industries, including streaming media. Our customers’ capital spending patterns are dependent on a variety of factors, including but not limited to: economic conditions in the U.S. and international markets, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic; access to financing; annual budget cycles of each of the industries we serve; impact of industry consolidations; and customers suspending or reducing capital spending in anticipation of new products or new standards, new industry trends and/or technology shifts. If our product portfolio and product development plans do not position us well to capture an increased portion of the capital spending in the markets in which we compete, our revenue may decline. As we attempt to further diversify our customer base in these markets, we may need to continue to build alliances with other equipment manufacturers, content providers, resellers and system integrators, managed services providers and software developers; adapt our products for new applications; take orders at prices resulting in lower margins; and build internal expertise to handle the particular operational, payment, financing and/or contractual demands of our customers, which could result in higher operating costs for us.
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in public health responses in affected regions, including travel bans and restrictions, social distancing requirements, and shelter-in-place orders, which have caused a global slowdown of economic activity and negatively impacted our business, operations and financial performance. In our Cable Access segment, COVID-19 led to delays in certain deployments and new engagements with some cable operators, which generally occurred in the first half of 2020. In our Video segment, sales of video appliances and integration fell following the spread of COVID-19 as transactions or shipments were delayed and we were unable to complete certain field deployment projects as customer facilities closed in the first half of 2020. In the third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020, we experienced an increase in sales activities, transactions and deployments in both business segments due to the loosening of certain COVID-19 restrictions, and customer adaptation to such restrictions. We expect that the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have an impact on our results of operations.
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and have adopted several measures in response to COVID-19, including instructing employees to work from home, making adjustments to our expenses and cash flow to correlate with declines in revenues and business travel, and restricting non-essential business travel by our employees. The extent to which our operations will be impacted by the pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the evolving severity of the pandemic in different countries and regions of the world, vaccination efforts, and other actions by governments and businesses in response to the pandemic. As such, given the uncertainty around the duration and severity of the impact on market conditions and the business environment, we cannot reasonably estimate the full impacts of COVID-19 on our future results of operations. See “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
We believe a material and growing portion of the opportunities for our Video business are linked to the industry and our customers (i) continuing to adopt streaming technologies to capture, process and deliver video content to consumers and, increasingly, utilizing public cloud solutions like our VOS SaaS platform to do so; (ii) transforming existing broadcast infrastructure workflows into more flexible, efficient and cost-effective operations running in public clouds; and (iii) for those customers maintaining on-premise video delivery infrastructure, continuing to upgrade and replace aging equipment with next-generation software-based appliances that significantly reduce operational complexity. Our Video business strategy is focused on continuing to develop and deliver products, solutions and services to enable and support these trends.
Our Cable Access strategy is focused on continuing to develop and deliver software-based cable access technologies, which we refer to as our CableOS solutions, to our cable operator customers. We believe our CableOS software-based cable access solutions are superior to hardware-based systems and deliver unprecedented scalability, agility and cost savings for our customers. Our CableOS solutions, which can be deployed based on a centralized, DAA or hybrid architecture, enable our customers to migrate to multi-gigabit broadband capacity and the fast deployment of DOCSIS 3.1 data, video and voice services. We believe our CableOS solutions resolve space and power constraints in cable operator facilities, eliminate dependence on hardware upgrade cycles and significantly reduce total cost of ownership, and will help us become a major player in the cable access market. In the meantime, we believe our Cable Access segment is gaining momentum in the marketplace as our customers have begun to adopt new virtualized DOCSIS 3.1 CMTS solutions and distributed access architectures. We continue to make progress in the development of our CableOS solutions and in the growth of our CableOS business, with expanded commercial deployments, field trials, and customer engagements.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires Harmonic to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingencies and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Material differences may result in the amount and timing of revenue and expenses if different judgments or different estimates were made. Refer to Note 2 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for details of our accounting policies. Critical accounting policies, judgments and estimates that we believe have the most significant impact on Harmonic’s financial statements are set forth below:
•Revenue recognition;
•Valuation of inventories;
•Impairment of goodwill or long-lived assets; and
•Accounting for income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the following five steps:
a) Identify the contract(s) with a customer;
b) Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
c) Determine the transaction price;
d) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
e) Recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Refer to Note 3, “Revenue,” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our revenue recognition policies, including critical judgments and estimates associated with our revenue recognition.
Valuation of Inventories
We state inventories at the lower-of-cost (determined on first-in, first-out basis) or net realizable value. We write down the cost of excess or obsolete inventory to net realizable value based on future demand forecasts and historical consumption. If there were to be a sudden and significant decrease in demand for our products, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and customer requirements, we could be required to record additional charges for excess and obsolete inventory and our gross margin could be adversely affected. Inventory management is of critical importance in order to balance the need to maintain strategic inventory levels to ensure competitive lead times against the risk of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and customer requirements.
Impairment of Goodwill or Long-lived Assets
On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standard Update (“ASU”) No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350) using the prospective approach. The ASU eliminates step two from the goodwill impairment test. Under ASU No. 2017-04, we will recognize an impairment charge for an amount by which the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value up to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we first assesses qualitative factors such as the magnitude of the excess fair value over carrying value from the prior period’s impairment testing, other reporting unit specific operating results as well as new events and circumstances impacting the operations at the reporting unit level. If the result of a qualitative test indicates a potential for impairment of a reporting unit, a quantitative impairment test is performed to determine the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it with its carrying value. We determine the fair value of our reporting units using both income and market valuation approaches.
Under the income approach, the fair value of each reporting unit is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows that the reporting unit is expected to generate over its remaining life. Cash flow projections are based on management's estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market conditions. The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit. Under the market approach, the fair value of the reporting unit is estimated based on market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from comparable publicly-traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the reporting units, and then apply a control premium which is determined by considering control premiums offered as part of the acquisitions that have occurred in market segments that are comparable with our reporting units.
Both valuation approaches require significant judgments and use of estimates in determining future operating trends and other variables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. However, those assumptions can be unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual results could be materially different from the estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed the goodwill impairment testing for our two reporting units as part of our annual goodwill impairment test and concluded that goodwill was not impaired. We have not recorded any impairment charges related to goodwill for any prior periods. Refer to Note 7, “Goodwill,” for additional information.
We evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets and other long-lived assets when indicators of impairment are present. When impairment indicators are present, we evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets and other long-lived assets on the basis of undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of each asset group and its eventual disposition. If the undiscounted expected future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized in order to write down the carrying value of the asset to its estimated fair market value.
Accounting for Income Taxes
In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we estimate our income taxes for each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This involves estimating our actual current tax expense and assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as reserves and accruals, for tax and accounting purposes. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We are subject to examination of our income tax returns by various tax authorities on a periodic basis. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from such examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We apply the provisions of the applicable accounting guidance regarding accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which requires application of a more-likely-than-not threshold to the recognition and derecognition of uncertain tax positions. If the recognition threshold is met, the applicable accounting guidance permits us to recognize a tax benefit measured at the largest amount of such tax benefit that, in our judgment, is more than fifty percent likely to be realized upon settlement. It further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the period in which such determination is made.
We file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. A number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited and finally resolved. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes reflect the most likely outcome. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest and penalties, in light of changing facts and circumstances. If our estimate of tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to expense would result. If payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be unnecessary, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. Any changes in estimate, or settlement of any particular position, could have a material impact on our operating results, financial condition and cash flows.
Refer to Note 14, “Income Taxes,” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
Net Revenue
The following table presents the breakdown of net revenue by category and geographical region:
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
Appliance and integration net revenue decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due a decrease in Video appliance revenue as media investment slowed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the addition of new CableOS customer deployments and increased penetration of existing CableOS customers.
Americas net revenue decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the recognition of one-time up front $37.5 million in software license revenue from the Comcast CableOS software license agreement in fiscal 2019, partially offset by the addition of new CableOS customer deployments and increased penetration of existing CableOS customers.
EMEA net revenue decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in Video appliance revenue as media investment slowed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the ramping of our CableOS solutions in the region.
APAC net revenue decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, as media investment slowed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic throughout APAC as shutdowns continued in the region resulting in a decrease in Video appliance revenue.
Fiscal 2019 compared to Fiscal 2018
Appliance and integration net revenue decreased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to a decrease in revenue in the Video segment. The decrease in revenue in our Video segment was primarily due to a shift in product mix to software and SaaS-based products.
SaaS and service net revenue increased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to the growing success of our CableOS solutions, as well as a shift in product mix to software and SaaS-based products in our Video segment.
Americas net revenue increased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to the growing success of our CableOS solutions, which was offset by a decrease in revenue from other products and services.
EMEA net revenue increased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to an increase in revenue from the sale of CableOS products and services, offset by a decrease in revenue in the Video segment.
APAC net revenue decreased in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to a decrease in revenue in the Video segment. The decrease in revenue in our Video segment was primarily due to a shift in product mix to software and SaaS-based products.
Gross Profit
Our gross margins are dependent upon, among other factors, the proportion of software sales, product mix, customer mix, product introduction costs, price reductions granted to customers and achievement of cost reductions.
Our gross margin decreased 4% in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the recognition of the one-time up front $37.5 million in software license gross profit from the Comcast CableOS software license agreement during fiscal 2019, partially offset by increased gross profit from new CableOS customer deployments and increased penetration of existing CableOS customers.
Gross margin increased 3% in 2019, as compared to 2018, primarily due to a higher proportion of software in the product mix for each of our business segments.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and related expenses, contractors and outside consultants, supplies and materials, equipment depreciation and facilities costs, all associated with the design and development of new products and enhancements of existing products. The research and development expenses are net of French R&D tax credits.
The decrease in research and development expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in expenses as a result of our continuing transformation from a capital-intensive hardware development model to a predominantly software development model, and lower travel and entertainment expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by higher employee compensation costs due to headcount increases, higher outside consulting spending attributable to our Cable Access segment, and higher stock-based compensation expense related to performance-based RSUs.
The decrease in research and development expenses in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to lower employee compensation costs due to headcount reductions as a result of our continuing transformation from a capital-intensive hardware development model to a predominantly software development model and lower stock-based compensation expense, offset by higher costs for third-party engineering services.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased slightly in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to higher employee compensation costs due to higher headcount, higher sales incentive bonus expenses towards the end of fiscal 2020, and an increase in stock-based compensation related to performance-based RSUs, mostly offset by lower travel, entertainment and trade show expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased slightly in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to higher trade show and marketing expenses, offset by lower employee compensation costs due to headcount reductions and lower stock-based compensation expense.
Amortization of Intangibles
The amortization of intangibles expense decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 as certain intangible assets became fully amortized.
Restructuring and Related Charges
We have implemented several restructuring plans in the past few years. The goal of these plans is to bring operational expenses to appropriate levels relative to our net revenues, while simultaneously implementing extensive company-wide expense control programs. We account for our restructuring plans under the authoritative guidance for exit or disposal activities. The restructuring and related charges are included in “Cost of revenue” and “Operating expenses-restructuring and related charges” in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The decrease in restructuring and related charges in 2020 compared to 2019, was primarily due to lower severance and employee benefit costs recorded in conjunction with restructuring activities during 2020.
The increase in restructuring and related charges in 2019 compared to 2018, was primarily due to higher severance and employee benefit costs recorded in conjunction with restructuring activities during 2019.
Refer to Note 10, “Restructuring and Related Charges,” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Interest Expense, Net
The decrease in interest expense, net from 2019 to 2020, was primarily driven by lower interest due to the partial repurchase of the 2020 Notes in 2019, partially offset by the higher amortization of debt discount and issuance costs for the 2024 Notes issued in September 2019 and the 2022 Notes issued in June 2020. Refer to Note 11, “Convertible Notes, Other Debts and Finance Leases,” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The increase in interest expense, net from 2018 to 2019, was primarily due to higher amortization of debt discount and issuance costs for the 2020 Notes and from amortization of debt discount and issuance costs for the 2024 Notes issued in September 2019, offset by lower interest due to the partial repurchase of the 2020 Notes during 2019.
Loss on Convertible Debt Extinguishment
The loss on convertible debt extinguishment of $1.4 million in 2020 includes $0.9 million loss related to the exchange of a portion of the 2020 Notes in June 2020 and the $0.5 million loss related to the settlement of the remaining 2020 Notes in December 2020. The loss on convertible debt extinguishment of $5.7 million in 2019 relates to the repurchase of a portion of the 2020 Notes in September 2019. Refer to Note 11, “Convertible Notes, Other Debts and Finance Leases,” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net is primarily comprised of foreign exchange gains and losses on cash, accounts receivable and intercompany balances denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of the reporting entity. Our foreign currency exposure is primarily driven by the fluctuations in the foreign currency exchanges rates of the Euro, British pound, Japanese yen and Israeli shekel. The decrease in other expense, net in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower foreign exchange losses resulting from the change in Euro against the U.S. dollar in 2020. To mitigate the volatility related to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, we enter into various foreign currency forward contracts. See “Foreign Currency Exchange Risk” under