Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References
in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company” refer
to Empower Ltd. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors,
and references to the “sponsor” refer to Empower Sponsor Holdings LLC. The following discussion and analysis of the
Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements
and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this
Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking
statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of
many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A.
Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We
are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on August 19, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting our initial
business combination We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial
Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We
expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to
complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results
of Operations
We
have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through
December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below
and looking for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our
initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities
held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company
(for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with
searching for, and completing, our initial business combination.
For
the period from August 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $221,009, which consisted of formation
and operating costs of $273,915, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $49,118 and an
unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $3,788.
Liquidity
and Capital Resources
On October 9, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. After deducting underwriting fees of $5,000,000, we received net proceeds of $245,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,666,667 private placement warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000. We incurred $465,163 of other offering costs, resulting in net cash provided by financing activities of $251,554,837 for the period from August 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Deferred underwriting costs of $8,750,000 were also incurred in connection with the Initial Public Offering, but are not payable until consummation of our initial business combination.
For the period from August 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $250,000,000. Following the Initial Public Offering, and the sale of the private placement warrants, we invested $250,000,000 in the trust account.
For
the period from August 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $474,208. Net loss
of $221,009 was impacted by formation expenses paid by the sponsor of $5,000, interest earned on marketable securities held in
the trust account of $49,118 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $3,788. Changes in operating assets and liabilities
used $205,293 of cash from operating activities.
At
December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $250,052,906. We intend to use substantially
all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest
shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We
may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole
or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will
be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue
our growth strategies.
As
of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,080,629 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the
trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses,
travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners,
review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete our initial
business combination.
In
order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial business combination, our
sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as
may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the
trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working
capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for
such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option
of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We
do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business for
at least the next 12 months. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due
diligence and negotiating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient
funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional
financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of
our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur
debt in connection with such initial business combination.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We
have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often
referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet
arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities,
guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual
Obligations
We
do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as
described below.
The
underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $8,750,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable
to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination,
subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We
entered into a forward purchase agreement to which Empower Funding LLC (“Empower Funding”), has received commitments
from one or more funds affiliated with MidOcean, and is an affiliate of the sponsor, will purchase an aggregate of up to 5,000,000
forward purchase units, consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-third of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary
share for $10.00 per unit, or up to $50,000,000 in the aggregate, in a private placement to close substantially concurrently with
the closing of our initial business combination, subject to approval at such time by the MidOcean investment committee. The allocation
of the forward purchase securities among the ultimate MidOcean funds that will be funding the forward purchase will be determined
by MidOcean, in its sole discretion, at the time of our initial business combination. If the sale of the forward purchase units
fails to close, for any reason, the Company may lack sufficient funds to consummate our initial business combination. The forward
purchase shares and forward purchase warrants will be identical to the Class A ordinary shares included in the units sold in the
Initial Public Offering, except that they will be subject to certain registration rights.
Critical
Accounting Policies
The
preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses
during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical
accounting policies:
Class
A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We
account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards
Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject
to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary
shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to
redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other
times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights
that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary
shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’
equity section of our balance sheet.
Net
Loss Per Ordinary Share
We
apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, which are not currently
redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per ordinary share
since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the trust account earnings. Our net loss is adjusted
for the portion of income that is attributable to ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, as these shares only participate
in the earnings of the trust account and not our income or losses.
Recent
Accounting Standards
Management
does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have
a material effect on our financial statements.