Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We consummated our initial Public Offering on October 14, 2020. We intend to use the cash proceeds from our public offering and private placement of warrants as well as additional issuances, if any, of our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt to complete the Business Combination.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. There can be no assurance that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital resources
On October 14, 2020, we consummated a $500,000,000 public offering consisting of 50,000,000 units at a price of $10.00 per Unit. Each Unit consists of one share of the Company’s Class A common stock, $0.0001 par value and one-third of one redeemable Public Warrant. Simultaneously, with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated a $12,000,000 Private Placement of an aggregate of 8,000,000 Sponsor Warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant. Upon closing of the Public Offering and Private Placement on October 14, 2020, $500,000,000 in proceeds (including $17,500,000 of deferred underwriting commissions) from the public offering and private placement was placed in the Trust Account. The remaining $120,000,000 held outside of trust was used to pay underwriting commissions of $10,000,000, loans to our Sponsors, and deferred offering and formation costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an unrestricted balance of $1,017,406 as well as cash and accrued interest held in the Trust Account of $500,078,624. Our working capital needs will be satisfied through the funds, held outside of the Trust Account, from the public offering. Interest on funds held in the Trust Account may be used to pay income taxes and franchise taxes, if any. Further, our Sponsors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required in connection with the Business Combination. Up to $1,500,000 of these loans may be converted into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender and would be identical to the Sponsor Warrants.
Agreement for Business Combination
On January 24, 2021, our board of directors unanimously approved an agreement and plan of merger, dated January 24, 2021, by and among Landcadia, Helios Sun Merger Sub, Inc., our wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), HMAN Group Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Hillman Holdco”) and CCMP Sellers’ Representative, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company in its capacity as the Stockholder Representative thereunder (in such capacity, the “Stockholder Representative”) (as it may be amended and/or restated from time to time, the “Merger Agreement”). If the Merger Agreement is adopted by our stockholders and the transactions under the Merger Agreement are consummated, Merger Sub will merge with and into Hillman Holdco with Hillman Holdco surviving the merger as our wholly owned subsidiary (the “Proposed Transaction”). Hillman Holdco is a holding company that indirectly holds all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of The Hillman Group, Inc., which, together with its direct and indirect subsidiaries (Hillman Holdco, The Hillman Group, Inc. and its direct and indirect subsidiaries, collectively, “Hillman” and each such entity, a “Hillman Group Entity”), is in the business of providing hardware-related products and related merchandising services to retail markets in North America. In connection with the consummation of the Proposed Transaction, We will be renamed “Hillman Solutions Corp.” and is referred to herein as “New Hillman” as of the time following such change of name.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement, we have agreed to pay aggregate consideration in the form of New Hillman common stock (the “Aggregate Consideration”) calculated as described below and equal to a value of approximately (i) $911,300,000 plus (ii) $28,280,000, such amount being the value of 2,828,000 shares of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class B common stock”), valued at $10.00 per share that our sponsors, TJF, LLC (“TJF Sponsor”) and Jefferies Financial Group Inc., (“JFG Sponsor” and, together with TJF Sponsor, the “Sponsors”), have agreed to forfeit at the closing of the Proposed Transaction (the “Closing”).
At the effective time of the Proposed Transaction, all outstanding shares of common stock of Hillman Holdco will be cancelled in exchange for the right to receive, with respect to each such share, a certain number of shares of New Hillman common stock valued at $10.00 per share equal to (A) (i) the Aggregate Consideration plus (ii) the value that would be received by Hillman Holdco upon the exercise of all outstanding Hillman Holdco options as of immediately prior to the Closing (the “Adjusted Purchase Price”), divided by (B) (i) the total number of shares of Hillman Holdco common stock outstanding as of immediately prior to the Closing plus (ii) the number of shares of Hillman Holdco common stock underlying all then outstanding Hillman Holdco options and shares of Hillman Holdco restricted stock outstanding as of immediately prior to the Closing (the “Adjusted Per Share Merger Value”).
At the effective time, each outstanding option to purchase shares of Hillman Holdco common stock (a “Hillman Holdco Option”), whether vested or unvested, will be assumed by New Hillman and will be converted into an option to acquire common stock of New Hillman (“New Hillman Options”) with substantially the same terms and conditions as applicable to the Hillman Holdco Option immediately prior to the effective time (including expiration date, vesting conditions and exercise provisions), except that (i) each such Hillman Holdco Option shall be exercisable for that number of shares of New Hillman common stock equal to the product (rounded down to the nearest whole number) of (A) the number of shares of Hillman Holdco common stock subject to such Hillman Holdco Assumed Option immediately prior the effective time multiplied by (B) the quotient of (1) the Adjusted Per Share Merger Value divided by (2) $10.00 (such quotient, with respect to each Hillman Holdco Option, the “Closing Stock Per Option Amount”), (ii) the per share exercise price for each share of New Hillman common stock issuable upon exercise of the New Hillman Option shall be equal to the quotient (rounded up to the nearest whole cent) obtained by dividing (A) the exercise price per share of Hillman Holdco subject to such Hillman Holdco Option immediately prior to the effective time by (B) the Closing Stock Per Option Amount; (iii) the Hillman Holdco Board (or the compensation committee of the Hillman Holdco Board) may appropriately adjust the performance conditions applicable to certain of the New Hillman Options; and (iv) the Hillman Holdco Board (or the compensation committee of the Hillman Holdco Board) may make such other immaterial administrative or ministerial changes to the New Hillman Options as it may determine in good faith are appropriate to effectuate the administration of the New Hillman Options and to ensure consistency with the administrative and ministerial provisions of the New Hillman Incentive Equity Plan;
At the effective time, each share of unvested restricted Hillman Holdco common stock will be cancelled and converted into the right to receive a number of shares of restricted New Hillman common stock (“New Hillman Restricted Stock”) equal to the quotient of (a) the Adjusted Per Share Merger Value divided by (b) $10.00 (such quotient, with respect to each share of unvested Hillman Holdco restricted stock, the “Closing Stock Per Restricted Share Amount”) with substantially the same terms and conditions as were applicable to the related share of Hillman Holdco Restricted Stock immediately prior to the effective time (including with respect to vesting and termination-related provisions), except that (i) any per-share repurchase price of such New Hillman Restricted Stock shall be equal to the quotient obtained by dividing (A) the per-share repurchase price applicable to the Hillman Holdco Restricted Stock, by (B) the Closing Stock Per Restricted Share Amount, rounded up to the nearest cent and (ii) the Hillman Holdco Board (or the compensation committee of the Hillman Holdco Board) may make such other immaterial administrative or ministerial changes to the New Hillman Restricted Stock as it may determine in good faith are appropriate to effectuate the administration of the New Hillman Restricted Stock and to ensure consistency with the administrative and ministerial provisions of the New Hillman Incentive Equity Plan.
At the effective time, each Hillman Holdco restricted stock unit (each a “Hillman Holdco RSU”) will be assumed by New Hillman and converted into a restricted stock unit in respect of shares of New Hillman common stock (each, a “New Hillman RSU”) with substantially the same terms and conditions as were applicable to such Hillman Holdco RSU immediately prior to the effective time (including with respect to vesting and termination-related provisions), except that (i) each New Hillman RSU shall represent the right to receive (subject to vesting) that number of shares of New Hillman common stock equal to the product (rounded up to the nearest whole number) of the number of shares of Hillman Holdco common stock underlying the Hillman Holdco RSU immediately prior to the effective time multiplied by the quotient of (a) the Adjusted Per Share Merger Value divided by (b) $10.00 (such quotient, with respect to each Hillman Holdco restricted stock unit, the “Hillman Holdco RSU Exchange Ratio”); and (ii) the Hillman Holdco Board (or the compensation committee of the Hillman Holdco Board) may make such other immaterial administrative or ministerial changes to the New Hillman RSUs as it may determine in good faith are appropriate to effectuate the administration of the New Hillman RSUs and to ensure consistency with the administrative and ministerial provisions of the New Hillman Incentive Equity Plan.
In addition, pursuant to the A&R Letter Agreement, our Sponsors will, at the Closing of the Proposed Transaction, forfeit a total of 3,828,000 of their shares of Class B common stock (the “Sponsor Forfeited Shares”), with 2,828,000 shares being forfeited by the Sponsors on a basis pro rata with their ownership of the Company and 1,000,000 additional shares being forfeited by the TJF Sponsor.
Immediately prior to the effective time of the Business Combination, with the exception of the Sponsor Forfeited Shares, each of the currently issued and outstanding shares of our Class B common stock will automatically convert, on a one-for-one basis, into shares of our Class A common stock in accordance with the terms of our second amended and restated certificate of incorporation, and thereafter, in connection with the Closing, our Class A common stock will be reclassified as New Hillman common stock.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any significant business operations nor generated any revenues to date. All activities to date relate to the Company’s formation and its initial Public Offering and search for a suitable Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses as we locate a suitable Business Combination.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and period from March 13, 2018 (inception) to December 31, 2018, we had a net loss of $154,280, $0 and $0, respectively. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to $172,904 of general and administrative costs and $60,000 of management fees for administrative services, offset by $78,624 in earnings on the Trust Account assets.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital, purchase or operating lease obligations or other long-term liabilities. We have recorded deferred underwriting commissions payable upon the completion of the Business Combination.
We entered into an administrative services agreement in which the Company pays Fertitta Entertainment, Inc. an affiliate of TJF, for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the Company’s management team, in an amount not to exceed $20,000 per month.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Redeemable Shares
All of the 50,000,000 Public Shares sold as part of the Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the Prospectus. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. The Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares will be affected by charges against additional paid-in capital. At December 31, 2020, there were 50,000,000 Public Shares, of which 47,849,916 were recorded as redeemable shares, classified outside of permanent equity, and 2,150,084 were classified as Class A common stock.
Loss per Common Share
Basic loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. All Founder Shares are assumed to convert to shares of Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis. Consistent with FASB ASC 480, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, as well as their pro rata share of undistributed trust earnings consistent with the two-class method, have been excluded from the calculation of loss per common share for the year ended December 31, 2020. Such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of trust earnings. Diluted loss per share includes the incremental number of shares of common stock to be issued in connection with the conversion of Founder Shares or to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method. For the years ending December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, the Company did not have any dilutive warrants, securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock. As a result, diluted loss per common share is the same as basic loss per common share for all periods presented. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reported a loss available to common shareholders of $0.02.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.