Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and assumptions and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” section of this Report. Refer to “Cautionary Note on Forward-Looking Statements.” Future results could differ significantly from the historical results presented in this section.
Overview
We are a leading residential mortgage originator and servicer with a mission to create financially healthy, happy homeowners. Our business model is focused on growing originations through highly leverageable partner networks supported by at-scale operations, and managing the customer experience through our in-house servicing operation and proprietary Home Ownership Platform. Our originations are primarily sourced through a nationwide network of more than 5,000 independent mortgage brokerages, or our Broker Partners. We enable the success of our Broker Partner network through a unique blend of in market sales coverage and an efficient and scaled loan fulfillment process, which is supported by our fully integrated technology platform. We also source customers through nearly 600 correspondent sellers, or our Correspondent Partners. We maintain ongoing connectivity with nearly 360,000 customers through our servicing platform with the ultimate objective of establishing Customers for Life.
Servicing is a strategic cornerstone of our business and central to our Customer for Life strategy. Retaining our servicing and managing the servicing platform in-house gives us the opportunity to establish a deeper relationship with our customers. This relationship is enhanced through our proprietary Home Ownership Platform. The proprietary Home Ownership Platform differs from competitors in the way in which it personalizes the experience for borrowers through the use of customized dashboards, which allow us to deliver critical information about borrowers’ accounts such as payment deadlines, forbearance status and escrow distributions and customized offerings, which allow us to connect borrowers to other third-party financial products such as insurance policies and home equity loans.
This connectivity and ongoing dialogue help us proactively find ways to help our customers save money, either through a refinancing of their mortgage or savings on another home-related product. We believe the frequency of customer interaction, coupled with providing effective solutions beyond the mortgage, will result in the development of trusted, long-standing relationships and ultimately increase the lifetime value of the customer relationships.
By executing on this strategy, we have developed our de novo platform into an industry leader with a historic market-leading growth position. As of December 31, 2020, we are the third largest wholesale lender with the fastest growth of the top five wholesale originators, according to Inside Mortgage Finance. Overall, Home Point is the 10th largest non-bank originator in the United States, according to Inside Mortgage Finance, having originated $62.0 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Segments
Our operations are organized into two separate reportable segments: Origination and Servicing.
In our Origination segment, we source loans through three distinct production channels: Direct, Wholesale and Correspondent. The Direct channel provides the Company’s existing servicing customers with various financing options. At the same time, it supports the servicing assets in the ecosystem by retaining existing servicing customers who may otherwise refinance their existing mortgage loans with a competitor. The Wholesale channel consists of mortgages originated through a nationwide network of more than 5,000 Broker Partners. The Correspondent channel consists of closed and funded mortgages that we purchase from a trusted network of Correspondent Partners. Once a loan is locked, it becomes channel agnostic. The channels in our Origination segment function in unison through the following activities: hedging, funding, and production. Our Origination segment generated contribution margins of $1.1 billion and $89.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our Servicing segment consists of servicing loans that were produced in our Originations segment where the Company retained the servicing rights. Servicing consists of collecting loan payments, remitting principal and interest payments to investors, managing escrow funds for the payment of mortgage-related expenses, such as taxes and insurance, performing loss mitigation activities on behalf of investors and otherwise administering our mortgage loan servicing portfolio in compliance with state and federal regulations. We also strategically buy and sell servicing rights. Our Servicing segment generated contribution loss of $65.7 million and contribution margin of $24.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We believe that maintaining both an Origination segment and a Servicing segment provides us with a more balanced business model in both rising and declining interest rate environments, as compared to other industry participants that predominantly focus on either origination or servicing, instead of both.
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019 Summary
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated $62.0 billion of mortgage loans compared to $22.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $39.7 billion or 178.0%. Our MSR Servicing Portfolio as of December 31, 2020 was $91.5 billion of MSR UPB compared to $52.6 billion of MSR UPB as of December 31, 2019. We generated $607.0 million of net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $29.2 million of net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019. We generated $667.7 million of Adjusted net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $28.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We generated $910.6 million of Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $69.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding our use of Adjusted net income (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA, including limitations related to such non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation of such measures to net income, the nearest comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Total net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a loss of $285.3 million due to a decrease in the fair value of our MSRs resulting from the valuation model impact of a decrease in projected duration of cash flow collections during the period. According to the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) Mortgage Finance Forecast, average 30-year mortgage rates declined by approximately 70 basis points from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. A decline of this nature generally results in higher prepayment speeds and a subsequent downward adjustment to the fair value of our MSRs for the loans that still exist in our portfolio. However, when rates decline, our Origination volume generally increases as refinance opportunities increase.
The above-described increase in Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to an increase in Gain on loans, net of $1.2 billion and an increase in Loan fee income of $64.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Gain on loans, net and Loan fee income was driven by the increase in Origination volume described above and increased profit margins on overall loan sales to investors, which increased by 134 basis points or 149% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our increased Origination volume also resulted in an increase in Compensation and benefits expense of $247.0 million or 158.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to that for the year ended December 31, 2019. For definitions of, and more information about, these non-GAAP financial measures, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Recent Developments-COVID-19
Business Operations
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) categorized COVID-19 as a pandemic, and the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a national emergency. While the financial markets have demonstrated significant volatility due to the economic impacts of COVID-19, our flexible, scalable platform and technology-enabled infrastructure have enabled us to respond quickly to the increased market demand, resulting in record levels of Origination volume. We expect the increase in origination demands to remain steady as a result of the low interest rate environment and our competitive positioning in the markets.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted and signed into law. The CARES Act allows borrowers with federally backed loans to request a temporary mortgage forbearance through December 31, 2020. In addition, in February 2021, the federal government announced an additional extension of three to six months depending on loan type. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 36,000 loans, or 10.0%, of the loans in our MSR Servicing Portfolio had elected the forbearance option. Of the 10.0% of the loans in our MSR Servicing Portfolio that had elected the forbearance option as of December 31, 2020, approximately 51.9% remained current on their December 31, 2020 payments. As a result of the CARES Act forbearance requirements, we have experienced increases in delinquencies in our MSR Servicing Portfolio, and we believe delinquencies will likely remain elevated through the expiration of the CARES Act, which we believe is in line with industry performance.
As of December 31, 2020, the 60 days or more delinquent rate in our MSR Servicing Portfolio was 4.4%, compared to 1.7% as of December 31, 2019. As a servicer, we may be required to advance principal and interest to the investor for up to four months on GSE backed mortgages and longer on other government agency backed mortgages on behalf of borrowers who have entered a forbearance plan. In response to these potential GSE requirements, in April 2020, we amended our servicing advance facility to extend the maturity date to May 2021 and increased the total capacity from $50 million to $85 million. We plan to extend this facility beyond the current maturity date.
As of December 31, 2020, our Servicing advance receivable increased by $44.4 million, or 82.9% compared to December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $173.4 million in our MSR Servicing Portfolio as of December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019. As a result, we increased our Servicing advance reserves by $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. However, out of the total increase in Servicing advance reserves of $4.1 million, $1.4 million was directly attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase of $4.1 million in the Servicing advance reserves was a result of increased delinquency rates on our MSR Servicing Portfolio stemming from the CARES Act. In addition, the Company’s cash and available line of credit positions remain positive. As of December 31, 2020, we had $165.2 million of unrestricted cash, $9.0 million in unused operating lines of credit, and $34.3 million in unused capacity from our servicing advance facilities.
We are currently prohibited from collecting certain servicing-related fees, such as late fees, and initiating foreclosure proceedings until the termination of the CARES Act forbearance period. As a result, we expect the effects of the CARES Act forbearance requirements to reduce our servicing income and increase our servicing expenses. Further, we have seen an increase in MSR prepayment speeds, which is driven by historically low interest rates. Refer to “Note 5, Mortgage servicing rights,” in the Company’s consolidated financial statements, for our increase in prepayment speeds. As a result of COVID-19, we experienced immaterial increased costs due to temporary process disruptions, resulting in holding loans held for sale in our portfolio longer than the average 30 days from funding to sale. While the incurred costs have thus far been immaterial, we expect this to be a continued risk until the COVID-19 pandemic has been remedied.
Finally, under the CARES Act, we elected to defer the payment of employer-related payroll taxes in the amount of $11.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Under the CARES Act, 50.0% of the deferred payroll taxes are due by December 31, 2021 and 50.0% are due by December 31, 2022. We have recorded the accrual for deferred payroll taxes within Accounts payable and accrued expenses in our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020, as applicable.
Associate Safety
We are continuing to focus on protecting the safety and well-being of our associates. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we quickly implemented a number of initiatives to ensure the safety of our associates. Since mid-March 2020, more than 90.0% of our associates have been working from home, and they are not participating in travel or face-to-face meetings that are deemed non-essential. To date, there has not been a material number of COVID-19 illnesses reported in our associate base, nor has there been a material impact to the observed productivity of our workforce in the aggregate.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material negative impact on our operational performance, financial performance, or liquidity to date, it is difficult to predict what the ongoing impact of the pandemic will be on the economy and our business. Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for more details.
Key Factors Affecting Results of Operations for Periods Presented
Residential Real Estate Market Conditions
Our Origination volume is impacted by broader residential real estate market conditions and the general economy. Housing affordability, availability and general economic conditions influence the demand for our products. Housing affordability and availability are impacted by mortgage interest rates, availability of funds to finance purchases, availability of alternative investment products and the relative relationship of supply and demand. General economic conditions are impacted by unemployment rates, changes in real wages, inflation, consumer confidence, seasonality and the overall economic environment. Recent market conditions, such as low interest rates and limited supply of housing, have led to home price appreciation and a decrease in the affordability index.
Changes in Interest Rates
Origination volume is impacted by changes in interest rates. Decreasing interest rates tend to increase the volume of purchase loan origination and refinancing whereas increasing interest rates tend to decrease the volume of purchase loan origination and refinancing.
Changes in interest rates impact the value of interest rate lock commitments and loans held for sale. Interest rate lock commitments represent an agreement to extend credit to a customer whereby the interest rate is set prior to the loan funding. These commitments bind us to fund the loan at a specified rate. When loans are funded, they are classified as held for sale until they are sold. During the origination and sale process, the value of interest rate lock commitments and loans held for sale inventory rises and falls with changes in interest rates; for example, if we enter into interest rate lock commitments at low interest rates followed by an increase in interest rates in the market, the value of our interest rate lock commitment will decrease.
The fair value of MSRs is also driven primarily by interest rates, which impact the likelihood of loan prepayments. In periods of rising interest rates, the fair value of the MSRs generally increases as prepayments decrease, and therefore the estimated life of the MSRs and related expected cash flows increase. In a declining interest rate environment, the fair value of MSRs generally decreases as prepayments increase and therefore the estimated life of the MSRs, and related cash flows, decrease.
There has been a long-term trend of falling interest rates, with intermittent periods of rate increases. More recently, there was a falling interest rate environment in 2020. Because origination volumes tend to increase in declining interest rate environments and decrease in increasing rate environments, we believe that our two principal sources of revenue, mortgage origination and mortgage loan servicing, contribute to a stable business profile by creating a natural hedge against changes in the interest rate environment. Additionally, to mitigate the interest rate risk impact, we employ economic hedging strategies. Our economic hedging strategies allow us to protect our investment and help us manage our liquidity through forward delivery commitments on mortgage-backed securities or whole loans and options on forward contracts.
Key Performance Indicators
We review several operating metrics, including the following key performance indicators to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe these key metrics are useful to investors both because they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making, and they may be used by investors to help analyze the health of our business.
Our origination metrics enable us to monitor our ability to generate revenue and expand our market share across different channels. In addition, they help us track origination quality and compare our performance against the nationwide originations market and our competitors. Other key performance indicators include the number of Broker Partners and number of Correspondent Partners, which enable us to monitor key inputs of our business model. Our servicing metrics enable us to monitor the size of our customer base, the characteristics and value of our MSR Servicing Portfolio, and help drive retention efforts.
The following summarizes key performance indicators for our business:
Origination Segment KPIs
(a) Calculated as Gain on sale, net divided by Origination volume.
(b) Calculated as the Company’s originations dollar value for the year divided by the total residential originations in the United States of America per Inside Mortgage Finance, a third party provider of residential mortgage industry news and statistics each year.
(c) Calculated as the Company’s originations dollar value for the year divided by the total wholesale originations in the United States of America per Inside Mortgage Finance, each year.
(d) Number of Broker Partners with whom the Company sources loans from.
(e) Number of Correspondent Partners from whom the Company purchases loans.
Servicing Segment KPIs
(f) The unpaid principal balance of loans we service on behalf of Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mae and others, at period end.
(g) Number of loans in our serving portfolio at period end.
(h) Total balances of outstanding loan principals for which installment payments are at least 60 days past due as a percentage of the outstanding loan principal as of a specified date. Includes delinquent loans in COVID-19 pandemic-related forbearance plans provided in the CARES Act.
(i) Calculated as the MSR fair market value as of a specified date divided by the related UPB divided by the weighted average service fee.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that certain non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Report, including Adjusted revenue, Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA can provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results. These measures are not financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net income, or any other operating performance measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to a similarly titled measure reported by other companies.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted revenue, Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations because each measure assists both investors and management in analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. Adjusted revenue, Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA provide indicators of performance that are not affected by fluctuations in certain costs or other items. Accordingly, management believes that these measurements are useful for comparing general operating performance from period to period, and management relies on these measures for planning and forecasting of future periods. The Company measures the performance of the segments primarily on a contribution margin basis. Additionally, these measures allow management to compare our results with those of other companies that have different financing and capital structures. However, other companies may define Adjusted revenue, Adjusted net income (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA differently, and as a result, our measures of Adjusted revenue, Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA may not be directly comparable to those of other companies.
Adjusted revenue. We define Adjusted revenue as Total net revenue exclusive of the impact of the change in fair value of MSRs related to changes in valuation inputs and assumptions, net of MSRs hedge and adjusted for Income from equity method investment.
Adjusted net income. We define Adjusted net income as Net income (loss) exclusive of the impact of the change in fair value of MSRs related to changes in valuation inputs and assumptions, net of MSRs economic hedging results.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest (without adjustment for net warehouse interest related to loan fundings and payoff interest related to loan prepayments), taxes, depreciation and amortization exclusive of the impact of the change in fair value of MSRs related to changes in valuation inputs and assumptions, net of MSRs economic hedging results.
The non-GAAP information presented below should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes.
The following is a reconciliation of Adjusted revenue, Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA to the nearest GAAP financial measures of Total revenue, net and Net income (loss), as applicable:
Reconciliation of Adjusted Revenue to Total Revenue, Net
Reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income to Total Net Income (Loss)
Reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to Total Net Income (Loss)
(a) MSR fair value changes due to valuation inputs and assumptions are measured using a stochastic discounted cash flow model that includes assumptions such as prepayment speeds, delinquencies, discount rates, and effects of changes in market interest rates. Refer to “Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 5, Mortgage Servicing Rights” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The change in the value of the MSR hedge is measured based on third party market values and cash settlement. Refer to “Note 16, Fair Value Measurements” in the consolidated financial statements. We exclude changes in fair value of MSRs, net of hedge from Adjusted revenue as they add volatility and we believe that they are not indicative of the Company’s operating performance or results of operations. This adjustment does not include changes in fair value of MSRs due to realization of cash flows, which remain in Adjusted EBITDA. Realization of cash flows occurs when cash is collected as customers make scheduled payments, partial prepayments of principal, or pay their mortgage in full.
(b) The income tax effect of change in fair value of MSR (due to inputs and assumptions), net of hedge is calculated as the MSR valuation change, net of hedge multiplied by the quotient of Income tax expense (benefit) divided by Income (loss) before income tax.
Description of Certain Components of our Results of Operations
Components of Revenue
Gain on loans, net includes the realized and unrealized gains and losses on mortgage loans, as well as the changes in fair value of all loan-related derivatives, including interest rate lock commitments, freestanding loan-related derivatives, and representation and warranty reserve.
Loan fee income consists of fee income earned on all loan originations, including amounts earned related to application and underwriting fees. Fees associated with the origination and acquisition of mortgage loans are recognized when earned, which is the date the loan is originated or acquired.
Interest income (expense), net consists of interest income recognized on loans held for sale for the period from loan funding to sale, which is typically 30 days, and interest earned on escrow and custodial funds held on behalf of our servicing customers and investors, respectively. Interest income (expense), net is presented net of interest expense related to our loan funding warehouse and other facilities as well as expenses related to amortization of capitalized debt expense, original issue discount, gains or losses upon extinguishment of debt, and commitment fees paid on certain debt agreements.
Loan servicing fees consist of fees received from loan servicing. Loan servicing involves the servicing of residential mortgage loans on behalf of an investor. Total Loan servicing fees include servicing and other ancillary servicing revenue earned for servicing mortgage loans owned by investors. Servicing fees received for servicing mortgage loans owned by investors are based on a stipulated percentage of the outstanding monthly principal balance on such loans, or the difference between the weighted-average yield received on the mortgage loans and the amount paid to the investor, less guaranty fees and interest on curtailments (reduction of principal balance). Loan servicing fees are receivable only out of interest collected from mortgagors and are recorded as income when earned, which is generally upon collection. Late charges and other miscellaneous fees collected from mortgagors are also recorded as income when collected.
Change in fair value of mortgage servicing rights. MSRs represent the fair value assigned to contracts that obligate us to service the mortgage loans on behalf of the owners of the mortgage loans in exchange for service fees and the right to collect certain ancillary income from the borrower. We recognize MSRs at our estimate of the fair value of the contract to service loans. Changes in the fair value of MSRs are recognized as current period income as a component of Change in fair value of MSRs. To hedge against interest rate exposure on these assets, we enter into various derivative instruments, which may include but are not limited to swaps and forward loan purchase commitments. Changes in the value of derivatives designed to protect against MSR value fluctuations, or MSR hedging gains and losses, are also included as a component of Change in fair value of MSRs.
Other Income includes income that is dissimilar in nature to revenues we earn from loan origination and servicing activities, such as proceeds from the sale of a business or contingent consideration received.
Components of Operating Expenses
Compensation and benefits expense includes all salaries, commissions, bonuses and benefit-related expenses for our associates.
Loan expense primarily includes loan origination costs, loan processing costs, and fees related to loan funding. As a result of adoption of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, certain passthrough fees such as flood certification, credit report, and appraisal fees, among others, are presented net within Loan expense. A reclassification of these passthrough fees from Loan fee income to Loan expense is presented for periods subsequent to adoption.
Loan servicing expense primarily includes servicing system technology expenses, non-performing servicing expenses, and general servicing expenses, such as printing expenses, recording fees, and title search fees.
Occupancy and equipment includes rent expense, utilities, office supplies, technology and other office expenses.
General and administrative primarily includes marketing and advertising costs, travel and entertainment, legal reserves, and professional services, such as audit and consulting fees.
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of Property and equipment and amortization of Intangible assets.
Other expenses primarily consist of insurance, dues and subscriptions, and other employee-related expenses such as recruitment fees and training expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation consists of equity awards and is measured and expensed accordingly under ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation.
Future Public Company Expenses
As a public company, we anticipate our operating expenses will increase as we establish and maintain governance and controls in accordance with SEC guidelines. We expect some of our expenses to increase as we establish more comprehensive compliance and governance functions, maintain and review internal controls over financial reporting in accordance with Sarbanes-Oxley and prepare and distribute periodic reports as required by SEC rules and regulations. Such expenses include, but are not limited to accounting, legal and personnel-related expenses. As a result, our historical results of operations may not be indicative of our results of operations in future periods.
Results of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain consolidated financial data for each of the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded Total net income of $607.0 million, an increase of $636.2 million, or 2178.1%, compared to a Total net loss of $29.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Net income was primarily the result of increase in Gain on loans, net of $1,185.4 million or 594.2% due to the increase in loan origination and Gain on sale margin during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was offset by an increase of unfavorable Change in fair value of MSRs of $112.1 million or 64.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 which was primarily driven by the decline in mortgage interest rates, which resulted in an increase in prepayment speeds. In addition, Compensation and benefits expense increased by $247.0 million, or 158.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to increases in headcount as a result of the growth in the loan origination volume. These were partially offset by increase in Loan fee income of $64.0 million, or 199.3%, due to the increase in origination volume and an increase of $44.0 million or 30.5% in Loan servicing fees due to the growth of our MSR Servicing Portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total Revenue, Net
Gains on loans, net
The components of Gain on loans, net for the periods presented were as follows:
(a)The Gain on sales, net includes income related to originations of mortgage servicing rights.
The table below provides details of the characteristics of our mortgage loan production for each of the periods presented:
(a)Gain on sale margin represents the margin on loans sold, including the realized and unrealized gains and losses on sales of mortgage loans, as well as the changes in fair value of all loan-related derivatives, including interest rate lock commitments, freestanding loan-related derivatives, and representation and warranty reserve, and is calculated as the ratio of Gain on loans, net to the Sales volume UPB.
(b)Represents the percentage of our loan sales UPBs for which we retained the underlying servicing UPB during the period.
Gain on loans, net increased by $1,185 million, or 594.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to an increase of $1,339 million in Gain on sales, net and an increase in the Change in fair value of loans held for sale, interest rate lock commitments (“IRLCs”), and related economic hedges of $272.9 million, partially offset by an increase of $407.6 million of Realized and unrealized loss from derivative financial instruments and an increase of $19.3 million of Provision for losses relating to representations and warranties for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increases in the components of Gain on loans, net is consistent with our increase in Origination volume and higher Gain on sale margins. The higher origination volume for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 also resulted in an increase of the reserve provision for losses relating to representation and warranties. Refer to Note 15 - Representation and Warranty Reserve within the financial statements for additional information regarding the Provision for losses relating to representation and warranties.
Gain on sales, net increased by $1.3 billion, or 640.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was consistent with our increase in Origination volume. Origination volume, excluding volume from the Distributed retail channel, increased by $39.7 billion, or 178.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was led by an increase in the wholesale market channel. The increase of our Origination volume was supported by declining interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2020, combined with a 74% increase in Broker partners and a 13% increase in Correspondent partners from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decline in interest rates resulted in an increase in Refinance originations as a percentage of our total origination volume. The increase was further driven by an increase of originated MSRs. Originated MSRs increased by $299.5 million, or 109.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The Retained servicing (UPB) ratio increased to approximately 99.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately 96.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, Gain on sale margin increased by 149.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Gain on sale margin was primarily driven by the low interest rates market which resulted in increased demand, which led to increased margins for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on loans, net also includes unrealized gains and losses from the fair value changes in mortgage loans held for sale and IRLCs as well as realized and unrealized gains and losses from derivative instruments used to hedge the loans held for sale and IRLCs. The Net loss from these fair value changes increased by $134.6 million, or 2419%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Realized and unrealized losses from derivative financial instruments increased by $407.6 million or 676.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019 due to unexpected changes in interest rates, offset by a gain of $272.9 million recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020 due to changes in fair value of loans held for sale and IRLCs resulting from favorable market conditions.
Loan fee income
Loan fee income increased by $64.0 million, or 199.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in Origination volume discussed above for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loan servicing fees
The table below provides details of the characteristics of our mortgage loan servicing portfolio as of the periods presented:
Loan servicing fees increased by $44.0 million, or 30.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in Servicing fees of $51.8 million due to an increase in the Average MSR Servicing Portfolio of $25.0 billion, or 53.2% as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, which was primarily driven by an increase in origination volume and our servicing ratio over the period.
Change in fair value of MSRs
Change in fair value of MSRs presented losses for both years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Fair value losses increased by $112.1 million, or 64.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily driven by the increased Realization of cash flows due to an increase in actual prepayments. Typically, when interest rates decline, MSRs will prepay faster, resulting in an increase in the Realization of cash flows. The increased loss due to changes in Valuation inputs and assumptions was primarily driven by lower interest rates, which resulted in an increase in modeled prepayment speeds. These increased losses were partially offset by increased gains from our economic hedging results.
Interest expense, net
The components for Interest expense, net for the periods presented were as follows:
Interest expense, net increased by $3.3 million, or 53.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in expense was driven by an increase in warehouse borrowing and related fees during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to increase in origination volume. Increase in warehouse borrowing expense was offset by a decrease in the term debt expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by a write off of debt issuance cost and prepayment penalty that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income increased due to an increase in interest earned on loans held for sale for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 which was driven by our increase in origination volume.
Other income
Other income decreased slightly by $0.5 million, or 14.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by contingent consideration received in 2019.
Expenses
Total expenses increased by $347.5 million, or 144.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily driven by increases in Compensation and benefits expense, loan expense, general and administrative expense and other expenses.
Compensation and benefits expense increased by $247.0 million, or 158.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $130.3 million in commissions and bonuses resulting from an increase in Origination volume, as well as an increase of $116.8 million in salary and benefits largely driven by an 130.3% increase in employee headcount to support our growth in Origination volume. As a percentage of volume, Compensation and benefits expense was 0.65% and 0.70% of Origination volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loan expense increased by $29.8 million, or 190.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in loan costs due to an increase in Origination volume of $39.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loan servicing expense increased by $9.9 million, or 47.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $5.1 million in loan servicing operations costs due to a 52.0% increase in mortgage servicing portfolio units as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 and a $4.9 million increase in the provision for servicing advance reserves due to an increase in servicing advances resulting from an increase in our servicing portfolio combined with increased cost associated with the forbearance provided for through the CARES Act.
Occupancy and equipment expense increased by $9.2 million, or 55.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in equipment and information technology associated expense of $6.0 million and increase in other occupancy and equipment expense of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, both of which were driven by an increased headcount.
General and administrative expense increased $31.1 million, or 145.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in professional services fees of $28.9 million related to the professional and consulting services incurred during the Company’s initial public offering process that was initiated in 2020 as well as an increase in other outsourcing and professional services incurred due to increase in origination volume. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 million in travel and entertainment expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $0.4 million, or 6.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease of $1.2 million in amortization of intangibles expense as a result of lower carrying value in 2020 and an impairment expense of $0.1 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was offset by an increase of depreciation expense of $0.9 million as a result of additional IT equipments acquired during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of our increase in headcount.
Income tax expense (benefit) increased by $208.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to an increase in pre-tax income. Our overall effective tax rate of 25.2% and 22.9% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due the impact of state incomes taxes, adjustments to the partial valuation allowance on state net operating losses, offset by certain non-deductible expenses and the impact of state rate changes on the beginning deferred tax balances.
Summary Results by Segment for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
We have two segments:
•Our Origination segment consists of a combination of retail and third-party loan production operations. The increase in revenues for the Origination segment was primarily driven by an increase in loan Origination volume.
•Our Servicing segment consists of servicing loans the Company had initially originated and subsequently sold, for which the Company retained servicing rights as well as MSRs the Company occasionally purchases from others. The decrease in revenues for the Servicing segment was primarily driven by a decrease in interest rates.
Origination
The table below presents details of Revenue and Contribution margin for the Origination segment:
Servicing
The table below presents details of Revenue and Contribution margin for the Servicing segment:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have included:
•Borrowings, including under our warehouse funding facilities and other secured and unsecured financing facilities
•Cash flow from our operations, including:
•Sale of mortgage loans held for sale
•Loan origination fees
•Servicing fee income
•Interest income on loans held for sale, and
•Cash and marketable securities on hand
Historically, our primary uses of funds have included:
•Origination of loans
•Payment of interest expense
•Repayment of debt
•Payment of operating expenses, and
•Changes in margin requirements for derivative contracts
We are also subject to contingencies which may have a significant impact on the use of our cash.
Summary of Certain Indebtedness
To originate and aggregate loans for sale into the secondary market, we use our own working capital and borrow on a short-term basis primarily through committed and uncommitted mortgage warehouse lines of credit that we have established with different large global and regional banks and financial institutions. Our loan funding facilities are primarily in the form of master repurchase agreements and participation agreements. New loan originations that are financed under these facilities are generally financed at approximately 95% to 100% of the principal balance of the loan (although certain types of loans are financed at lower percentages of the principal balance of the loan).
At the time of either the funding or purchase, mortgage loans are pledged as collateral for borrowings on mortgage warehouse lines of credit. In most cases, loans will remain on one of the warehouse lines of credit facilities for only a short time, generally less than one month, until the loans are pooled and sold. During the time the loans are held for sale, we earn Interest income from the borrower on the underlying mortgage loan. This income is partially offset by the interest and fees we have to pay under the mortgage warehouse lines of credit.
When we sell a pool of loans in the secondary market, the proceeds received from the sale of the loans are used to pay back the amounts we owe on the mortgage warehouse lines of credit. We rely on the cash generated from the sale of loans to fund future loans and repay borrowings under our mortgage warehouse lines of credit. Delays or failures to sell loans in the secondary market could have an adverse effect on our liquidity position.
As of December 31, 2020, we held mortgage warehouse lines of credit arrangements with nine separate financial institutions with a total maximum borrowing capacity of $4.2 billion and we had an unused borrowing capacity of $1.2 billion. Refer to “Note 11 - Warehouse Lines of Credit” of our consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, we maintained a servicing advance financing facility, MSR financing facility and an operating line of credit with total combined maximum borrowing capacity of $572.0 million and an unused borrowing capacity of $116.1 million. Refer to “Note 12 - Term Debt and Other Borrowings, net” of our consolidated financial statements.
The amount owed and outstanding on our mortgage warehouse lines of credit fluctuates significantly based on our origination volume and the amount of time it takes us to sell the loans we originate.
Our debt financing agreements also contain margin call provisions that, upon notice from the applicable lender at its option, require us to transfer cash or, in some instances, additional assets in an amount sufficient to eliminate any margin deficit. A margin deficit generally will result from any decline in the market value (as determined by the applicable lender) of the assets subject to the related financing agreement relative to the available financing and offsetting hedges. Upon notice from the applicable lender, we generally will be required to satisfy the margin call on the day of such notice or the following business day.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we completed our offering of $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior unsecured notes due 2026 (the “Senior Notes”).
The warehouse facilities and other lines of credit require maintenance of certain operating and financial covenants, and the availability of funds under these facilities is subject to, among other conditions, our continued compliance with these covenants. These financial covenants include, but are not limited to, maintaining a certain minimum tangible net worth, minimum liquidity, minimum profitability levels, and ratio of indebtedness to tangible net worth, among others. A breach of these covenants can result in an event of default under these facilities following which the lenders would be able to pursue certain remedies against us. In addition, each of these facilities includes cross-default or cross- acceleration provisions that could result in all facilities terminating if an event of default or acceleration of maturity occurs under any facility.
We were in compliance with all covenants under our warehouse facilities and other lines of credit as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Cash flows
Our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are summarized below.
Our Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash increased by $115.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Activities
Our Cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by changes in the levels of our inventory of loans held for sale as shown below:
Cash used in operating activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in Gain on loans, net was primarily due to an increase in origination volume. The increase in cash used in Change in fair value of derivative assets was primarily due to increase in our interest rate lock commitment revenue and margin call assets as a result of increased volume and favorable interest rates. Increases were partially offset by a decrease in cash used in Mortgage loans held for sale due to an increase in sales proceeds, Other operating sources primarily due to an increase in Net income, and Deferred income tax due to increases in deferred tax liabilities related to MSRs and derivative assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to the increase in purchases of IT and other equipment during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to our increase in headcount, partially offset by the cash usage in the year ended December 31, 2019 for business acquisitions.
Financing Activities
Our Cash flows from financing activities are primarily influenced by changes in warehouse borrowings as shown below:
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by increases in warehouse borrowings to be utilized for funding increased loan origination volume offset slightly by a decrease in other financing sources for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to decrease in term debt borrowing.
Shareholder’s equity
Total shareholder’s equity increased by $517.2 million, or 126.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by Net income of $607.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was partially offset by a dividend paid to our direct parent at the time, HPLP.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table sets forth certain of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020. Refer to “Note 11 - Warehouse Lines of Credit”, “Note 12 - Term Debt and Other Borrowings, net”, and “Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies” of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of contractual obligations, commercial commitments, and other contingencies, including legal contingencies.
(a)The rate used to estimate interest was the rate as of December 31, 2020. The rate is based on the LIBOR rate and there has been a significant decline in the rate in 2020 which is reflected above. Term debt is net of debt issuance costs.
(b)Interest expense on advance, warehouse facilities and operating lines of credit is not presented in this table due to the short-term nature of these facilities.
(c)Payments due for our leases of office space and equipment expiring at various dates through 2029. The payments represent future minimum rental payments under the leases having an initial or remaining non-cancelable term in excess of one year.
Repurchase and Indemnification Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we are exposed to liability with respect to certain representations and warranties that we make to the investors who purchase the loans that we originate. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to repurchase mortgage loans, or indemnify the purchaser of such loans for losses incurred, if there has been a breach of these representations and warranties, or in the case of early payment defaults. In addition, in the event of an early payment default, we are contractually obligated to refund certain premiums paid to us by the investors who purchased the related loan.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Refer to “Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this form.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We have identified certain accounting policies as being critical because they require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments about matters that are uncertain. We believe that the judgment, estimates, and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate given the factual circumstances at the time. However, actual results could differ, and the use of other assumptions or estimates could result in material differences in our results of operations or financial condition. Our critical accounting policies and estimates are discussed below and relate to fair value measurements, particularly those determined to be Level 2 and Level 3. Refer to “Note 16 - Fair Value Measurements” to our consolidated financial statements.
Mortgage loans held for sale. We have elected to record Mortgage loans held for sale at fair value. The majority of our Mortgage loans held for sale at fair value are saleable into the secondary mortgage markets, and their fair values are estimated using observable quoted market or contracted prices or market price equivalents, which would be used by other market participants. These saleable loans are considered Level 2. A smaller portion of our Mortgage loans held for sale consist of loans repurchased from the GSEs that have subsequently been deemed to be non-saleable to GSEs when certain representations and warranties are breached. These repurchased loans are considered Level 3 at collateral value less estimated costs to sell the properties.
Changes in economic or other relevant conditions could cause our assumptions with respect to market prices of securities backed by similar mortgage loans to be different than our estimates. Increases in the market yields of similar mortgage loans result in a lower Mortgage loans held for sale at fair value.
Derivative financial instruments. We enter into IRLCs, forward commitments to sell mortgage-backed securities, and MSR-related derivatives which are considered derivative financial instruments. Our derivative financial instruments are accounted for as free-standing derivatives and are included in the consolidated balance sheets at fair value.
The Company estimates the fair value of IRLCs based on the value of the underlying mortgage loan, quoted MBS prices and estimates of the fair value of the MSRs and the probability that the mortgage loan will fund within the terms of the interest rate lock commitment. The Company estimates the fair value of forward sales commitments based on quoted MBS prices. The weighted average pull-through rate for IRLCs was 73% and 82% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Given the significant and unobservable nature of the pull-through factor, IRLCs are classified as Level 3.
MSRs. We have elected to record MSRs at fair value. MSRs are recognized as a component of Gain on loans, net when loans are sold, and the associated servicing rights are retained. Subsequent changes in fair value of MSRs due to the collection and realization of cash flows and changes in model inputs and assumptions are recognized in current period earnings and included as a separate line item in the consolidated statements of operations.
We use a discounted cash flow approach to estimate the fair value of MSRs. This approach consists of projecting servicing cash flows discounted at a rate that management believes market participants would use in their determinations of value.
Changes in economic and other relevant conditions could cause our assumptions, such as with respect to the prepayment speeds, to be different than our estimates. The key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of MSRs are prepayment speeds and the discount rate. Increases in prepayment speeds generally have an adverse effect on the value of MSRs as the underlying loans prepay faster, which causes accelerated MSR amortization. Increases in the discount rate result in a lower MSR value and decreases in the discount rate result in a higher MSR value. Refer to “Note 5 - Mortgage Servicing Rights” to our consolidated financial statements.
New Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective
Refer to “Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting developments and the expected effect on the Company.