Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of the Corporation’s historical results of operations and of its liquidity and capital resources should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Corporation and related notes. Statements that are not historical are forward-looking and involve risks and uncertainties. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" and the Forward-Looking Statements section within "Item 1. Business" for further information.
Overview
The Corporation has two reportable segments: workplace furnishings (formerly office furniture) and residential building products (formerly hearth products). In the second quarter of 2020, the Corporation rebranded its reportable segments, with no impact on the Corporation’s consolidated financial statements or disclosures. The Corporation is a leading global designer and provider of commercial furnishings, and a leading manufacturer and marketer of hearth products. The Corporation utilizes a decentralized business model to deliver value to customers via various brands and selling models. The Corporation is focused on growing its existing businesses while seeking out and developing new opportunities for growth.
Consolidated net sales for 2020 decreased 13.0 percent compared to the prior year. The change was due to a 19.5 percent decrease in the workplace furnishings segment, partially offset by a 7.3 percent increase in the residential building products segment. The acquisition of residential building products distributors resulted in a $9.4 million increase compared to 2019.
Net income attributable to the Corporation in 2020 was $41.9 million compared to net income of $110.5 million in 2019. The change was primarily driven by $45.6 million of impairments and costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption and lower workplace furnishings volume, partially offset by net productivity, lower core SG&A, and higher residential building products volume.
On December 31, 2020, the Corporation acquired Design Public Group ("DPG"), a leading e-Commerce distributor of high-design furniture and accessories for the office and home. DPG brings a digitally native organization with skills and capabilities to help the Corporation accelerate its digital and e-Commerce initiatives. DPG's platform will support the Corporation's traditional distribution models and allow for increased reach to a broader consumer group that increasingly purchases furniture online. Due to the timing of the transaction, DPG had no net sales or expenses included in the Corporation's Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for fiscal 2020. DPG's provisional purchase price allocation recorded as of January 2, 2021 is included in the Corporation's workplace furnishings segment. See "Note 4. Acquisitions" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Results of Operations
The following table presents certain key highlights from the results of operations (in thousands):
Net Sales
Consolidated net sales for 2020 decreased 13.0 percent compared to the prior year. The change was driven by a decrease in the workplace furnishings segment, partially offset by an increase in the residential building products segment. Included in the 2020 sales results was a $9.4 million favorable impact from acquiring residential building products distributors.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased 20 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by lower workplace furnishings volume, partially offset by net productivity and higher residential building products volume.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales increased 150 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by $6.8 million of one-time costs incurred as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic (of which $1.6 million was recorded as a corporate charge) and lower workplace furnishings volume, partially offset by lower core SG&A and freight and distribution productivity.
Selling and administrative expenses include freight expense for shipments to customers, research and development costs, and amortization of intangible assets. Refer to "Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and "Note 6. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the comparative expense levels for these items.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges
In 2020, the Corporation recorded $38.8 million of impairment charges related to goodwill, intangibles, and other assets in the workplace furnishings segment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption. Refer to "Note 6.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding impairment testing and charges.
In 2019, the Corporation recorded $2.4 million of restructuring costs primarily associated with structural realignments in the workplace furnishings segment.
Operating Income
For 2020, operating income decreased 59.4 percent to $61.4 million compared to $151.3 million in 2019. The change was primarily driven by $45.6 million of impairments and costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption and lower workplace furnishings volume, partially offset by net productivity, lower core SG&A, and higher residential building products volume.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $7.0 million and $8.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease was due to lower interest rates and reduced borrowings, partially offset by lower interest income.
Income Taxes
The following table summarizes the Corporation's income tax provision (in thousands):
The income tax provision reflects a higher rate in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the non-deductibility of foreign losses for which valuation allowances have been recorded. In addition, there was an asset impairment charge recorded related to foreign operations that was not deductible for tax purposes and which resulted in an increase in the overall tax rate. See "Note 8. Income Taxes" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information relating to income taxes.
Net Income Attributable to HNI Corporation
Net income attributable to the Corporation was $41.9 million or $0.98 per diluted share in 2020 compared to $110.5 million or $2.54 per diluted share in 2019.
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended December 28, 2019 with the Fiscal Year Ended December 29, 2018
To review commentary for the consolidated and segment-level results of operations comparison of the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019 with the fiscal year ended December 29, 2018, please refer to Item 7 of our Form 10-K filed February 25, 2020 with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or follow the link below:
https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/48287/000004828720000045/a2019form10-k.htm
Workplace Furnishings
The following table presents certain key highlights from the results of operations in the workplace furnishings segment (in thousands):
Net sales in 2020 for the workplace furnishings segment decreased 19.5 percent compared to 2019.
Operating profit (loss) as a percentage of net sales decreased 650 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019. In the current year, the workplace furnishings segment recorded charges of $38.8 million related to the impairment of goodwill, intangibles and other assets and $5.2 million of other costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption. Additionally, segment results decreased compared to the prior year due to lower volume, partially offset by net productivity and lower core SG&A spend.
In 2019, the workplace furnishings segment recorded $2.4 million of restructuring costs and $0.2 million of transition costs primarily associated with structural realignments. Specific items incurred include severance and member relocation costs.
Residential Building Products
The following table presents certain key highlights from the results of operations in the residential building products segment (in thousands):
Net sales in 2020 for the residential building products segment increased 7.3 percent compared to 2019. Included in the 2020 sales results was a $9.4 million favorable impact from acquiring residential building products distributors.
Operating profit as a percentage of net sales increased 130 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by higher volume and favorable price-cost, partially offset by higher variable compensation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $117.8 million at the end of 2020, compared to $53.2 million at the end of 2019. These funds, coupled with cash flow from future operations, borrowing capacity under the existing credit agreement, and the ability to access capital markets, are expected to be adequate to fund operations and satisfy cash flow needs for at least the next twelve months. Additionally, based on current earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization generation, the Corporation can access the full $450 million of borrowing capacity available under the revolving credit facility and maintain compliance with applicable covenants. As of the end of 2020, $3.3 million of cash was held overseas and considered permanently reinvested. If such amounts were repatriated, it could result in additional foreign withholding and state tax expense to the Corporation. The Corporation does not believe treating this cash as permanently reinvested will have any impact on the ability of the Corporation to meet its obligations as they come due.
Cash Flow - Operating Activities
Operating activities were a source of $214.5 million of cash in 2020, compared to a source of $219.4 million cash in 2019. The lower cash generation compared to the prior year was primarily due to decreased earnings, partially offset by changes in working capital. Changes in working capital balances resulted in a $24.2 million source of cash in 2020 compared to a $3.3 million use of cash in the prior year.
The Corporation places special emphasis on management and control of working capital, including accounts receivable and inventory. Management believes recorded trade receivable valuation allowances at the end of 2020 are adequate to cover the risk of potential bad debts. Allowances for non-collectible trade receivables, as a percent of gross trade receivables, totaled 2.7 percent and 1.3 percent at the end of fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Corporation’s inventory turns were 8.2 and 8.8 for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash Flow - Investing Activities
Capital expenditures, including capitalized software, were $41.8 million in 2020 and $66.9 million in 2019. These expenditures are primarily focused on machinery, equipment, and tooling required to support new products, continuous improvements, and cost savings initiatives in manufacturing processes. The Corporation anticipates capital expenditures for 2021 in an estimated range of $55 million to $65 million.
In 2020, the investing activities reflected a net cash outflow of $58.3 million related to the acquisition of Design Public Group and three residential building products distributors. See "Note 4. Acquisitions" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Cash Flow - Financing Activities
Long-Term Debt - The Corporation maintains a revolving credit facility as the primary source of committed funding from which the Corporation finances its planned capital expenditures, strategic initiatives, and seasonal working capital needs. Cash flows included in financing activities represent periodic borrowings and repayments under the revolving credit facility. During the second quarter of 2018, the Corporation issued $100 million of private placement notes. See "Note 7. Long-Term Debt" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Dividend - The Corporation is committed to maintaining or modestly growing the quarterly dividend. Cash dividends declared and paid per share are as follows (in dollars):
The last quarterly dividend increase was from $0.295 to $0.305 per common share effective with the June 3, 2019 dividend payment for shareholders of record at the close of business on May 17, 2019. The average dividend payout percentage for the most recent three-year period has been 53 percent of prior year earnings or 29 percent of prior year cash flow from operating activities.
Stock Repurchase - The Corporation’s capital strategy related to stock repurchase is focused on offsetting the dilutive impact of issuances for various compensation related matters. The Corporation may elect to opportunistically purchase additional shares based on excess cash generation and/or share price considerations. The Board authorized $200 million on November 9, 2007 and an additional $200 million each on November 7, 2014 and February 13, 2019 for repurchases of the Corporation’s common stock. See "Note 10. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) and Shareholders' Equity" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Contractual Obligations
The following table discloses the Corporation's obligations and commitments to make future payments, by period, under contracts (in thousands):
(1)Interest has been included for all debt at the fixed or variable rate in effect as of January 2, 2021, as applicable. See "Note 7. Long-Term Debt" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(2)Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, legally binding, and specify all significant terms, including the quantity to be purchased, the price to be paid, and the timing of the purchase.
(3)Other long-term obligations represent payments due to members who are participants in the Corporation’s deferred and long-term incentive compensation programs, liability for unrecognized tax liabilities, deferred payroll taxes, and contribution and benefit payments expected to be made pursuant to the Corporation’s post-retirement benefit plans. It should be noted the obligations related to post-retirement benefit plans are not contractual and the plans could be amended at the discretion of the Corporation. The disclosure of contributions and benefit payments has been limited to 10 years, as information beyond this time period was not available. Other long-term obligations of $35.9 million, primarily insurance allowances and long-term warranty, are not included in the table above due to the Corporation's inability to predict their timing.
Litigation and Uncertainties
See "Note 15. Guarantees, Commitments, and Contingencies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Looking Ahead
Management continues to anticipate near-term challenges as the Corporation navigates the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption. However, cash flows are anticipated to remain healthy, with net debt levels expected to be stable.
Management remains optimistic about the long-term prospects in the workplace furnishings and residential building products
markets. Management believes the Corporation continues to compete well and remains confident the investments made in the business will continue to generate strong returns for shareholders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon the Consolidated Financial Statements, prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflects its more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill
The Corporation evaluates its goodwill for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or whenever indicators of impairment exist. Asset impairment charges associated with the Corporation’s goodwill impairment testing are discussed in "Note 6. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Corporation reviews goodwill at the reporting unit level within its workplace furnishings and residential building products operating segments. These reporting units constitute components for which discrete financial information is available and regularly reviewed by segment management. The accounting standards for goodwill permit entities to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If the quantitative test is required, the Corporation estimates the fair value of its reporting units. In estimating the fair value, the Corporation generally relies on an average of the income approach and the market approach. In the income approach, the estimate of fair value of each reporting unit is based on management’s projection of revenues, gross margin, operating costs, and cash flows considering historical and estimated future results, general economic and market conditions, as well as the impact of planned business and operational strategies. The valuations employ present value techniques to measure fair value and consider market factors. In the market approach, the Corporation utilizes the guideline company method, which involves calculating valuation multiples based on operating data from guideline publicly-traded companies. These multiples are then applied to the operating data for the reporting units and adjusted for factors similar to those used in the discounted cash flow analysis. Management believes the assumptions used for the impairment test are consistent with those utilized by a market participant in performing similar valuations of its reporting units. Management bases its fair value estimates on assumptions they believe to be reasonable at the time, but such assumptions are subject to inherent uncertainty. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Additionally, the Corporation compares the estimated aggregate fair value of its reporting units to its overall market capitalization.
Assessing the fair value of goodwill includes, among other things, making key assumptions for estimating future cash flows and appropriate market multiples. These assumptions are subject to a high degree of judgment and complexity. The Corporation makes every effort to estimate future cash flows as accurately as possible with the information available at the time the forecast is developed. However, changes in assumptions and estimates may affect the estimated fair value of the reporting unit, and could result in an impairment charge in future periods. Factors that have the potential to create variances in the estimated fair value of the reporting unit include, but are not limited to, economic conditions in the United States and other countries where the Corporation has a presence, competitor behavior, the mix of product sales, commodity costs, wage rates, the level of manufacturing capacity, the pricing environment, and currency exchange fluctuations. In addition, estimates of fair value are impacted by estimates of the market-participant derived weighted average cost of capital.
The key to recoverability of goodwill is the forecast of economic conditions and its impact on future revenues, operating profit, and cash flows. Management’s projection for the United States office furniture and domestic hearth markets and global economic conditions is inherently subject to a number of uncertain factors, such as global economic improvement, the impact and timeframe of the COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S housing market, credit availability, borrowing rates, and overall consumer confidence. In the near term, as management monitors the above factors, it is possible it may change the revenue and cash flow projections of certain reporting units, which may require the recording of additional goodwill impairment charges.
In 2020, the Corporation determined that goodwill recorded at three smaller reporting units in the workplace furnishings segment was fully impaired as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic disruption, and thus a material amount of impairment charges was incurred in the aggregate. In 2019, management considered these three reporting units to contain a higher risk of impairment due to the results of previous impairment tests that showed a smaller difference between fair value and carrying value, relative to the Corporation's other reporting units. Furthermore, as discussed in "Note 4. Acquisitions" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Corporation acquired several businesses in the current year, which resulted in a material addition of goodwill. Newly acquired goodwill assigned to a new reporting unit is considered to have a higher valuation risk, relative to goodwill assigned to reporting units which have historically had a large excess of fair value over carrying value.
Self-Insurance
The Corporation is primarily self-insured or carries high deductibles for general, auto, and product liability, workers’ compensation, and certain employee health benefits. The general, auto, product, and workers’ compensation liabilities are managed via a wholly-owned insurance captive and the related liabilities are included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Certain risk exposures are mitigated through the use of independent third party stop loss insurance coverages. The Corporation’s policy is to accrue amounts in accordance with the actuarially determined liabilities. The actuarial valuations are based on historical information along with certain assumptions about future events. Changes in assumptions for such matters as the number or severity of claims and magnitude of change in actual experience development could cause these estimates to change in the near term.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This update simplifies various aspects related to accounting for income taxes, removes certain exceptions to the general principles in ASC 740, and clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. The new standard becomes effective for the Corporation in fiscal 2021. The Corporation anticipates the standard will not have a material effect on consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.