ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Our consolidated financial statements should be read in conjunction with this discussion.
IMPACT OF COVID-19
We continue to face uncertainty regarding the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The State of Indiana, where our operations are located, issued a shelter in place order from March 24, 2020, to May 4, 2020. The State deemed our operations necessary and essential, and we were allowed to operate as a supplier to critical power infrastructure. Below is an outline of some of the actions we have taken to address the challenges the COVID-19 pandemic has brought. We continue to monitor the ongoing pandemic and note that if conditions deteriorate in the future, it could result in further negative impact on our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity.
I.
Sales - The global shelter in place response to the COVID-19 pandemic led to an unexpected and dramatic reduction in power demand, especially during the second quarter 2020. For example, our largest customer base is the MISO power region, and MISO coal consumption declined 20% during the first half of 2020 as compared to prior year. The drop in power demand resulted in disruptions in shipments and increases in customers' inventory levels of historic proportions. Markets should be better in 2021and 2022 driven by an improving economy and higher natural gas prices, and we expect our customers to return to the market in the next three to nine months. This should lead to sales opportunities starting in back-half 2021 and especially 2022.
II. Production - COVID-19 affected our cost structure in 2020. At times up to 25% of our workforce was unable to work due to exposure issues. COVID-19 related absenteeism has been on the decline, but we expect some influence on cost through the first half of 2021.
III. Liquidity and financial flexibility - In Q2 2020, to enhance our liquidity and financial flexibility in response to COVID-19, we amended our credit facility, suspended our quarterly dividend, and borrowed $10 million under the Paycheck Protection Program.
a. As of December 31, 2020, our liquidity was $51.8 million and our leverage ratio of 2.68X is within our covenant of 3.50X.
IV. Supply chain and distribution network - To date, we have not seen a material disruption in our access to supplies and equipment needed in the production of coal. In the second and third quarter of 2020, we experienced delays in rail services primarily due to COVID-19, which improved in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Executive Overview
The largest portion of our business is devoted to coal mining in the State of Indiana through Sunrise Coal, LLC (a wholly-owned subsidiary) serving the electric power generation industry. We also own a 50% interest in Sunrise Energy, LLC, a private gas exploration company with operations in Indiana, which we account for using the equity method.
Mining Operations
In February 2020, we decided to permanently close the Carlisle Mine and to focus our efforts on lower-cost operations at Oaktown. Due to unforeseen geologic conditions and other issues experienced in 2019, cost of producing coal at Carlisle was much higher than anticipated. When considering capital expenses, Carlisle did not produce positive cash flow in 2019. The decision to permanently close Carlisle was made after a thorough review of future mining conditions, operations and expected future coal market conditions. After closing Carlisle, we started relocating $23 million of Carlisle equipment and parts inventory that Oaktown will utilize to reduce future capital expenditures. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion on the impairment of the Carlisle Mine assets. After the closure, we continue to operate two underground coal mines and one surface coal mine in southwestern Indiana with the following capacities:
* The Oaktown 1 & Oaktown 2 underground mines share a common surface facility.
All mines have the ability to truck coal to our Princeton Rail Loop, located near Princeton, IN, which is located on the NS Railroad.
Our Coal Contracts
In 2020, Sunrise sold 6.0 million tons of coal to 11 power plants in 5 different states across nine different customers. We continue to focus on increasing “Customer Value”, meaning the total lifetime value of a customer’s business, to add and retain business. We work to increase “Customer Value” by acquiring more customers, earning more business from existing ones and retaining customers longer. An example of acquiring more customers would be our investment in our Princeton Rail Loop, which has enabled us to provide transportation flexibility and access to new customers. Though markets are currently challenging, we continue to see opportunities to increase “Customer Value” over the long run.
During 2020, we derived 79% of our revenue from four customers (6 power plants), with each of the four customers representing at least 10% of our coal sales. During 2019, we derived 70% of our revenue from four customers (8 power plants), with each of the four customers representing at least 10% of our coal sales.
Significant customers in 2020 include Vectren Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of CenterPoint Energy (NYSE: CNP), Orlando Utility Commission (OUC), Hoosier Energy, an Indiana electric cooperative, Alcoa Power Generating, Inc. a subsidiary of Alcoa Corporation (NYSE: AA), Indianapolis Power & Light Company (IPL), a wholly-owned subsidiary of The AES Corporation (NYSE: AES), and Duke Energy Corporation (NYSE: DUK).
Of our 2020 sales, 74% were shipped to locations in the State of Indiana.
In Q4 2020, customer coal inventories and natural gas (a competitor to coal) inventory levels were both higher than normal, however, due to extreme winter conditions in February 2021 inventories have declined. While customers will return to market this year, coal markets are still very challenging due to lingering effects of 2020, continuing uncertain power demand in 2021 and weak coal export market conditions.
* Contracted tons are subject to adjustment in instances of force majeure and exercise of customer options to either take additional tons or reduce tonnage if such option exists in the customer contract.
Of significant note, natural gas prices have been increasing since Q4 2020 and dramatically in the weather events of February 2021. Natural gas prices as of February 2021 for balance of year delivery have increased approximately $1.00/mmbtu over February 2020 prices for balance of 2020. Current balance of 2021 Henry Hub gas prices are over $3.00/mmbtu which puts most coal generation in the money as compared to gas. Depending on how actual gas prices play out will significantly impact our customers' coal generation and our sales opportunities.
We expect to continue selling a significant portion of our coal under supply agreements with terms of one year or longer. Typically, customers enter into coal supply agreements to secure reliable sources of coal at predictable prices while we seek stable sources of revenue to support the investments required to open, expand and maintain, or improve productivity at the mines needed to supply these contracts. The terms of coal supply agreements result from competitive bidding and extensive negotiations with customers.
While most of our customer plants are expected to operate many years, Hoosier Energy announced in January 2020 that they intend to close their Merom Generating Station in 2023. Merom represented 700,000 tons or ~11% of our sales volume in 2020. In addition, other utility customers are currently evaluating their generation portfolios in light of expected future carbon reduction programs. Some utility customers have proposed shuttering certain plant units or entire plants pending any final reviews.
Asset Impairment Review
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Reserve Table - Controlled Tons (in millions):
*The table above excludes Carlisle tons sold of 0.3 million.
Our assigned underground coal reserves are high sulfur (5.0# - 6.5# SO2) with an average BTU content in the 11,200 -11,600 range. Our reserves have lower chlorine (<0.12%) than average ILB reserves of 0.22%. Much of the ILB’s new production is located in Illinois and possesses chlorine content in excess of .30%. The relatively low chlorine content of our reserves is attractive to buyers given their desire to limit the corrosive effects of chlorine in their power plants. As discussed below, the Ace surface mine is low sulfur (~2.0# SO2) with an average BTU content of 11,100. We have no metallurgical coal reserves, only steam (thermal) coal reserves. Below is a discussion of our current projects. Only seams greater than 4 feet in thickness are included in our underground reserves.
Our underground mines are room and pillar mines that utilize developed entries for ventilation and transportation. Continuous miners extract coal from rooms by removing coal from the seam, leaving pillars to support the roof. Coal haulers are used to transport coal to a conveyor belt for transport to the surface.
Oaktown 1 Mine (underground) - Assigned
We have 45.3 million controlled, salable tons of the Indiana #V coal seam. We began 2020 with 47.9 million tons controlled. After accounting for current year production, the remaining decrease is a result of revised mining plans relating to tons that were deemed unrecoverable due to geologic conditions. Oaktown 1 reserves are located in Knox County, IN.
Access to the Oaktown 1 Mine is via a 90-foot-deep box cut and a 2,200-foot slope, reaching coal in excess of 375 feet below the surface. In 2017, we added an elevator 7 miles from the slope allowing miners to enter closer to the active face, thereby reducing unproductive daily travel time.
Oaktown 2 Mine (underground) - Assigned
We have 34.9 million controlled, saleable tons of the Indiana #V coal seam. We began 2020 with 39.0 million controlled tons. After accounting for current year production, the remaining decrease relates to tons that were deemed unrecoverable due to geologic conditions based on new drilling. Oaktown 2 reserves are located in both Knox County, Indiana and Lawrence County, Illinois.
Access to the Oaktown 2 Mine is via an 80-foot-deep box cut and a 2,600-foot slope, reaching coal in excess of 400 feet below the surface.
The two Oaktown mines are separated by a sandstone channel. The coal seam thickness ranges from 4 feet to over 9 feet. The Oaktown mines share the same wash plant which is rated at 1,800 tons per hour. The two mines are connected to a rail loadout that can store two 120 car trains at once and is serviced by the CSX Railroad and Indiana Railroad. Coal is also transported via truck to customers.
Ace in the Hole Mine (Ace) (surface) - Assigned
We have 0.1 million controlled, saleable tons at our Ace mine. The Ace mine is near Clay City, Indiana in Clay County and 50 road miles northeast of the Oaktown Mine. The two primary seams are low sulfur coal (~2# SO2), which make up the vast majority of the tons controlled. Mine development began in late December 2012, and we began shipping coal in late August 2013. We truck low sulfur coal from Ace to Oaktown to blend with high sulfur coal. Many utilities in the southeastern U.S. have scrubbers with lower sulfur limits (4.5# SO2) which cannot accept the higher sulfur contents of the ILB (4.5# - 6.5# SO2). Blending high sulfur coal to a lower sulfur specification enables us to market our high sulfur coals to more customers.
The Ace mine is a multi-seam open pit strip mine. The majority of the seams are sold raw, but some of the seams will be washed prior to sales depending on quality. To convert the tons sold raw, the in-place tonnage is multiplied by a pit recovery of 95% based on seam thickness. To convert the tons sold washed, the in-place tonnage is multiplied by a pit recovery based on seam thickness then reduced by the projected wash plant recovery of 78% to 100% depending on the seam.
Ace in the Hole Mine #2 Reserves (surface) - Unassigned
In 2018, we leased property giving us 1.0 million controlled, saleable tons at a new location 2 miles southwest of our Ace in the Hole mine. Mine development is expected to begin in early 2022.
Bulldog Reserves (underground) - Unassigned
We have leased roughly 19,300 acres in Vermilion County, Illinois near the village of Allerton. Based on our reserve estimates we currently control 30.6 million tons of coal. A considerable amount of our leased acres has yet to receive any exploratory drilling. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion on the impairment of the Bulldog assets.
Unassigned reserves represent coal reserves that would require new mineshafts, mining equipment, and plant facilities before operations could begin on the property. The primary reason for this distinction is to inform investors which coal reserves will require substantial capital expenditures before production can begin.
Below is a map that shows the locations of our coal mines.
Railroad Legend:
CSX - CSX Railroad
INRD - Indiana Rail Road
ISRR - Indiana Southern Railroad
NS - Norfolk Southern Railway
Mine and Wash Plant Recovery and Capacity
_____________________________
* Does not include out-of-seam material extracted during the mining process.
** Oaktown 1 and Oaktown 2 share the wash plant.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As set forth in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, cash provided by operations was $52.6 million and $38.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. Operating cash flow increased due primarily to positive changes in accounts receivable and inventory, which was offset by operating margins from our coal operations decreasing in 2020 by $13.1 million due mostly to the 2.1 million ton reduction in coal sales. Operating margin per ton increased in 2020 to $9.49/ton from $8.65/ton in 2019.
Our capital expenditure budget for 2021 is $23 million, of which $9 million is for maintenance capex. With the closure of the Carlisle Mine, equipment and parts inventories totaling $23 million are being re-deployed to Oaktown and are expected to be fully utilized over the next 6 - 12 months, helping reduce our capital expenditures in the future. We expect cash from operations for 2021 and the utilization of our revolver, if necessary, to fund our maintenance capital expenditures and our debt service.
See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion about our bank debt amendment in April 2020 and other actions discussed below that were taken in 2020 to improve liquidity as a result of the COVID-19 uncertainty.
Paycheck Protection Program and Payroll Tax Deferral
I.
Due to economic uncertainty as a result of COVID-19, on April 16, 2020, we entered into a promissory note evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $10 million made to the Company under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “Loan”).
a. As noted previously, uncertainty was created as a result of unexpected sales delays due to the impacts of COVID-19.
i.
Starting in March and continuing through Q2, sales were 30% lower than expected.
ii.
The receipt of funds under the PPP loan allowed the Company to avoid workforce reduction measures amidst a steep decline in revenue and operating margins.
II.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic taking root in the United States, we idled and permanently closed the Carlisle Mine resulting in a reduction in force in Q1 2020.
a.
At December 31, 2020, the PPP loan totaling $10 million is presented as current and long-term liabilities on the condensed consolidated balance sheets based upon the schedule of repayments and excluding any possible forgiveness of the loan. Based on the terms of the loan, after factoring in the reduction in force prior to our application, we expect the loan to be forgiven following a successful audit by the Small Business Administration (SBA). In December 2020, we applied for forgiveness of the full $10 million promissory note. On January 8, 2021, we were notified by the Lender that they had approved the application for the full forgiveness of the $10 million note and had forwarded on to the SBA for final approval. The SBA has 90 days from receipt of application from the Lender to make its determination as to the amount of forgiveness.
III.
In June 2020, we started to take advantage of the payroll tax deferral offered by the CARES act. We deferred $1.7 million in 2020, which will be due and payable in two annual installments at the end of 2021 and 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than our surety bonds for reclamation, we have no material off-balance sheet arrangements. We have recorded reclamation obligations of $16.3 million, with the long-term portion presented as asset retirement obligations (ARO) and the remainder in accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our accompanying balance sheets. In the event we are not able to perform reclamation, we have surety bonds totaling $27 million to cover ARO.
Capital Expenditures (capex)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our capex was $20.7 million allocated as follows (in millions):
Results of Operations
I. 2020 Net Loss of $6.2 million, Adjusted EBITDA of $53.5 million
a. Sales: 2020 shipments totaled 6.0 million tons. We agreed with our customers to defer 400,000 tons of 2020 shipments to 2021. As part of these agreements, we were able to extend the term of multiple contracts for additional years.
i. Coal inventory was reduced by $2.8 million during the year.
b. Production: 2020 production costs were $31.07/ton. 2019 costs were slightly better at $30.69/ton. Oaktown costs over that same period were $29.84 and $28.35, respectively. We closed the Carlisle Mine in February 2020 due to increased costs and then the COVID-19 pandemic began.
c. Cash Flow & Debt: We generated $52.6 million in operating cash flow during the year which we utilized to pay down our bank debt by $42.4 million. We are also expecting the SBA to forgive an additional $10 million by April 8, 2021.
i. As of December 31, 2020, our bank debt was $137.7 million, bringing our liquidity to $51.8 million and our leverage ratio to 2.68X, comfortably within our covenant of 3.5X.
Reconciliation of GAAP “net loss” to non-GAAP “adjusted EBITDA” (in thousands), the most comparable GAAP financial measure.
Management believes that the presentation of such additional financial measures provides useful information to investors regarding our performance and results of operations because these measures when used in conjunction with related GAAP financial measures, (i) provide additional information about our core operating performance and ability to generate and distribute cash flow, (ii) provide investors with the financial and analytical framework upon which management bases financial, operation, compensation, and planning decisions, and (iii) present measurements that investors, rating agencies, and debt holders have indicated are useful in assessing our results.
The following tables presenting our quarterly results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in