Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Harley-Davidson, Inc. is the parent company of Harley-Davidson Motor Company (HDMC) and Harley-Davidson Financial Services (HDFS). Unless the context otherwise requires, all references to the "Company" include Harley-Davidson, Inc. and all its subsidiaries. The Company operates in two segments: Motorcycles and Related Products (Motorcycles) and Financial Services.
The “% Change” figures included in the “Results of Operations” section were calculated using unrounded dollar amounts and may differ from calculations using the rounded dollar amounts presented. Certain “% Change” deemed not meaningful (NM) have been excluded.
(1) Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The Company intends that certain matters discussed in this report are “forward-looking statements” intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements can generally be identified as such by reference to this footnote or because the context of the statement will include words such as the Company “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “estimates,” “targets,” “intend” or words of similar meaning. Similarly, statements that describe or refer to future expectations, future plans, strategies, objectives, outlooks, targets, guidance, commitments or goals are also forward-looking statements. Such forward-
looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially, unfavorably or favorably, from those anticipated as of the date of this report. Certain of such risks and uncertainties are described in close proximity to such statements or elsewhere in this report, including in Item 1A. Risk Factors and under the “Cautionary Statements” section in this Item 7. Shareholders, potential investors, and other readers are urged to consider these factors in evaluating the forward-looking statements and cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements included in the “Overview” and “Guidance” sections in this Item 7 are only made as of February 2, 2021 and the remaining forward-looking statements in this report are only made as of the date of the filing of this report (February 23, 2021), and the Company disclaims any obligation to publicly update such forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances.
Overview(1)
The Company’s net income for 2020 was $1.3 million, or $0.01 per diluted share, compared to $423.6 million, or $2.68 per diluted share in 2019 on lower operating income in both the Motorcycles and Financial Services segments.
The Motorcycles segment reported an operating loss of $186.1 million in 2020 down $475.7 million from operating income of $289.6 million in 2019. The decline in operating income was due primarily to a 32.1% decrease in wholesale motorcycle shipments, a less favorable product mix and higher restructuring expenses, partially offset by reduced selling, administrative and engineering expenses.
Operating income from the Financial Services segment in 2020 was down $70.2 million or 26.4% compared to 2019 due primarily to an increase in the provision for credit losses, higher interest expense and restructuring charges. The provision for credit losses was higher due to negative economic conditions during 2020 and also reflects the continued impact of the 2020 adoption of a new accounting standard related to the recognition of expected credit losses. The new standard requires recognition of full lifetime expected credit losses upon initial recognition of a financial instrument carried at amortized cost, replacing the prior, incurred loss methodology. The Company adopted the new accounting standard on January 1, 2020 using a modified retrospective approach. As a result, prior period results were not restated.
Worldwide independent dealer retail sales of new Harley-Davidson motorcycles decreased 17.4% in 2020 compared to 2019. Retail sales were adversely impacted primarily in the first half of 2020, by a temporary suspension of the Company's manufacturing operations, from mid-March through May 2020, and independent dealer closures related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company believes retail sales in the second half of 2020, compared to prior year, were adversely impacted by the Company's decision to reset its new model year launch timing, beginning in 2020, from the third quarter to the first quarter. In addition, the Company believes lower dealer inventory levels related to its new approach to supply and inventory management also resulted in lower retail sales during the second half of 2020 compared to the same period last year.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Recovery Actions(1)
Cash Preservation - During 2020, the Company delivered on its previously disclosed plans to reduce planned capital and planned non-capital spending to preserve approximately $250 million of cash in 2020. The spending reductions exclude the impact of restructuring charges as discussed further under “Restructuring Plan Costs and Savings”. Also, during 2020, the Company suspended discretionary share repurchases and reduced its cash dividend to $0.02 per share for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020.
Liquidity - At the end 2020, the Company had $4.7 billion of available liquidity through cash, cash equivalents and availability under its credit and conduit facilities. Liquidity is discussed in more detail under “Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
Supporting Dealers and Riders - The Company's response and recovery plans have included supporting global dealers and customers. HDFS continues to work with qualified retail borrowers who have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic by offering short-term adjustments to payment due dates. These temporary extensions do not affect the associated interest rate or loan term. At the end of 2020, the volume of payment extensions on eligible retail loans declined, but has not yet returned to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels. The Company continues to grant payment extensions to customers in accordance with its policies.
Community Strength - The Company continues to proactively manage through the COVID-19 pandemic and has implemented robust protocols to keep workers safe in its manufacturing facilities. Most non-production workers continue to work remotely in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future results depends on future developments, such as the ultimate duration and scope of the pandemic, the success of vaccination programs, and its impact on the Company's customers, independent dealers, distributors, and suppliers. While the Company's manufacturing operations were temporarily suspended and subsequently resumed in 2020, COVID-19 pandemic related impacts and disruptions could occur in the future. Future
impacts and disruptions could have an adverse effect on production, supply chains, distribution, and demand for the Company's products. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company.
The Rewire
During 2020, the Company executed a set of actions, referred to as The Rewire. The Rewire was a critical overhaul of the Company's business to set the Company on a new course and provide a solid foundation to execute its 2021-2025 strategic plan, The Hardwire. Key elements of The Rewire included the following:
New operating model with reduced complexity and increased speed - The Company implemented a new operating model to eliminate duplication and complexity across its global operations resulting in fewer positions across the Company's global operations and annual ongoing savings as discussed further under “Restructuring Plan Costs and Savings”.
Reset global business and focus on high-potential markets - The Company plans to concentrate on approximately 50 markets primarily in North America, Europe and parts of Asia Pacific that represent a high percentage of the Company’s expected volume and growth potential.
Refined motorcycle line-up and high-impact product launches - The Company streamlined its planned product portfolio, changed its model year launch timing and go-to-market practices for maximum impact and success.
Growth through Parts & Accessories (P&A) and General Merchandise (GM) - P&A and GM are now organized around dedicated leaders with strategies poised for new growth as the Company invests in new channel strategies and better product assortments.
Protecting value - The Company is operating with a new approach to supply and inventory management, with a focus on a strong independent dealer network to better preserve the value and desirability of Harley-Davidson motorcycles for customers. The Company believes a strong network of profitable dealers is essential to delivering the most desirable Harley-Davidson experience. The Company reduced its global dealer network during 2020 and continues work to optimize its network of independent dealers to strengthen priority markets and provide and improve the customer experience.
The Hardwire(1)
The Hardwire is the Company's 2021-2025 strategic plan guided by its mission and vision, which the Company introduced on February 2, 2021. The plan targets long-term profitable growth through focused efforts that extend and strengthen the brand and drive value for all stakeholders. The Company's ambition is to enhance its position as the most desirable motorcycle brand in the world. Desirability is a motivating force driven by emotion. Refer to Item 1. Business for more details on The Hardwire strategic plan and financial targets.
Guidance(1)
On February 2, 2021, the Company announced the following guidance for 2021. During 2021, the first year of The Hardwire, the Company expects to continue to manage through the ongoing uncertainties brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on revenue and its supply chain. The Company's guidance for 2021 is as follows:
•Motorcycles segment revenue growth, compared to 2020, between 20% and 25%
•Motorcycles segment operating margin as a percent of revenue of 5% to 7%, which includes approximately $115 million of gross annual cost savings resulting from 2020 restructuring actions
•Approximately $20 million of restructuring expense
•Financial Services operating income growth, compared to 2020, between 10% and 15%
•Capital expenditures between $190 and $220 million
Restructuring Plan Costs and Savings(1)
During 2020, the Company initiated certain restructuring activities as part of The Rewire including a workforce reduction, the termination of certain current and future products, facility changes, optimizing its global independent dealer network, exiting certain international markets, and discontinuing its sales and manufacturing operations in India. These actions included restructuring expenses related to employee termination costs, contract termination costs and non-current asset adjustments. The workforce reduction resulted in the elimination of approximately 700 positions globally, including the termination of approximately 500 employees. In addition, the India action will result in the termination of approximately 70 employees. The Company incurred $130 million of restructuring expense in connection with these actions during 2020. The Company expects to incur total restructuring expenses for these actions of approximately $150 million, including approximately $20 million in 2021. The Company's total estimated restructuring expense is down from its previous estimate of $169 million. The Company continues to expect ongoing gross savings resulting from these restructuring activities of approximately $115 million. Refer to Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the Company's restructuring expenses.
Results of Operations 2020 Compared to 2019
Consolidated Results
The Company reported operating income of $9.7 million in 2020 compared to $555.6 million in 2019. The Motorcycles segment incurred a $186.1 million operating loss in 2020, a decline from operating income of $289.6 million in 2019. Operating income from the Financial Services segment decreased $70.2 million, or 26.4%, compared to 2019. Refer to the Motorcycles and Related Products Segment and Financial Services Segment discussions for a more detailed analysis of the factors affecting operating results.
Other (expense) income in 2020 was impacted by lower non-operating income related to the Company's defined benefit plans. Investment income decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 driven by lower income from investments in marketable securities.
The Company's effective income tax rate for 2020 was a 108.3% benefit compared to a 24.0% expense for 2019. The Company recorded an income tax benefit during 2020 due to a pre-tax loss and discrete income tax benefits related primarily to favorable tax audit settlements with taxing authorities during the year.
Diluted earnings per share was $0.01 in 2020 compared to $2.68 in 2019. Diluted earnings per share were adversely impacted by the decrease in net income, but benefited from lower diluted weighted average shares outstanding. Diluted weighted average shares outstanding decreased from 157.8 million in 2019 to 153.9 million in 2020 driven by the Company's discretionary repurchases of common stock during 2019. Refer to "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information concerning the Company's share repurchase activity.
Motorcycle Retail Sales and Registration Data
Harley-Davidson Motorcycle Retail Sales(a)
Retail unit sales of new Harley-Davidson motorcycles were as follows:
(a)Data source for retail sales figures shown above is new sales warranty and registration information provided by Harley-Davidson dealers and compiled by the Company. The Company must rely on information that its independent dealers supply concerning new retail sales, and the Company does not regularly verify the information that its independent dealers supply. This information is subject to revision.
During 2020, primarily in the first half of the year, retail sales of new Harley-Davidson motorcycles were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in the temporary closure of the Company's manufacturing facilities and the temporary closure of many of its independent dealerships.
Retail sales in the second half of 2020 were adversely impacted by lower retail inventory as the Company continued to aggressively manage the supply of its motorcycles into the independent dealer network under its new supply and inventory management approach. The Company's approach to supply and inventory management is focused on profitable and desirable volume aimed at helping drive retail pricing to preserve the value and desirability of Harley-Davidson motorcycles for customers. Under this approach, the Company will continue to aggressively manage the supply of new motorcycles into the independent dealer network. At the end of 2020, independent dealer retail inventory of new Harley-Davidson motorcycles was down approximately 64% or 24,000 units in the U.S. and approximately 59% worldwide compared to the end of 2019.
The Company's decision to reset its annual new model year launch from August to early in the first quarter also impacted retail sales in 2020. Previously, the Company launched its new model year motorcycles in the third quarter with new product available in U.S. markets in August, followed by international markets as product was distributed globally. While the Company believes the initial shift from August has adversely impacted year-over-year retail sales comparisons, it believes an early-year launch better aligns with the seasonality of retail demand allowing products a full riding season to sell and minimizes aged inventory and floor plan costs that might accumulate during the off season.
The Company's U.S. market share of new 601+cc motorcycles for 2020 was 42.1%, down 7.0 percentage points compared to 2019 (Source: Motorcycle Industry Council). The Company's U.S. market share fell on weaker retail sales performance relative to the industry, as well as stronger performance in segments outside of the Company's Touring and Cruiser segments.
The Company's European market share of new 601+cc motorcycles for 2020 was 7.7%, down 1.4 percentage points compared to 2019 (Source: Management Services Helwig Schmitt GmbH).
Motorcycle Registration Data - 601+cc(a)
Industry retail registration data for new motorcycles was as follows:
(a)Data includes on-road models with internal combustion engines with displacements greater than 600cc's and electric motorcycles with kilowatt peak power equivalents greater than 600cc's (601+cc). On-road 601+cc models include dual purpose models, three-wheeled motorcycles and autocycles. Registration data for Harley-Davidson Street® 500 motorcycles is not included in this table.
(b)United States industry data is derived from information provided by Motorcycle Industry Council. This third-party data is subject to revision and update.
(c)Europe data includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Industry data is derived from information provided by Management Services Helwig Schmitt GmbH. Prior year registrations have been revised to exclude Greece and Portugal registrations. This third-party data is subject to revision and update.
Motorcycles and Related Products Segment
Motorcycle Unit Shipments
Wholesale Harley-Davidson motorcycle unit shipments were as follows:
(a)Includes Softail®, CVOTM, and LiveWireTM
During 2020, Harley-Davidson motorcycle shipments were down 32.1% from 2019 reflecting the impact of the temporary suspension of the Company's global manufacturing operations and the temporary closure of independent dealers in the first half of 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the Company's new approach to supply and inventory management and the change in new model year launch timing adversely impacted wholesale shipments compared to 2019. The mix of Touring motorcycles shipped during 2020 decreased as a percent of total shipments while the mix of Cruiser and Sportster/Street motorcycles increased compared to 2019.
Segment Results
Condensed statements of operations for the Motorcycles segment were as follows (in thousands):
The estimated impacts of the significant factors affecting the comparability of revenue, cost of goods sold and gross profit from 2019 to 2020 were as follows (in millions):
The following factors affected the comparability of net revenue, cost of goods sold and gross profit from 2019 to 2020:
•The decrease in volume was due to lower wholesale motorcycle shipments and lower P&A and General Merchandise sales.
•During 2020, revenue benefited from higher wholesale prices for motorcycles and lower sales incentives. The positive impact on revenue was partially offset by increased costs related to additional content added to motorcycles shipped in 2020 as compared to the prior year.
•Revenue was adversely impacted by weaker foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar. In addition, unfavorable net foreign currency losses associated with hedging and balance sheet remeasurements also reduced gross profit in 2020 as compared to the prior year.
•Changes in the shipment mix between motorcycle families had an adverse impact on gross profit during 2020 as compared to 2019. Additionally, unfavorable mix within P&A contributed to the impact.
•Manufacturing and other costs were adversely impacted by a higher fixed cost per unit on lower production volumes. This unfavorable impact was partially offset by lower incremental tariff costs and the absence of temporary inefficiencies related to the manufacturing restructuring activities in 2019. Incremental tariff costs (incremental European Union (EU) and China tariffs imposed beginning in 2018 on the Company's products shipped from the U.S. and incremental U.S. tariffs imposed beginning in 2018 on certain items imported from China) were $24.5 million in 2020 compared to $97.9 million in 2019. The Company began to wholesale motorcycles sourced from its Thailand facility in the EU during the second quarter of 2020 which reduced the cost of tariffs incurred through the majority of 2020.
Operating expenses were lower in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to lower employee related cost on reduced headcount, reduced incentive-based compensation cost and lower discretionary spending as the Company aggressively managed costs, including its efforts to reduce planned non-capital spending as part of its COVID-19 pandemic response and recovery actions. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in restructuring expense. Refer to Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the Company's restructuring expenses.
Financial Services Segment
Segment Results
Condensed statements of operations for the Financial Services segment were as follows (in thousands):
Interest income was favorable in 2020 compared to 2019 due to a higher average retail yield, partially offset by lower average outstanding finance receivables. Other income decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 due in part to lower investment income. Interest expense increased due to higher average outstanding debt, partially offset by a lower cost of funds.
The provision for credit losses increased $47.3 million compared to 2019 primarily due to unfavorable economic conditions during 2020, partially offset by favorable 2020 retail credit loss performance. The provision for credit losses was up significantly as compared to 2019 driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. economy and the Company’s outlook on future economic conditions. The Company believes that there is significant uncertainty surrounding future economic outcomes. As such, the Company considered various third-party economic forecast scenarios and applied a probability-weighting to those economic forecast scenarios. At the end of 2020, the Company's outlook on economic conditions included a heavy emphasis on pessimistic economic trend assumptions as the COVID-19 pandemic continued to restrain the U.S. economy. The Company will continue to monitor economic trends and conditions. The Company's expectations surrounding its economic forecasts may change in future periods as additional information becomes available.
The 30-day delinquency rate for retail motorcycle loans at December 31, 2020 decreased to 3.18% from 4.39% at December 31, 2019. The improved delinquency rate was primarily driven by a high volume of short-term COVID-19 pandemic related extensions during the second quarter of 2020 and into the first part of the third quarter of 2020 on eligible retail loans to help customers get through financial difficulties associated with the pandemic. Through the remainder of 2020, the volume of payment extensions on eligible retail loans declined but has not yet returned to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels. The Company continues to grant payment extensions to customers in accordance with its policies. Annual losses on the Company's retail motorcycle loans were 1.38% during 2020 compared to 2.00% in 2019. The favorable retail credit loss performance was due to lower delinquencies driven by the COVID-19 pandemic related loan payment extensions earlier in the year as well as improved used motorcycle values at auction due to a limited supply of new and used motorcycles.
The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 was determined in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13 Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (ASU 2016-13), a new accounting standard the Company adopted on January 1, 2020 that requires recognition of full lifetime expected credit losses upon initial recognition of a financial instrument, replacing the prior, incurred loss methodology. The Company adopted the new accounting standard using a modified retrospective approach. As a result, prior period results were not restated.
Operating expenses decreased $22.8 million compared to 2019 as the Company aggressively managed costs, including its efforts to reduce planned non-capital spending as part of its COVID-19 pandemic response and recovery actions.
Additionally, the Financial Services segment incurred restructuring expense of $10.9 million in 2020. Refer to Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the Company's restructuring expenses.
Changes in the allowance for credit losses on finance receivables were as follows (in thousands):
(a)On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13 and increased the allowance for loan loss through retained earnings, net of income taxes, to establish an allowance that represents expected lifetime credit losses on the finance receivable portfolios at date of adoption.
At December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses on finance receivables was $371.7 million for retail receivables and $19.2 million for wholesale receivables. At December 31, 2019, the allowance for credit losses on finance receivables was $188.5 million for retail receivables and $10.1 million for wholesale receivables.
Refer to Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding the Company’s allowance for credit losses on finance receivables.
Results of Operations 2019 Compared to 2018
Refer to Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 19, 2020 for a detailed discussion of the results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 and liquidity and capital resources for 2019 compared to 2018.
Other Matters
New Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted
Refer to Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for a discussion of new accounting standards that will become effective for the Company in 2021 and 2022.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company’s financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Management believes that the following are some of the more critical judgment areas in the application of accounting policies that currently affect the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company's Board of Directors.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Retail Finance Receivables - On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13, which requires an entity to recognize expected lifetime losses on finance receivables upon origination. The allowance for credit losses on retail finance receivables as of December 31, 2020 represents the Company’s estimate of lifetime losses for its retail finance receivables. Prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-13, the Company maintained an allowance for credit losses on retail finance receivables based on the Company’s estimate of probable losses inherent in the retail finance receivable portfolio as of the balance sheet date.
The retail portfolio primarily consists of a large number of small balance, homogeneous finance receivables. The Company performs a collective evaluation of the adequacy of the retail allowance for credit losses. For periods after January 1, 2020, the Company utilizes a vintage-based loss forecast methodology that includes decompositions for probability of default, exposure at default, attrition rate, and recovery balance rate. Reasonable and supportable economic forecasts for a two-year period are incorporated into the methodology to reflect the estimated impact of changes in future economic conditions, such as unemployment rates, household obligations or other relevant factors, over the expected life of the retail portfolio. For periods beyond the Company’s reasonable and supportable forecasts, the Company reverts to its average historical loss experience for a three-year period using a mean-reversion process. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, or term as well as other relevant factors. For periods prior to January 1, 2020, the Company performed a periodic and
systematic collective evaluation of the adequacy of the retail allowance for credit losses. The Company utilized loss forecast models which considered a variety of factors including, but not limited to, historical loss trends, origination or vintage analysis, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, the value of the underlying collateral, recovery rates and current economic conditions.
Refer to Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding the Company’s allowance for credit losses on finance receivables.
Product Warranty and Recalls - Estimated warranty costs are recorded at the time of sale and are based on a combination of historical claim cost data and other known factors that may affect future warranty claims. The estimated costs associated with voluntary recalls are recorded when the liability is both probable and estimable. The accrued cost of a recall is based on an estimate of the cost to repair each affected motorcycle and the number of motorcycles expected to be repaired based on historical data concerning the percentage of affected customers that take advantage of recall offers. In the case of both warranty and recall costs, as actual experience becomes available it is used to update the accruals.
The factors affecting actual warranty and recall costs can be volatile. As a result, actual warranty claims experience and recall costs may differ from estimates, which could lead to material changes in the Company’s accrued warranty and recall costs. The Company’s warranty and recall liabilities are discussed further in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements.
Pensions and Other Postretirement Healthcare Benefits - The Company has a defined benefit pension plan and postretirement healthcare benefit plans, which cover certain eligible employees and retirees of the Motorcycles segment. The Company also has unfunded supplemental employee retirement plan agreements (SERPA) with certain employees.
U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) requires that companies recognize in their consolidated balance sheets a liability for defined benefit pension and postretirement plans that are underfunded or an asset for defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans that are overfunded.
Pension, SERPA and postretirement healthcare obligations and costs are calculated through actuarial valuations. The valuation of benefit obligations and net periodic benefit costs relies on key assumptions including discount rates, mortality, long-term expected return on plan assets, future compensation and healthcare cost trend rates.
The Company determines its discount rate assumptions by referencing high-quality long-term bond rates that are matched to the duration of its benefit obligations. Based on this analysis, the Company decreased the weighted-average discount rate for pension and SERPA obligations from 3.49% as of December 31, 2019 to 2.62% as of December 31, 2020. The Company decreased the weighted-average discount rate for postretirement healthcare obligations from 3.26% as of December 31, 2019 to 2.11% as of December 31, 2020. The Company determines its healthcare trend assumption for the postretirement healthcare obligation by considering factors such as estimated healthcare inflation, the utilization of healthcare benefits and changes in the health of plan participants. Based on the Company’s assessment of this data as of December 31, 2020, the Company set its healthcare cost trend rate at 7.00% as of December 31, 2020. The Company expects the healthcare cost trend rate to reach its ultimate rate of 5.00% by 2029.(1) These assumption changes were reflected immediately in the benefit obligation and will be amortized into net periodic benefit costs over future periods.
Plan assets are measured at fair value and are subject to market volatility. In estimating the expected return on plan assets, the Company considers the historical returns on plan assets, adjusted to reflect the current view of the long-term investment market.
Changes in the funded status of defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans resulting from the difference between assumptions and actual results are initially recognized in other comprehensive income (loss) and amortized to expense over future periods. Sensitivity to changes in major assumptions used in the pension and postretirement healthcare obligations and costs was as follows (in thousands):
The amounts based on current assumptions above exclude the impact of settlements, curtailments and special early retirement benefits. This information should not be viewed as predictive of future amounts. The analysis of the impact of a 1% change in the table above does not take into account the cost related to special termination benefits. The calculations of pension, SERPA and postretirement healthcare obligations and costs are based on many factors in addition to those discussed here. This information should be considered in combination with the information provided in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes - The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes (Topic 740). Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and other loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company reviews its deferred income tax asset valuation allowances on a quarterly basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that a review is required. In determining the requirement for a valuation allowance, the historical and projected financial results of the legal entity or consolidated group recording the net deferred income tax asset is considered, along with any positive or negative evidence including tax law changes. Since future financial results and tax law may differ from previous estimates, periodic adjustments to the Company’s valuation allowances may be necessary.
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. These tax laws and regulations are complex and significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s worldwide provision for income taxes and recording the related deferred tax assets and liabilities.
In the ordinary course of the Company’s business, there are transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Accruals for unrecognized tax benefits are provided for in accordance with the requirements of Topic 740. An unrecognized tax benefit represents the difference between the recognition of benefits related to items for income tax reporting purposes and financial reporting purposes. The unrecognized tax benefit is included within Other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated balance sheets. The Company has a liability for interest and penalties on exposure items, if applicable, which is recorded as a component of the overall income tax provision. The Company is regularly audited by tax authorities as a normal course of business. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the Company believes that it has appropriate support for the positions taken on its tax returns and that its annual tax provision includes amounts sufficient to pay any assessments(1). Nonetheless, the amounts ultimately paid, if any, upon resolution of the issues raised by the taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued for each year.
Refer to Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding the Company's income taxes.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company is subject to lawsuits and other claims related to environmental, product and other matters. In determining costs to accrue related to these items, the Company carefully analyzes cases and considers the likelihood of adverse judgments or outcomes, as well as the potential range of possible loss. Any amounts accrued for these matters are monitored on an ongoing basis and are updated based on new developments or new information as it becomes available for each matter. Refer to Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the Company's commitments and contingencies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's response to the COVID-19 pandemic included actions to preserve cash and secure additional liquidity. During 2020, the Company delivered on its previously disclosed plans to reduce planned capital and non-capital spending to preserve approximately $250 million of cash in 2020 (excludes the impact of cash restructuring charges). In addition, the Company suspended all discretionary share repurchases and reduced its cash dividend to $.02 per share in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020. Going forward, the Company believes the Motorcycles segment operations will continue to be primarily funded through cash flows generated by operations.(1) The Company expects the Financial Services segment operations to continue to be funded with unsecured debt, unsecured commercial paper, asset-backed commercial paper conduit facilities, committed unsecured bank facilities, asset-backed securitizations and deposits.(1)
Through The Hardwire, the Company expects its business model to generate cash that will allow it to invest in the business and brand, fund The Hardwire initiatives, and return value to shareholders.(1) The Company's cash allocation priorities are first to fund growth through The Hardwire initiatives, then to reward shareholders through dividends. The Company's Board of Directors approved a 2021 first quarter dividend of $.15 per share. At this time, significant discretionary share repurchases are not planned as the Company prioritizes cash for these top two priorities.(1)
The Company’s strategy is to maintain a minimum of twelve months of its projected liquidity needs through a combination of cash and cash equivalents and availability under its credit facilities. The Company’s cash and cash equivalents and availability under its credit and conduit facilities at December 31, 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
(a)Includes facilities expiring in the next 12 months which the Company expects to renew prior to expiration.(1)
To access the debt capital markets, the Company relies on credit rating agencies to assign short-term and long-term credit ratings. Generally, lower credit ratings result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to debt capital markets. A credit rating agency may change or withdraw the Company’s ratings based on its assessment of the Company’s current and future ability to meet interest and principal repayment obligations. The Company’s short-term debt ratings affect its ability to issue unsecured commercial paper. The Company’s short- and long-term debt ratings as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
The Company recognizes that it must continue to monitor and adjust its business to changes in the lending environment. The Company intends to continue with a diversified funding profile through a combination of short-term and long-term funding vehicles and to pursue a variety of sources to obtain cost-effective funding.(1) The Financial Services operations could be negatively affected by higher costs of funding and increased difficulty of raising, or potential unsuccessful efforts to raise, funding in the short-term and long-term capital markets.(1) These negative consequences could in turn adversely affect the Company’s business and results of operations in various ways, including through higher costs of capital, reduced funds available through its Financial Services operations to provide loans to independent dealers and their retail customers, and dilution to existing shareholders through the use of alternative sources of capital.
Cash Flow Activity
Cash flow activities for the years ended December 31, were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The increase in operating cash flow in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to favorable changes in working capital, led by a decline in accounts receivable and inventory levels as well as favorable cash flows from decreased wholesale financing activity due to lower loan originations.
The Company continues to expect that it will generate sufficient cash inflows from operations to fund its ongoing operating cash requirements including those related to existing contractual commitments. The Company's purchase orders for inventory used in manufacturing generally do not become firm commitments until 90 days prior to expected delivery. The Company's material contractual operating cash commitments at December 31, 2020 relate to leases, retirement plan obligations and income taxes. The Company's long-term lease obligations and future payments are discussed further in Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements. The Company’s expected future contributions and benefit payments related to its defined benefit retirement plans are discussed further in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements. As described in Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements, the Company has a liability for unrecognized tax benefits of $50.6 million and related accrued interest and penalties of $25.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company cannot reasonably estimate the period of cash settlement for either the liability for unrecognized tax benefits or accrued interest and penalties.
Investing Activities
The Company’s most significant investing activities consist of capital expenditures and retail finance receivable originations and collections. Capital expenditures were $131.1 million and $181.4 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company's 2021 plan includes estimated capital expenditures between $190 to $220 million, all of which the Company expects to fund with net cash flow generated by operations.(1)
Net cash outflows for finance receivables in 2020, which consisted primarily of retail finance receivables, were $390.4 million lower than in 2019 primarily due to lower retail motorcycle loan originations during 2020. The Company funds its finance receivables net lending activity through the issuance of debt, discussed in "Financing Activities" below.
Financing Activities
The Company’s financing activities consist primarily of dividend payments, share repurchases and debt activities.
The Company paid dividends of $0.44 per share totaling $68.1 million during 2020 and $1.50 per share totaling $237.2 million during 2019.
Cash outflows for share repurchases were $8.0 million and $296.5 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the first quarter of 2020, the Company suspended discretionary share repurchases; as a result, there were no discretionary share repurchases in 2020. Discretionary share repurchases during the year ended December 31, 2019 were $286.7 million or 8.2 million shares. Share repurchases of common stock that employees surrendered to satisfy withholding taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock units were $8.0 million or 0.3 million shares and $9.8 million or 0.3 million shares during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, there were 18.2 million shares remaining on a board-approved share repurchase authorization.
Financing cash flows related to debt and deposit activities resulted in net cash inflows/(outflows) of $1.45 billion and $(182.1) million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s total outstanding debt and deposits consisted of the following as of December 31, (in thousands):
Refer to Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated financial statements for a summary of future principal payments on debt obligations.
Deposits - During 2020, HDFS began offering brokered certificates of deposit to customers indirectly through contractual arrangements with third-party banks and/or securities brokerage firms through its bank subsidiary. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $80.0 million, net of fees, of short-term interest-bearing brokered certificates of deposit outstanding. Each separate brokered certificate of deposit is issued under a master certificate and, as such, all outstanding brokered certificates of deposit are considered below the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insurance coverage limits.
Credit Facilities - In April 2020, the Company entered into a $707.5 million five-year credit facility to replace the $765.0 million five-year credit facility that was due to mature in April 2021. The new five-year credit facility matures in April 2025. The Company also amended its $780.0 million five-year credit facility to $707.5 million with no change to the maturity date of April 2023. The Company also had a $195.0 million 364-day credit facility which was due to mature in May 2020. In April 2020, the Company extended the maturity date of this credit facility to August 2020; however, this facility was terminated on May 18, 2020. At the time of termination, there were no outstanding borrowings under this 364-day credit facility. On June 1, 2020, the Company entered into a new $350.0 million 364-day credit facility, and on June 4, 2020, the Company borrowed $150.0 million under this facility. On December 9, 2020, the Company amended this facility to allow for the early repayment of the $150.0 million borrowing, which was repaid in full on this date, along with the related interest. The five-year credit facilities (together, the Global Credit Facilities), as well as the $350.0 million 364-day credit facility, bear interest at variable rates, which may be adjusted upward or downward depending on certain criteria, such as credit ratings. The Global Credit Facilities and the $350.0 million 364-day credit facility also require the Company to pay a fee based on the average daily unused portion of the aggregate commitments. The Global Credit Facilities are committed facilities primarily used to support the Company's unsecured commercial paper program.
Unsecured Commercial Paper - Subject to limitations, the Company could issue unsecured commercial paper of up to $1.42 billion as of December 31, 2020 supported by the Global Credit Facilities. Outstanding unsecured commercial paper may not exceed the unused portion of the Global Credit Facilities. Maturities may range up to 365 days from the issuance date. The Company intends to repay unsecured commercial paper as it matures with additional unsecured commercial paper or through other means, such as borrowing under the Global Credit Facilities or the $350.0 million 364-day credit facility, borrowing under its asset-backed U.S. commercial paper conduit facilities or through the use of operating cash flow and cash on hand.(1)
Medium-Term Notes - The Company has the following unsecured medium-term notes issued and outstanding at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(a)Euro denominated €650.0 million par value remeasured to U.S. dollar at December 31, 2020
(b)Euro denominated €600.0 million par value remeasured to U.S. dollar at December 31, 2020
The fixed-rate U.S. dollar-denominated medium-term notes provide for semi-annual interest payments, the fixed-rate foreign currency-denominated medium-term notes provide for annual interest payments, and the floating-rate medium-term notes provide for quarterly interest payments. Principal on the medium-term notes is due at maturity. Unamortized discounts and debt issuance costs on the medium-term notes reduced the outstanding balance by $15.4 million and $12.8 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Senior Notes - In July 2015, the Company issued $750.0 million of unsecured senior notes in an underwritten offering. The senior notes provide for semi-annual interest payments and principal due at maturity. $450.0 million of the senior notes mature in July 2025 and have an interest rate of 3.50%, and $300.0 million of the senior notes mature in July 2045 and have an interest rate of 4.625%. The Company used the proceeds from the debt to repurchase shares of its common stock in 2015.
On-Balance Sheet Asset-Backed Canadian Commercial Paper Conduit Facility - The Company has a revolving facility agreement (Canadian Conduit) with a Canadian bank-sponsored asset-backed commercial paper conduit. Under the agreement, the Canadian Conduit is contractually committed, at the Company's option, to purchase from the Company eligible Canadian retail motorcycle finance receivables for proceeds up to C$220.0 million. The transferred assets are restricted as collateral for the payment of the associated debt. The terms for this facility provide for interest on the outstanding principal based on prevailing market interest rates plus a specified margin. The Canadian Conduit also provides for a program fee and an unused commitment fee based on the unused portion of the total aggregate commitment of C$220.0 million. There is no amortization schedule; however, the debt is reduced monthly as available collections on the related finance receivables are applied to outstanding principal. Upon expiration of the Canadian Conduit, any outstanding principal will continue to be reduced monthly through available collections. The expected remaining term of the related receivables is approximately 4 years. Unless earlier terminated or extended by mutual agreement between the Company and the lenders, as of December 31, 2020, the Canadian Conduit has an expiration date of June 25, 2021.
In 2020, the Company transferred $77.9 million of Canadian retail motorcycle finance receivables to the Canadian Conduit for proceeds of $61.6 million. In 2019, the Company transferred $28.2 million of Canadian retail motorcycle finance receivables to the Canadian Conduit for proceeds of $23.4 million.
On-Balance Sheet Asset-Backed U.S. Commercial Paper Conduit Facilities VIE - Until November 25, 2020, the Company had two separate agreements with third-party bank-sponsored asset-backed U.S. commercial paper conduits, a $300.0 million revolving facility agreement and a $600.0 million revolving facility agreement (together, the Former U.S. Conduit Facilities). On November 25, 2020, the Company amended each revolving facility agreement by consolidating the two agreements into one $900.0 million revolving facility agreement with third-party bank-sponsored asset-backed U.S. commercial paper conduits. Under the revolving facility agreement, the Company may transfer U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables to an SPE, which in turn may issue debt to those third-party bank-sponsored asset-backed U.S. commercial paper conduits. In addition to the $900.0 million aggregate commitment, the agreement allows for additional borrowings, at the lender’s discretion, of up to $300.0 million. Availability under the $900.0 million revolving facility (the U.S. Conduit Facility) is based on, among other things, the amount of eligible U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables held by the SPE as collateral.
In 2020, the Company transferred $195.3 million of U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables to an SPE which, in turn, issued $163.6 million of debt under the Former U.S. Conduit Facilities. In 2019, the Company transferred $174.4 million of U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables to an SPE which, in turn, issued $154.6 million of debt under the Former U.S. Conduit Facilities.
The terms for this debt provide for interest on the outstanding principal based on prevailing commercial paper rates if funded by a conduit lender through the issuance of commercial paper. If not funded by a conduit lender through the issuance of commercial paper, the terms of the interest are based on LIBOR. In each of these cases, a program fee is assessed based on the outstanding principal. The U.S. Conduit Facility also provides for an unused commitment fee based on the unused portion of the total aggregate commitment. When calculating the unused fee, the aggregate commitment does not include any unused portion of the $300.0 million additional borrowings allowed. There is no amortization schedule; however, the debt is reduced monthly as available collections on the related finance receivables are applied to outstanding principal. Upon expiration of the U.S. Conduit Facility, any outstanding principal will continue to be reduced monthly through available collections. The expected remaining term of the related receivables held by the SPE is approximately 4 years. Unless earlier terminated or extended by mutual agreement of the Company and the lenders, as of December 31, 2020, the U.S. Conduit Facility has an expiration date of November 19, 2021.
Asset-Backed Securitization VIEs - For all of its asset-backed securitization transactions, the Company transfers U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables to separate VIEs, which in turn issue secured notes with various maturities and interest rates to investors. All of the notes held by the VIEs are secured by future collections of the purchased U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables. The U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables included in the asset-backed securitization transactions are not available to pay other obligations or claims of the Company's creditors until the associated debt and other obligations are satisfied. Restricted cash balances held by the VIEs are used only to support the asset-backed securitizations.
The accounting treatment for asset-backed securitizations depends on the terms of the related transaction and the Company’s continuing involvement with the VIE. The Company's current outstanding asset-backed securitizations do not meet the criteria to be accounted for as a sale because, in addition to retaining servicing rights, the Company retains a financial interest in the VIE in the form of a debt security. These transactions are treated as secured borrowings. As secured borrowings, the retail motorcycle finance receivables remain on the balance sheet with a corresponding obligation reflected as debt. There is no amortization schedule for the secured notes; however, the debt is reduced monthly as available collections on the related retail motorcycle finance receivables are applied to outstanding principal. The secured notes have various contractual maturities ranging from 2022 to 2028.
In 2020, the Company transferred $2.42 billion of U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables to four separate SPEs which, in turn, issued $2.08 billion, or $2.06 billion net of discounts and issuance costs, of secured notes through four separate on-balance-sheet asset-backed securitization transactions. In 2019, the Company transferred $1.12 billion of U.S. retail motorcycle finance receivables to two separate SPEs which, in turn, issued $1.03 billion, or $1.02 billion net of discount and issuance costs, of secured notes through two separate on-balance sheet asset-backed securitization transactions.
Support Agreement - The Company has a support agreement with HDFS whereby, if required, the Company agrees to provide HDFS with financial support to maintain HDFS’ fixed-charge coverage at 1.25 and minimum net worth of $40.0 million. Support may be provided at the Company’s option as capital contributions or loans. Accordingly, certain debt covenants may restrict the Company’s ability to withdraw funds from HDFS outside the normal course of business. No amount has ever been provided to HDFS under the support agreement.
Operating and Financial Covenants - HDFS and the Company are subject to various operating and financial covenants related to the credit facilities and various operating covenants under the medium-term and senior notes and the U.S. and Canadian asset-backed commercial paper conduit facilities. The more significant covenants are described below.
The operating covenants limit the Company’s and HDFS’ ability to:
•Assume or incur certain liens;
•Participate in certain mergers or consolidations; and
•Purchase or hold margin stock.
Under the current financial covenants of the Global Credit Facilities, the ratio of HDFS’ consolidated debt, excluding secured debt, to HDFS’ consolidated allowance for credit losses on finance receivables plus HDFS' consolidated shareholders' equity, excluding accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCL), cannot exceed 10.0 to 1.0 as of the end of any fiscal quarter. In addition, the ratio of the Company's consolidated debt to the Company's consolidated debt and consolidated shareholders’ equity (where the Company's consolidated debt in each case excludes that of HDFS and its subsidiaries, and the Company's consolidated shareholders’ equity excluding AOCL), cannot exceed 0.7 to 1.0 as of the end of any fiscal quarter. No financial covenants are required under the medium-term and senior notes or the U.S. or Canadian asset-backed commercial paper conduit facilities.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, HDFS and the Company remained in compliance with all of the then existing covenants.
Cautionary Statements
The Company intends that certain matters discussed in this report are “forward-looking statements” intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements can generally be identified as such by reference to this footnote or because the context of the statement will include words such as the Company “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “estimates,” “targets,” “intend” or words of similar meaning. Similarly, statements that describe or refer to future expectations, future plans, strategies, objectives, outlooks, targets, guidance, commitments or goals are also forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially, unfavorably or favorably, from those anticipated as of the date of this report. Certain of such risks and uncertainties are described below. Shareholders, potential investors, and other readers are urged to consider these factors in evaluating the forward-looking statements and are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements included in this report are only made as of the date of this report, and the Company disclaims any obligation to publicly update such forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances.
Important factors that could affect future results and cause those results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements include, among others, the following: (i) the COVID-19 pandemic, including the length and severity of the pandemic across the globe and the pace of recovery following the pandemic and (ii) the Company's ability to: (a) execute its business plans and strategies, including The Hardwire, successfully execute its remodeled approach to supply and inventory management, and strengthen its existing business while allowing for desirable growth; (b) accurately analyze, predict and react to changing market conditions and successfully adjust to shifting global consumer needs and interests, including successfully implementing a distributor model in fifteen international markets; (c) successfully access the capital and/or credit markets on terms that are acceptable to the Company and within its expectations; (d) successfully carry out its global manufacturing and assembly operations; (e) develop and introduce products, services and experiences on a timely basis that the market accepts, that enable the Company to generate desired sales levels and that provide the desired financial returns, including successfully implementing and executing plans to strengthen and grow its leadership position in Touring, large Cruiser and Trike, and growing its complementary businesses; (f) perform in a manner that enables the Company to benefit from market opportunities while competing against existing and new competitors; (g) prevent, detect, and remediate any issues with its motorcycles or any issues associated with the manufacturing processes to avoid delays in new model launches, recall campaigns, regulatory agency investigations, increased warranty costs or litigation and adverse effects on its reputation and brand strength, and carry out any product programs or recalls within expected costs and timing; (h) manage supply chain issues, including quality issues and any unexpected interruptions or price increases caused by raw material shortages or natural disasters; (i) manage the impact that prices for and supply of used motorcycles may have on its business, including on retail sales of new motorcycles; (j) realize expectations concerning market demand for electric models, which will depend in part on the building of necessary infrastructure; (k) successfully manage and reduce costs throughout the business; (l) manage through changes in general economic and business conditions, including changing capital, credit and retail markets, and the changing political environment; (m) continue to develop the capabilities of its distributors and dealers, effectively implement changes relating to its dealers and distribution methods and manage the risks that its independent dealers may have difficulty obtaining capital and managing through changing economic conditions and consumer demand; (n) develop and maintain a productive relationship with Zhejiang Qianjiang Motorcycle Co., Ltd. and launch related products in a timely manner; (o) develop and maintain a productive relationship with Hero MotoCorp as a distributor and licensee of the Harley-Davidson brand name in India; (p) manage and predict the impact that new or adjusted tariffs may have on the Company's ability to sell products internationally, and the cost of raw materials and components; (q) successfully maintain a manner in which to sell motorcycles in the European Union, China, and the Company's Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries that does not subject its motorcycles to incremental tariffs; (r) manage its Thailand corporate and manufacturing operation in a manner that allows the Company to avail itself of preferential free trade agreements and duty rates, and sufficiently lower prices of its motorcycles in certain markets; (s) accurately estimate and adjust to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates and commodity prices; (t) retain and attract talented employees, and eliminate personnel duplication, inefficiencies and complexity throughout the organization; (u) prevent a cybersecurity breach involving
consumer, employee, dealer, supplier, or Company data and respond to evolving regulatory requirements regarding data security; (v) manage the credit quality, the loan servicing and collection activities, and the recovery rates of HDFS' loan portfolio; (w) adjust to tax reform, healthcare inflation and reform and pension reform, and successfully estimate the impact of any such reform on the Company’s business; (x) manage through the effects inconsistent and unpredictable weather patterns may have on retail sales of motorcycles; (y) implement and manage enterprise-wide information technology systems, including systems at its manufacturing facilities; (z) manage changes and prepare for requirements in legislative and regulatory environments for its products, services and operations; (aa) manage its exposure to product liability claims and commercial or contractual disputes; (bb) continue to manage the relationships and agreements that the Company has with its labor unions to help drive long-term competitiveness; (cc) accurately predict the margins of its Motorcycles and Related Products segment in light of, among other things, tariffs, the cost associated with product development initiatives and the Company's complex global supply chain; and (dd) successfully develop and launch the pre-owned motorcycle program, Harley-Davidson Certified.
The Company’s operations, demand for its products, and its liquidity could be adversely impacted by work stoppages, facility closures, strikes, natural causes, widespread infectious disease, terrorism, or other factors. Other factors are described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this report. Many of these risk factors are impacted by the current changing capital, credit and retail markets and the Company's ability to manage through inconsistent economic conditions.
The Company’s ability to sell its motorcycles and related products and services and to meet its financial expectations also depends on the ability of the Company’s independent dealers to sell its motorcycles and related products and services to retail customers. The Company depends on the capability and financial capacity of its independent dealers to develop and implement effective retail sales plans to create demand for the motorcycles and related products and services they purchase from the Company. In addition, the Company’s independent dealers and distributors may experience difficulties in operating their businesses and selling Harley-Davidson motorcycles and related products and services as a result of weather, economic conditions, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or other factors.
In recent years, HDFS has experienced historically low levels of retail credit losses, but there is no assurance that this will continue. The Company believes that HDFS' retail credit losses may increase over time due to changing consumer credit behavior and HDFS' efforts to increase prudently structured loan approvals to sub-prime borrowers, as well as actions that the Company has taken and could take that impact motorcycle values.