Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, the information described under the caption “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report and our Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements at the outset of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
We are a developer, manufacturer and supplier of premium diagnostics products, medical imaging systems and surgical products focused on women's health and well-being through early detection and treatment. We sell and service our products through a combination of direct sales and service personnel and a network of independent distributors and sales representatives. We operate in four segments: Diagnostics, Breast Health, GYN Surgical and Skeletal Health. Until December 30, 2019, our product portfolio included aesthetic and medical treatments systems sold by our former Medical Aesthetic business. We completed the sale of our Medical Aesthetics segment on December 30, 2019 (the first day of the second quarter of fiscal 2020).
Through our Diagnostics segment, we offer a wide range of diagnostic products, which are used primarily to aid in the screening and diagnosis of human diseases. Our primary Diagnostics products include our molecular diagnostic assays, which run on our advanced instrumentation systems (Panther, Panther Fusion and Tigris), our ThinPrep cytology system, and the Rapid Fetal Fibronectin Test. Our Aptima family of molecular diagnostic assays is used to detect, among other things, the infectious microorganisms that cause common sexually transmitted diseases, or STDs, such as: chlamydia and gonorrhea, or GTGC; certain high-risk strains of human papillomavirus, or HPV; and Trichomonas vaginalis, the parasite that causes trichomoniasis; Mycoplasma genitalium; and Herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2. We also offer viral load tests for HIV, Hepatitis C and Hepatitis B for use on our Panther instrument system. Our assay portfolio also includes diagnostic tests for a range of acute respiratory infections, including SARS-CoV-2, as well as a test for the detection of Group B Streptococcus, or GBS, that are run on the Panther Fusion system, a field upgradeable instrument addition to the base Panther system. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we developed and launched the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay (which runs on our standard Panther system) and the Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay (which runs on our Panther Fusion system). The Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay and the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay were launched at the end of our second quarter and in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, respectively. The ThinPrep System is primarily used in cytology applications, such as cervical cancer screening, and the Rapid Fetal Fibronectin Test assists physicians in assessing the risk of pre-term birth.
Our Breast Health segment offers a broad portfolio of solutions for breast cancer care primarily in the areas of radiology, breast surgery, pathology and treatment. These solutions include 3D digital mammography systems, image analytics software utilizing artificial intelligence, reading workstations, ultrasound imaging, minimally invasive breast biopsy guidance systems, breast biopsy site markers, localization, specimen radiology, connectivity solutions and breast conserving surgery products. Our most advanced breast imaging platforms, Selenia Dimensions and 3Dimensions, utilize tomosynthesis to produce 3D images that show multiple contiguous slice images of the breast, which we refer to as the Genius 3D Mammography exam.
Our GYN Surgical products include our NovaSure Endometrial Ablation System, or NovaSure, and our MyoSure Hysteroscopic Tissue Removal System, or MyoSure, as well as our Fluent Fluid Management system, or Fluent. The NovaSure portfolio is comprised of the NovaSure CLASSIC and NovaSure ADVANCED devices and involves a trans-cervical procedure for the treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding. The MyoSure suite of devices offers four options to provide incision-less removal of fibroids, polyps, and other pathology within the uterus. The Fluent system is a fluid management system that provides liquid distention during diagnostic and operative hysteroscopic procedures.
Our Skeletal Health segment's products includes the Horizon DXA, a dual energy x-ray system, which evaluates bone density and performs body composition assessments, and the Fluoroscan Insight FD mini C-arm, which assists in performing minimally invasive orthopedic surgical procedures on a patient's extremities, such as the hand, wrist, knee, foot, and ankle.
Our Medical Aesthetics segment consisted of a portfolio of aesthetic treatment systems. We completed the sale of our Medical Aesthetics business on December 30, 2019.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to we, us, Hologic or our company refer to Hologic, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
COVID-19 Considerations
The global COVID-19 pandemic has created significant volatility, uncertainty, and economic disruption in the markets we sell our products into, primarily the U.S., Europe and Asia-Pacific. Starting in the second quarter of fiscal 2020, the spread of COVID-19 negatively impacted business and healthcare activity globally. In particular, due to government measures, elective
procedures and exams were delayed or cancelled, there were significant reductions in physician office visits, and hospitals postponed or canceled capital purchases as well as limited or eliminated services; however, in the second half of the third quarter of fiscal 2020, we started to see a recovery of elective procedures and exams as economies were opened back up and restrictions eased, which has continued through the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. The reductions in testing and procedures had a negative impact on our operating results and cash flows in fiscal 2020, however, the impact of the commercial release of our COVID-19 assays more than offset those negative impacts as we generated significant revenue from the sales of these assays starting in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 through the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
While our results of operations and cash flows since the third quarter of fiscal 2020 have been positively impacted by the sale of our COVID-19 assays as well the continued recovery of our other primary product lines and businesses to pre-COVID levels, the COVID-19 pandemic could have an adverse impact on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition in the future. The factors that could create such adverse impact include: reduced demand for COVID-19 testing; competition from existing and new COVID-19 testing technologies and products as well as the timing and effectiveness of distributing vaccines; the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic; the resurgence of COVID-19 infections; the emergence of new COVID strain variants; the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on the U.S. and international healthcare systems, the U.S. economy and worldwide economy; and the timing, scope and effectiveness of U.S. and international governmental, regulatory, fiscal, monetary and public health responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic disruptions. We expect that as the current COVID-19 pandemic subsides, there may be a significantly reduced demand for ongoing testing, and thus, for our COVID-19 assays. As expected in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, revenues generated from the sale of its COVID-19 assays decreased significantly in the U.S. compared to the prior year period and the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021 as the population of vaccinated people continues to grow in the U.S. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, COVID-19 assay revenues increased compared to the preceding quarter primarily due to the impact of the delta strain of COVID-19 resulting in higher demand for testing. However, COVID-19 assay revenues decreased compared to the corresponding prior year period.
In response to the negative impact of COVID-19 on our business, in April 2020, we initiated cost-cutting measures, which included not only reducing discretionary and variable spend, such as travel, marketing programs and the use of contractors, consultants and temporary help, but we also implemented employee furloughs, salary cuts primarily in the U.S., reduced hours and in certain instances, effected employee terminations. Further in April 2020, we shut down certain manufacturing facilities temporarily and implemented reduced work-week schedules in response to lower near-term demand for many of our products. As of the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2020, substantially all of the Company's employee cost-cutting measures ceased During fiscal 2021 the majority of the impacted manufacturing facilities were back to pre-COVID levels.
We have also taken and continue to take measures to ensure the safety of our employees and to comply with governmental orders. These measures could require that our employees continue to work remotely or otherwise refrain from reporting to their normal workplace for extended periods of time, which in turn could result in a decrease in our commercial and marketing activities. In addition, complying with government and customer vaccine mandates that apply to us may lead to employee attrition, disrupt our workforce and result in additional costs associated with implementation and on-going compliance, which could have an adverse impact on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition.
Acquisitions and Disposition
The following sets forth a description of certain of our acquisitions and dispositions in our last two fiscal years:
Mobidiag
On June 17, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Mobidiag Oy, or Mobidiag, for a purchase price of $729.6 million. Mobidiag, located in Finland, manufactures molecular diagnostic solutions for gastrointestinal infections, antimicrobial resistance management and other infections. This acquisition expanded our molecular diagnostics portfolio into the near-patient testing market. Based on our preliminary valuation, we allocated $399.9 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $432.6 million to goodwill. The remaining $102.9 million of the purchase price was allocated to the net acquired tangible assets and liabilities. The allocation of the purchase price is preliminary as we continue to gather information supporting the acquired assets and liabilities. Mobidiag's results of operations are reported in our Diagnostics segment.
Biotheranostics
On February 22, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Biotheranostics, Inc., or Biotheranostics, for a purchase price of $231.3 million. Biotheranostics, located in San Diego, California, manufactures molecular diagnostic tests for breast and metastatic cancers and performs lab testing procedures at its facility. Based on our preliminary valuation, we allocated $162.4 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $80.9 million to goodwill. The remaining $12.0 million of the purchase price was allocated to the net acquired tangible assets and liabilities. The allocation of the purchase price is
preliminary as we continue to gather information supporting the acquired assets and liabilities. Biotheranostics' results of operations are included in our Diagnostic segment and its revenues are reported within service and other revenues in our consolidated statements of operations.
Diagenode
On March 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Diagenode SA, or Diagenode, for a purchase price of $155.1 million. Diagenode, located in Belgium, is a developer and manufacturer of molecular diagnostic assays based on PCR technology to detect infectious diseases of bacterial, viral or parasite origin. Based on our preliminary valuation, we allocated $79.0 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $83.5 million to goodwill. The remaining $7.4 million of the purchase price was allocated to the net acquired tangible assets and liabilities. The allocation of the purchase price is preliminary as we continue to gather information supporting the acquired assets and liabilities. Diagenode's results of operations are included in our Diagnostics segment.
Somatex Medical Technologies
On December 30, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Somatex Medical Technologies GmbH, or Somatex, for a purchase price of $62.9 million. Somatex, located in Germany, is a manufacturer of biopsy site markers, including the Tumark product line of tissue markers, which were distributed by the Company in the U.S. prior to the acquisition. Based on our preliminary valuation, we allocated $40.1 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $32.4 million to goodwill. The remaining $9.6 million of the purchase price was allocated to the net acquired tangible assets and liabilities. The allocation of the purchase price is preliminary as we continue to gather information supporting the acquired assets and liabilities. Somatex' results of operations are included in our Breast Health segment.
NXC Imaging
On September 28, 2020, we completed the acquisition of assets from NXC Imaging, for a purchase price of $5.6 million. NXC Imaging was a long-standing distributor of our Breast and Skeletal products in the U.S.
Acessa Health
On August 23, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Acessa Health, Inc., or Acessa for a purchase price of $162.0 million, which included contingent consideration and was estimated at $81.8 million as of the measurement date. Acessa, located in Austin, Texas, manufactures and markets its Acessa ProVu system, a laparoscopic radio frequency ablation system for use in treatment of uterine fibroids. Acessa's results of operations are included in our GYN Surgical segment. The contingent consideration is based on annual incremental revenue growth over a three-year period ending annually in December. The contingent consideration is payable after each annual measurement period. We remeasure the contingent consideration liability on a quarterly basis, and for fiscal year 2021 we recorded a gain of $6.7 million to decrease the liability to its fair value. The reduction in fair value was primarily due to a decrease in forecasted revenues over the measurement period, partially offset by lower discount rates and accretion of the liability. The liability was recorded at $75.1 million at September 25, 2021.
Health Beacons
On February 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Health Beacons, Inc., or Health Beacons, for a purchase price of $19.7 million. Health Beacons manufactures the LOCalizer product. Health Beacon's results of operations are reported in our Breast Health segment.
Alpha Imaging
On December 30, 2019, we completed the acquisition of assets from Alpha Imaging, LLC, or Alpha Imaging, for a purchase price of $18.0 million. Alpha Imaging was a long-standing distributor of our Breast and Skeletal products in the U.S.
SuperSonic Imagine
On August 1, 2019, we acquired approximately 46% of the outstanding shares of SuperSonic Imagine SA, or SSI, which is headquartered in France. SSI specializes in ultrasound imaging and designs, develops and markets an ultrasound platform used in the non-invasive care path for the characterization of breast, liver or prostate diseases. We initially accounted for this investment as an equity method investment.
On November 21, 2019, we acquired an additional 7.6 million common shares of SSI for $12.6 million. As a result, we owned approximately 78% of the outstanding shares of SSI at November 21, 2019 and controlled SSI's voting interest and
operations. We performed purchase accounting as of November 21, 2019 and beginning on that date the financial results of SSI are included within our consolidated financial statements within our Breast Health segment. We remeasured the initial investment of 46% of the outstanding shares of SSI to its fair value at the acquisition date, resulting in a gain of $3.2 million in Other income (expense), net in the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we acquired the remaining 4.8 million shares outstanding of SSI for $8.5 million. As of September 25, 2021, we owned 100% of SSI. Accordingly we recorded an adjustment to our net income for the noncontrolling interest we did not own of $1.8 million and $4.7 million (both of which were losses) for the years ended September 25, 2021 and September 26, 2020, respectively.
Disposition - Medical Aesthetics
On December 30, 2019, we completed the sale of our Medical Aesthetics. At the closing, we received cash proceeds of $153.4 million. The sales price was finalized in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, and we repaid $3.4 million, resulting in a final sales price of $150.0 million. As a result of the sale, we recorded a $30.2 million impairment charge in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 to record the asset group at fair value less costs to dispose as it met the assets held-for-sale criteria. For additional information, see Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements included herein. Following the sale of our Medical Aesthetics business, we have not generated any further product revenue related to this business, although additional expenses have been and will be incurred primarily in connection with the indemnification of legal and tax matters that existed as of the date of disposition. In addition, we agreed to provide transition services for a period of up to 15 months, which ended in March 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year Ended September 25, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 26, 2020
Product Revenues
We generated a 53.9% increase in product revenues in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in the Diagnostics business from a full year of sales of our two COVID-19 assays, one of which was launched near the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and the other in the third quarter of fiscal 2020. Excluding sales of our COVID-19 assays, product revenues in the prior year period were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and product revenues in the current year periods have increased across our divisions. We primarily attribute this increase to recovery of elective procedures and exams, including associated capital equipment spending, as economies were opened back up and restrictions eased, and to a lesser extent a portion of the increase was driven by our current year acquisitions. The increase in product revenues in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was partially offset by no revenues from the Medical Aesthetics business in the current fiscal year as we disposed of this business segment on December 30, 2019, the beginning of our second quarter of fiscal 2020.
Diagnostics product revenues increased 73.4% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increases in Molecular Diagnostics of $1,457.7 million, Cytology and Perinatal of $58.3 million, and an increase in blood-screening of $6.3 million. While we divested our blood screening business in the second quarter of fiscal 2017, we continue to provide long-term access to Panther instrumentation and certain supplies to the purchaser of that business. Molecular Diagnostics product revenue was $3.1 billion in fiscal 2021 compared to $1.6 billion in fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to revenues of $2.16 billion in fiscal 2021 compared to $929.3 million in fiscal 2020 from our two SARS-CoV-2 assays (primarily the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay and to a lesser extent the Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay), an increase in Panther and Panther Fusion instrument sales due to demand for increased testing capacity for COVID-19, and an increase of $150.2 million in Aptima assays sales, which primarily consist of our CTGC, HPV and Trichomonas vaginalis assays, and related collection kits due to a return to pre-COVID testing levels. Prior fiscal year sales of these assays were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related lockdowns across the globe. In addition, we had an increase of $9.4 million in worldwide sales of our virology products in the current fiscal year. We expect that sales of our COVID-19 assays will decline significantly in fiscal 2022 compared to the current fiscal year primarily due to the continued distribution of vaccines. Cytology & Perinatal product revenue increased $58.3 million in the current fiscal year primarily due to higher ThinPrep test volumes, which we primarily attribute to the recovery of wellness office visits that had previously been delayed or cancelled in the prior year in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by lower average selling prices and lower Perinatal product volumes. The inclusion of Diagenode and Mobidiag contributed $29.9 million of product revenue in the current fiscal year. We also experienced an increase in revenue from the favorable foreign currency exchange impact of the weakened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies in current fiscal year.
Breast Health product revenues increased 21.3% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as product revenues in the prior fiscal year were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related lockdowns across the globe. These increases were primarily due to an increase in sales volume of our digital mammography systems and related workflow products (primarily Intelligent 2D, Clarity HD and SmartCurve), Affirm Prone breast biopsy tables, and our interventional breast solutions products, primarily Eviva, ATEC, and Brevera disposables (relaunched in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020). In addition, we had higher sales of our breast conserving surgery products and ultrasound imaging products. We primarily attribute the increase in revenues to hospitals and imaging centers purchasing capital equipment following a significant decline in such spending during fiscal 2020 and to the recovery of elective procedures and exams as elective procedures and wellness visits that had previously been delayed or cancelled in the prior year in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We also experienced an increase in revenue from the favorable foreign currency exchange impact of the weakened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies in the current year.
GYN Surgical product revenues increased 29.8% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the recovery of elective medical visits and procedures that had previously been delayed or cancelled in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and to a lesser extent healthcare providers increasing their inventory levels. These revenue increases were primarily due to increases in the sales volumes of MyoSure systems, NovaSure systems, Fluent Fluid Management systems and to a lesser extent sales of ProVu systems acquired in the Acessa acquisition in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. We also experienced an increase in revenue from the favorable foreign currency exchange impact of the weakened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies in the current year.
Skeletal Health product revenues increased 22.7% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in sales volume of both our Insight FD mini C-arm and Horizon DXA systems. We primarily attribute this increase to the increase in wellness visits and healthcare screenings in 2021 as a result of the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
We divested the Medical Aesthetics segment on December 30, 2019, the beginning of our second quarter of fiscal 2020. We have generated no revenue from the segment since that date.
Product revenues by geography as a percentage of total revenues were as follows:
While our product revenue increased in all our geographic regions, our largest proportionate increase was in Europe, which we primarily attribute to strong sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays in Europe, growth in our Aptima assays in Europe as we expanded our customer base, increased sales from the adoption of co-testing for cervical cancer screening in Germany and to a lesser extent in the UK, as well as the inclusion of revenue from Diagenode, Mobidiag and Somatex, which are predominantly in Europe. Asia-Pacific product revenue as a percentage of total product revenue increased primarily due to an increase in sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays in the region, an increase in sales of our mammography systems and growth in ThinPrep and Molecular Diagnostics primarily due to the recovery of wellness office visits that had previously been delayed or cancelled in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Service and Other Revenues
Service and other revenues are primarily comprised of revenue generated from our field service organization to provide ongoing service, installation and repair of our products. The majority of these revenues are generated within our Breast Health segment. Service and other revenues increased 21.0% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in Breast Health service contract revenue as the Breast Health business continued to convert a high percentage of our installed base of digital mammography systems to service contracts upon expiration of the warranty period, as well as additions from our distributor acquisitions. We also experienced an increase in spare parts revenue in the current fiscal year for services that had previously been delayed or cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In our Diagnostics business, we had additional royalty revenue in the current fiscal year of $34.4 million from Grifols related to licensing our intellectual property to our COVID-19 assays for their sale in Spain. In addition, the inclusion of Biotheranostics added $33.7 million in the current fiscal year. These increases were partially offset by the sale of the Medical Aesthetics business which contributed $15.6 million of service revenue in the prior fiscal year.
Cost of Product Revenues
Product gross margin was 70.2% in fiscal 2021 compared to 61.8% in fiscal 2020.
Cost of Product Revenues. The cost of product revenues as a percentage of product revenues was 24.3% in the current year compared to 29.6% in the prior year. Cost of product revenues as a percentage of revenue decreased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays, which have higher gross margins compared to our other Diagnostic products, and comprised 43.5% and 28.8% of total product revenue in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Also benefiting gross margin in the current year were higher sales volumes from our other businesses and product lines as they have continued to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic as economies opened back up and restrictions eased and the disposition of Medical Aesthetics, which had lower gross margins compared to our remaining businesses. Partially offsetting these decreases were higher field service costs for our expanded instrument installed base for the Diagnostics business and higher freight costs.
Diagnostics' product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays and higher overall production of our Aptima assays and ThinPrep Pap Test reducing fixed overhead on a unit basis. These increases were partially offset by increased international freight costs, increased inventory reserves, higher field service costs for our expanded instrument installed base, an increase in amortization of placed instruments, and a slight decline in average selling prices partially driven by geographic mix.
Breast Health’s product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, which resulted in decreased sales volume across the majority of our product lines, period costs for temporary facility shut-downs and reduced manufacturing utilization and higher inventory reserves. In the current fiscal year, sales volumes have increased for our higher margin 3Dimensions systems, higher-margin workflow products (primarily consisting of Intelligent 2D, Clarity HD and SmartCurve), and our breast biopsy and breast conserving surgery disposable products. Increased sales also improved manufacturing utilization.
GYN Surgical’s product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, which resulted in significant decreases in sales volume of our NovaSure and MyoSure devices, period costs for the temporary shutdown of our manufacturing facility and reduced manufacturing utilization. In the current fiscal year, the Surgical business has recovered to pre-COVID levels which significantly improved manufacturing utilization and margins, partially offset by the product mix of higher volumes of lower margin products, including our Fluent Fluid Management systems and Acessa ProVu systems.
Skeletal Health’s product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to higher sales volume of both our Insight FD mini C-arm and Horizon DXA systems and lower inventory reserves in the current year.
We divested the Medical Aesthetics segment on December 30, 2019, the beginning of our second quarter of fiscal 2020.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets included in cost of product revenues relates to acquired developed technology, which is generally amortized over its estimated useful life of between 5 and 15 years using a straight-line method or, if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets are expected to be consumed. Amortization expense increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to intangible assets acquired in the Mobidiag, Acessa, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Somatex acquisitions, partially offset by lower amortization of intangible assets acquired in the Cytyc acquisition which reduces over time.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Equipment. As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, we recorded an aggregate impairment charge of $30.2 million during the first quarter of fiscal 2020. The impairment charge was allocated to the Medical Aesthetics long-lived assets, of which $25.8 million was allocated to developed technology assets and written off to cost of revenues.
Cost of Service and Other Revenues
Service and other revenues gross margin was 46.7% in fiscal 2021 compared to 42.4% in fiscal 2020. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to additional royalty revenue from Grifols related to licensing our intellectual property related to our COVID-19 assays for their sale in Spain, which has a high margin, and laboratory testing services from Biotheranostics, which has a higher gross margin than our legacy service businesses. In addition, in the current year period the Breast Health business had an increase in service contract revenue which benefited gross margin as service contract revenue has higher margins compared to revenue from spare parts, installation and training.
Operating Expenses
** Percentage not meaningful
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased 24.2% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher R&D project spend in Diagnostics, Breast Health and Surgical, the inclusion of expenses from the Mobidiag, Acessa, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Somatex acquisitions aggregating $14.6 million, higher salary expense from increased headcount in Diagnostics, higher project and consulting spend and increased spending to implement the European Medical Device Regulation (MDR) and In Vitro Diagnostic Regulation (IVDR) requirements. In the current year, we also recorded a $7.0 million charge related to the purchase of intellectual property in Breast Health that has no future alternative use. Partially offsetting these increases in the current year was the reduction of expense due to the disposition of the Medical Aesthetics business which contributed $7.3 million of expense in the prior year. In addition, we recorded a credit to research and development expenses of $11.0 million and $7.1 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) in connection with a grant to expand manufacturing capacity, obtain FDA approval of our SARS-CoV-2 assays and develop sampling pooling capability and other enhancements to our SARS-CoV-2 assays. At any point in time, we have a number of different research projects and clinical trials being conducted and the timing of these projects and related costs can vary from period to period.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. Selling and marketing expenses increased 15.8% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due inclusion of expenses from the Mobidiag, Acessa, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Somatex acquisitions aggregating $36.3 million, an increase in commissions in Breast Health, Surgical and Diagnostics from higher revenues, and an increase in marketing initiatives and consulting spend. Partially offsetting these increases in the current year was the disposition of the Medical Aesthetics business which contributed $23.7 million of expense in the prior year, lower travel and trade show expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, decreases in meeting expenses primarily related to cancelling our national sales meeting and not having an in-person RSNA conference as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower bonus expense.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased 21.8% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the inclusion of expenses from the Mobidiag, Acessa, Biotheranostics, Diagenode and Somatex acquisitions aggregating $16.4 million, increased acquisition transaction costs including $11.5 million for a transfer tax related to the Mobidiag acquisition, a $11.2 million non-income tax charge related to an ongoing non-income tax audit, higher expense from our deferred compensation plan, higher litigation and settlement costs, increased consulting spend for corporate initiatives and information system implementation projects, higher charitable donations, higher salary expenses due to an increase in headcount and the cessation of furloughs implemented in April 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic before the end of the prior year period, and lower credits in the current year of $3.5 million related to transition services provided to Cynosure. Partially offsetting these increases were lower stock-based compensation and bonuses, lower bad debt expense, the disposition of the Medical Aesthetics business, which contributed $5.5 million of expenses in the prior year, expenses incurred in the prior year to separate and dispose of that business, and a $3.3 million benefit due to reversal of a tax reserve.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets results from customer relationships, trade names, distributor relationships and business licenses related to our acquisitions. These intangible assets are generally amortized over their estimated useful lives of between 2 and 30 years using a straight-line method or, if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets are expected to be consumed utilizing expected undiscounted future cash flows. Amortization expense increased 6.3% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increases from recent acquisitions, partially offset by assets from older acquisitions becoming fully amortized.
Contingent Consideration Fair Value Adjustments. In connection with the acquisition of Acessa, we are obligated to make contingent earn-out payments. The payments are based on achieving incremental revenue growth over a three-year period ending annually in December. As of the acquisition date for Acessa, we recorded a contingent consideration liability for the estimated fair value of the amount we expected to pay to the former shareholders of the acquired business. This liability is not contingent on future employment, and we recorded our estimate of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation based on future revenue projections of Acessa, comparable company revenue growth rates, implied volatility and applying a risk adjusted discount rate. Increases or decreases in the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities can result from the passage of time, changes in discount rates, and changes in the timing, probabilities and amount of revenue estimates. In the current year, we recorded a gain of $6.7 million to decrease the liability to its fair value. The reduction in fair value was primarily due to a decrease in forecasted revenues over the measurement period, partially offset by a lower discount rate and accretion of the liability based on the passage of time.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Equipment. As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, we recorded an aggregate impairment charge of $30.2 million during the first quarter of fiscal 2020. The impairment charge was allocated to the Medical Aesthetics long-lived assets of which $4.4 million was written off to operating expenses.
Restructuring and Divestiture Charges. We have implemented various cost reduction initiatives to align our cost structure with our operations and related to integration activities. These actions have primarily resulted in the termination of employees, As a result, we recorded charges of $9.3 million in fiscal 2021 and $15.3 million in fiscal 2020, primarily related to severance benefits. For additional information, please refer to Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest Expense
Interest expense in fiscal 2021 and 2020 consists primarily of the cash interest costs and the related amortization of the debt discount and deferred issuance costs on our outstanding debt. Interest expense in fiscal 2021 decreased compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a decrease in LIBOR year over year, the basis for determining interest expense under our 2018 Credit Agreement, lower interest rates on our Senior Notes due to issuing our 2029 Senior Notes and paying off our 2025 Senior Notes, and the pay-off of amounts outstanding under our accounts receivable asset securitization agreement in the prior year, partially offset by issuance costs expensed from the issuance of the 2029 Senior Notes and higher interest rate swap expenses.
Debt Extinguishment Loss
In the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we completed a private placement of $950 million aggregate principal amount of our 2029 Senior Notes, The proceeds under the 2029 Senior Notes offering, together with available cash, were used to redeem our 2025 Senior Notes in the same principal amount. In connection with this transaction, we recorded a debt extinguishment loss of $21.6 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Other Income (Expense), net
In fiscal 2021, this account primarily consisted of a net foreign currency exchange loss of $17.1 million, partially driven by the mark-to-market and settling of outstanding forward foreign currency exchange and option contracts, and a charge of $1.8 million for the write-off of an equity investment, partially offset by a gain of $13.4 million on the cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan driven by current year stock market gains.
In fiscal 2020, this account primarily consisted of net foreign currency exchange gains of $3.2 million primarily due to hedging activities, a net gain of $3.2 million to reflect an adjustment to remeasure our initial investment in SSI in connection with purchase accounting and a gain of $2.3 million on the cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes.
** Percentage not meaningful
Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was a provision of 20.8%. The effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the impact of the U.S. deduction for foreign derived intangible income and the geographic mix of income earned by our international subsidiaries, which are taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, partially offset by state income taxes and the global intangible low-taxed income inclusion.
Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 was a benefit of 10.8%. The effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to a $313.4 million discrete net tax benefit related to the sale of the Medical Aesthetics business, the impact of the U.S. deduction for foreign derived intangible income, federal and state tax credits, and the geographic mix of income earned by our international subsidiaries, which are taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, partially offset by state income taxes, reserves for uncertain tax positions net of releases resulting from statute of limitations expirations and favorable audit settlements, the global intangible low-taxed income inclusion, and unbenefited foreign losses.
Segment Results of Operations
We operate in four segments: Diagnostics, Breast Health, GYN Surgical, and Skeletal Health. Until December 30, 2019, our product portfolio included aesthetic and medical treatments systems sold by our former Medical Aesthetic business. We completed the disposition of the Medical Aesthetics segment on December 30, 2019 (the first day of the second quarter of fiscal 2020). The accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in the footnotes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in Item 15 of this Annual Report. We measure segment performance based on total revenues and operating income (loss). Revenues from product sales of each of these segments are described in further detail above. The discussion that follows is a summary analysis of total revenues and the primary changes in operating income or loss by segment.
Diagnostics
Diagnostics revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in product revenues from the recovery of our core product lines, current year acquisitions and sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays discussed above, an increase in royalty revenue from Grifols related to licensing our intellectual property to our COVID-19 assays for their sale in Spain, and the inclusion of laboratory testing service revenue from Biotheranostics.
Operating income for this business segment increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in gross profit from higher revenues partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Gross margin was 73.2% in the current year compared to 65.2% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to increased sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays, higher overall production of our Aptima assays and ThinPrep Pap Test reducing fixed overhead on a unit basis and increased royalty revenue from Grifols, partially offset by an increase in freight costs to ship product internationally, an increase in inventory reserves, higher field service costs, an increase in amortization of placed Panther instruments as the installed base has increased significantly year over year, and higher intangible asset amortization expense from the Mobidiag, Diagenode and Biotheranostics acquisitions in the current year.
Operating expenses increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher compensation and benefits driven by salary, commissions and our deferred compensation plan, an increase in headcount in the operations, service and sales departments, an increase in R&D project spend, higher acquisition transaction expenses, which included $11.5 million for a transfer tax related to the Mobidiag acquisition, higher bad debt expense, an increase in marketing initiatives, a lower BARDA credit of $3.9 million in the current year, and additional expenses from the Mobidiag, Biotheranostics and Diagenode acquisitions. These increases were partially offset by lower bonus expense.
Breast Health
Breast Health revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase of $143.0 million in product revenue as discussed above and an increase of $57.3 million in service and other revenue. The increase in service revenue is primarily due to an increase in service contract revenue as the Breast Health business continued to convert a high percentage of our installed base of digital mammography systems to service contracts upon expiration of the warranty period, the addition of service contracts from the NXC Imaging acquisition and an increase in spare parts revenue.
Operating income for this business segment increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in gross profit from higher revenues with higher gross margin, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Gross margin was 56.4% in the current year compared to 52.8% in the prior year. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to the increase in product revenue and service revenue discussed above and lower costs related to the step-up in fair value of inventory of $2.3 million for the Somatex acquisition in the current year compared to $6.8 million for the SSI and Health Beacons acquisitions in the prior year. In addition, gross profit in the prior year was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in decreased sales volume across the majority of our product lines, period costs for temporary facility shut-downs and reduced manufacturing utilization and higher inventory reserves.
Operating expenses increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to due to higher compensation and benefits driven by higher commissions from increased sales and our deferred compensation plan, a $7.0 million charge related to the purchase of intellectual property, an increase in R&D project spend, an increase in consulting spend, an increase in marketing initiatives and the prior year included a benefit from the reversal of acquisition related accruals and a holdback. These increases were partially offset by lower bonus expense, lower stock compensation expense, a decrease in trade show expenses and lower bad debt expense.
GYN Surgical
GYN Surgical revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to the increase in product revenues discussed above.
Operating income for this business segment increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in gross profit from higher revenues with higher gross margin, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. Gross margin was 61.0% in the current year, compared to 59.1% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to the increased sales volume in the current year as the GYN Surgical business recovered to pre-COVID levels and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the prior year, which resulted in decreased sales volume, period costs for temporary facility shut-downs and reduced manufacturing utilization. The increase in gross margin was partially offset by an unfavorable product mix of lower margin products, including our Fluent Fluid Management system and Acessa ProVu systems, higher intangible asset amortization expense from the Acessa acquisition, and an increase in inventory reserves.
Operating expenses increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the inclusion of Acessa expenses of $15.0 million, higher compensation and benefits driven by our deferred compensation plan and commissions from the increase in sales, increased spending on research and development projects, higher travel, marketing initiative spend and consulting, and an increase in bad debt expense partially offset by a gain of $6.7 million related to the fair value adjustments for contingent consideration related to the Acessa acquisition.
Skeletal Health
Skeletal Health revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in product revenues discussed above.
Operating loss increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in operating expenses, partially offset by an increase in gross profit from higher revenues. Gross margin decreased to 31.4% in the current year compared to 33.2% in the prior year primarily due to higher service costs, partially offset by higher sales volume of our products and higher inventory reserves in the prior year.
Operating expenses increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher compensation and benefits and an increase in trade show expenses.
Fiscal Year Ended September 26, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 28, 2019
Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 26, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At September 25, 2021, we had working capital of $1,841.9 million, and our cash and cash equivalents totaled $1,170.3 million. Our cash and cash equivalents balance increased by $469.3 million during fiscal 2021 principally due to cash generated from operating activities partially offset by cash used in financing and investing activities related to acquisitions of businesses, repurchases of common stock, net repayments of debt and capital expenditures.
In fiscal 2021, our operating activities provided us with $2,330.4 million of cash, primarily due to net income of $1,869.7 million, non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization aggregating $406.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of
$65.0 million and a debt extinguishment loss of $21.6 million. These adjustments to net income were partially offset by a decrease in net deferred tax liabilities of $70.1 million primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets. Cash provided by operations included a net cash inflow of $13.0 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities were driven primarily by a decrease in accounts receivable of $110.9 million primarily due to payments received from customers that had large balances from COVID-19 assay sales in our Diagnostics division and lower revenues in fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, an increase in accounts payable of $20.4 million primarily due to the timing of these payments, and an increase in deferred revenue of $14.0 million primarily due to an increase in service contracts as the Breast Health business continues to convert a high percentage of its installed base of digital mammography systems to service contracts upon expiration of the warranty period, and a decrease in prepaid income taxes of $13.0 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by an increase in inventory of $84.1 million primarily due to the increase in raw materials and inventory to continue to support SARS-CoV-2 assay demand and production and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $56.3 million due to an increase in technology implementation capitalized costs and licenses and the timing of value added tax receivables.
In fiscal 2021, our investing activities used cash of $1,329.6 million primarily related to net cash paid for our fiscal 2021 acquisitions of Biotheranostics, Diagenode, Somatex, and Mobidiag of $1,164.7 million and net capital expenditures of $156.2 million, which primarily consisted of purchases of manufacturing equipment primarily to expand the capacity of our molecular diagnostics manufacturing facilities and the placement of equipment under customer usage agreements.
In fiscal 2021, our financing activities used cash of $529.8 million, primarily related to $970.8 million for the repayment of our 2025 Senior Notes, $409.8 million for repurchases of our common stock, $250.0 million for the repayment of amounts borrowed under our revolving credit line, $75.0 million for scheduled principal payments under our 2018 Credit Agreement, $71.5 million for the net repayment of amounts borrowed under our accounts receivable securitization agreement and payments of $47.5 million for employee-related taxes withheld for the net share settlement of vested restricted stock units. Partially offsetting these uses of cash were net proceeds of $936.3 million under our 2029 Senior Notes, $320.0 million of proceeds under the accounts receivable securitization agreement that we restarted in the third quarter of 2021 to partially fund the Mobidiag acquisition, and $51.3 million from our equity plans, primarily from the exercise of stock options.
Debt
We had total recorded debt outstanding of $3.0 billion at September 25, 2021, which was comprised of our term loan under our then existing Credit Agreement of $1.38 billion (principal of $1.39 billion), 2029 Senior Notes of $934.5 million (principal of $950.0 million), and 2028 Senior Notes of $395.4 million (principal of $400.0 million), Securitization Program of $248.5 million, and $64.5 million in debt acquired in the Mobidiag acquisition.
2021 Credit Agreement (Subsequent Event)
On September 27, 2021, we refinanced our existing term loan and revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. in its capacity as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer, and certain other lenders from time to time party thereto (the "2018 Credit Agreement") by entering into Refinancing Amendment No. 2 dated as of September 27, 2021, to the Amended and Restated Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated as of October 3, 2017, as amended(the "2021 Credit Agreement"). Substantially all of the proceeds under the 2021 Credit Agreement of $1.5 billion were used to repay the amounts outstanding under the term loan under the 2018 Credit Agreement. Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement are secured by first-priority liens on, and a first priority security interest in (in each case subject to certain liens permitted under the 2021 Credit Agreement), substantially all of our U.S. assets and the assets of the Subsidiary Guarantors. These liens are subject to release during the term of the facilities if we are able to achieve certain corporate or corporate family ratings and other conditions are met. The credit facilities (the "2021 Credit Facilities") under the 2021 Credit Agreement consist of:
•A $1.5 billion secured term loan ("2021 Term Loan") with a stated maturity date of September 25, 2026; and
•A secured revolving credit facility (the "2021 Revolver") under which the Borrowers may borrow up to $2.0 billion, subject to certain sublimits, with a stated maturity date of September 25, 2026.
As of the date of this Annual Report, there have been no borrowings under the 2021 Revolver.
Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement, other than Swing Line Loans (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), bear interest, at our option, at the Base Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), at the Eurocurrency Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), at the Alternative Currency Daily Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), or at the LIBOR Daily Floating Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), in each case plus the Applicable Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement).
The Applicable Rate in regards to the Base Rate, the Eurocurrency Rate, the Alternative Currency Daily Rate, the Alternative Currency Term Rate and the LIBOR Daily Floating Rate is subject to change depending on the Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement). The borrowings of the Term Loan under the 2021 Credit Facilities initially bear interest at an annual rate equal to the Eurocurrency Rate for a one month interest period plus an Applicable Rate equal to 1.00%.
We are also required to pay a quarterly commitment fee calculated on a daily basis equal to the Applicable Rate as of such day multiplied by the undrawn committed amount available under the Revolver (taking into account any outstanding amounts under the LS Sublimit). This commitment fee is initially 0.15% per annum for the Revolver.
We are required to make scheduled principal payments under the 2021 Term Loan in increasing amounts ranging from $3.750 million per three-month period commencing with the three-month period ending on December 29, 2022 to $18.750 million per three-month period commencing with the three month period ending on December 26, 2025. The remaining scheduled balance of $1.335 billion (or such lesser aggregate principal amount of Term Loans then outstanding) on the 2021 Term Loan and any amounts outstanding under the 2021 Revolver are due at maturity. In addition, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the 2021 Credit Agreement, we may be required to make certain mandatory prepayments from the net proceeds of specified types of asset sales (subject to certain reinvestment rights), debt issuances and insurance recoveries (subject to certain reinvestment rights). Certain of the mandatory prepayments are subject to reduction or elimination of certain financial covenants are met. These mandatory prepayments are required to be applied first to the 2021 Term Loan, second to any outstanding amount under any Swing Line Loans (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), third to the 2021 Revolver, fourth to prepay any outstanding reimbursement obligations with respect to Letters of Credit (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) and fifth to cash collateralize any Letters of Credit. Subject to certain limitations, we may voluntarily prepay any of the 2021 Credit Facilities without premium or penalty.
The 2021 Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants customarily applicable to senior secured credit facilities, including covenants restricting our ability subject to negotiated exceptions, to incur additional indebtedness and grant additional liens on our assets, engage in mergers or acquisitions or dispose of assets, enter into sale-leaseback transactions, pay dividends or make other distributions, voluntarily prepay other indebtedness, enter into transactions with affiliated persons, make investments, and change the nature of our business. In additions, the 2021 Credit Agreement requires the Borrowers to maintain certain financial ratios. The 2021 Credit Agreement also contains customary representations and warranties and events of default, including payments defaults, breach of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, cross defaults and an event of default upon a change of control of the company.
2028 Senior Notes
As of September 25, 2021, the total aggregate principal balance of the 2028 Senior Notes was $400.0 million. The 2028 Senior Notes are general senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of the Company's domestic subsidiaries. The 2028 Senior Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of January 19, 2018, among the Company, the guarantors and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee. The 2028 Senior Notes mature on February 1, 2028 and bear interest at the rate of 4.625% per year, payable semi-annually on February 1 and August 1 of each year, commencing on August 1, 2018. We may redeem the 2028 Senior Notes at any time prior to February 1, 2023 at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date and a make-whole premium set forth in the Indenture. We also have the option to redeem the 2028 Senior Notes on or after: February 1, 2023 through February 1, 2024 at 102.312% of par; February 1, 2024 through February 1, 2025 at 101.541% of par; February 1, 2025 through February 1, 2026 at 100.770% of par; and February 1, 2026 and thereafter at 100% of par. In addition, if there is a change of control coupled with a decline in ratings, as provided in the indenture, we will be required to make an offer to purchase each holder’s 2028 Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date.
2029 Senior Notes
On September 28, 2020, we completed a private placement of our 2029 Senior Notes. The total aggregate principal balance of the 2029 Senior Notes is $950.0 million. The 2029 Senior Notes are general senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of the Company's domestic subsidiaries. The 2029 Senior Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of September 28, 2020, among the Company, the guarantors and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee. The 2029 Senior Notes mature on February 15, 2029 and bear interest at the rate of 3.250% per year, payable semi-annually on February 15 and August 15 of each year, commencing on February 15, 2021. We may redeem the 2029 Senior Notes at any time prior to September 28, 2023 at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date and a make-whole premium set forth in the Indenture. We may also redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Senior Notes with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at any time and from time to time before September 28, 2023, at a redemption price equal to 103.250% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. We also have the option to redeem the 2029 Senior Notes on or after: September 28, 2023 through September 27, 2024 at 101.625% of par; September 28, 2024 through September 27, 2025 at 100.813% of par; and September 28, 2025 and thereafter at 100% of par. In addition, if there is a change of control coupled with a decline in ratings, as provided in the indenture, we will be required to make an offer to purchase each holder’s 2029 Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date.
Accounts Receivable Securitization Program
In response to the market uncertainties created by the COVID-19 pandemic, on March 26, 2020, we paid off the total amount outstanding of $250.0 million previously borrowed under our then existing accounts receivable securitization program. On April 13, 2020, we amended the Credit and Security agreement with the lenders, temporarily suspending the ability to borrow and the need to comply with covenants for up to a year. On June 11, 2021, we amended and restated the Credit and Security agreement to restart the Securitization Program (the "Securitization Program") and increase the maximum borrowing amount to $320.0 million. Under the terms of the Securitization Program, we and certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries sell our customer receivables to a bankruptcy remote special purpose entity, which is wholly-owned by us. The amount that the special purpose entity may borrow at a given point in time is determined based on the amount of qualifying receivables that are present in the special purpose entity at such point in time. The assets of the special purpose entity secure the amounts borrowed and cannot be used to pay our other debts or liabilities. The Securitization Program provides for annual renewals.
Loans outstanding under the Securitization Program bear interest at LIBOR plus an applicable margin for defined tranches. As of September 25, 2021, there was $248.5 million outstanding under this program. The weighted average interest rate under the Securitization Program was 0.8% as of September 25, 2021.
Fiscal 2022 Acquisition
On October 14, 2021, we announced that we entered into an agreement to acquire Bolder Surgical, Inc., or Bolder, a privately held, U.S.-based company that provides advanced energy vessel sealing surgical devices, for approximately $160.0 million, subject to working capital and other customary closing adjustments. The closing is subject to certain regulatory approvals, but we expect the acquisition to close before the end of calendar 2021. The acquisition will add laparoscopic vessel sealing, dividing and dissecting devices to the GYN Surgical portfolio and also will enable Hologic to expand the use of Bolder’s devices to OB/GYN specialists.
Contingent Consideration Earn-Out Payments
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, we have incurred the obligation to make contingent earnout payments tied to performance criteria, principally revenue growth of the acquired business over a specified period. In addition, contractual provisions relating to these contingent earn-out obligations may result in the risk of litigation relating to the calculation of the amount due or our operation of the acquired business. Such litigation could be expensive and divert management attention and resources. Our obligation to make contingent payments may also result in significant operating expenses.
Our contingent consideration arrangements are recorded as either additional purchase price or compensation expense if continuing employment is required to receive such payments. Pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations, contingent consideration that is deemed to be part of the purchase price is recorded as a liability based on the estimated fair value of the consideration we expect to pay to the former shareholders of the acquired business as of the acquisition date. This liability is re-measured each reporting period with the change in fair value recorded through a separate line item within our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Increases or decreases in the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities can result from changes in discount rates, changes in the timing, probabilities and amount of revenue estimates, and accretion of the liability for the passage of time.
Currently, our primary contingent consideration liability is from our acquisition of Acessa Health. We have an obligation to the former Acessa Health shareholders to make contingent payments based on a multiple of annual incremental revenue growth over a three year period ending annually in December. There is no maximum earnout. Pursuant to ASC 805, the contingent consideration was deemed to be part of the purchase price and we recorded our estimate of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation based on future revenue projections of the business, comparable company revenue growth rates, implied volatility and applying a risk adjusted discount rate. At September 25, 2021 this liability was recorded at $75.1 million and no contingent earnout payments have been earned or made.
Stock Repurchase Program
On December 9, 2020, the Board of Directors authorized a new five-year share repurchase plan, to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock. The prior plan was terminated in connection with this new authorization. As of September 25, 2021, $691.6 million remained available under this authorization. Subsequent to September 25, 2021, we repurchased 2.3 million shares of our common stock for $167.0 million.
Future Liquidity Considerations
We expect to continue to review and evaluate potential strategic transactions (both acquisitions and dispositions) and alliances that we believe will complement or enhance our business and stockholder value. Subject to the Risk Factors set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report and the general disclaimers set forth in our Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements at the outset of this Annual Report, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, the cash available under our 2021 Revolver and our Securitization Program will provide us with sufficient funds in order to fund our expected normal operations and debt payments over the next twelve months. Our longer-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund capital expenditures, repayment of debt, acquisitions including contingent consideration payments, strategic transactions or other investments. As described above, we have significant indebtedness outstanding under our 2021 Credit Agreement, 2028 Senior Notes, 2029 Senior Notes and Securitization Program. These capital requirements could be substantial. Our operating performance may also be affected by matters discussed under the above-referenced Risk Factors set forth elsewhere in this report. These risks, trends and uncertainties may also adversely affect our long-term liquidity.
Legal Contingencies
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings and claims. In connection with these legal proceedings and claims, management periodically reviews estimates of potential costs to be incurred by us in connection with the adjudication or settlement, if any, of these proceedings. These estimates are based on an analysis of potential litigation outcomes and settlement strategies. In accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies, loss contingencies are accrued if, in the opinion of management, an adverse outcome is probable and such outcome can be reasonably estimated. It is possible that future results for any particular quarter or annual period may be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies relating to these proceedings.
Guarantees and Other Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, of a magnitude that we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition for multiple element arrangements, allowance for doubtful accounts, reserves for excess and obsolete inventories, valuations, purchase price allocations and contingent consideration related to business combinations, expected future cash flows including growth rates, discount rates, terminal values and other assumptions used to evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets and goodwill, estimated fair values of intangible assets and goodwill, amortization methods and periods, warranty reserves, certain accrued expenses, restructuring and other related charges, stock-based compensation, contingent liabilities, tax reserves and recoverability of our net deferred tax assets and related valuation allowances. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate. Any differences may have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
The following is a discussion of what we believe to be the more significant critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Inventory
Our inventories include material, labor and overhead, and are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market. As a developer and manufacturer of high technology medical equipment and diagnostic test kits, we may be exposed to a number of economic and industry factors that could result in portions of our inventory becoming either obsolete or in excess of anticipated usage. Our policy is to establish inventory reserves when conditions exist that suggest that our inventory may be in excess of anticipated demand or is obsolete based upon our assumptions about future demand for our products and market conditions. Although considerable effort is made to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or expected usage could have a significant negative impact on the value of our inventory and our operating results.
Business Combinations
We record tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations under the purchase method of accounting. Amounts paid for each acquisition are allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. Contingent consideration, which is not deemed to be linked to continuing employment, is recorded at fair value as measured on the date of acquisition using an appropriate valuation model, such as the Monte Carlo simulation model. The value recorded is based on estimates of future financial projections under various potential scenarios, in which the model runs many simulations based on comparable companies' growth rates and their implied volatility. These cash flow projections are discounted with a risk adjusted rate. Each quarter until such contingent amounts are earned, the fair value of the liability is remeasured at each reporting period and adjusted as a component of operating expenses based on changes to the underlying assumptions. The estimates used to determine the fair value of the contingent consideration liability are subject to significant judgment, specifically projected revenues, and given the inherent uncertainties in making these estimates, actual results are likely to differ from the amounts originally recorded and could be materially different.
The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions provided by management, which consider management’s best estimate of inputs and assumptions that a market participant would use. We allocate any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to goodwill.
We generally use the income approach in which cash flow projections on an after-tax basis are discounted using a risk adjusted rate to determine the estimated fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets including developed technology, in-process research and development projects, customer relationships, and trade names. The significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of intangible assets include discount rates and certain assumptions that form the basis of the forecasted results specifically revenue growth rates. These significant assumptions are forward looking and could be affected by future economic and market conditions.
With respect to property, plant and equipment, we estimate the fair value of these assets using a combination of the cost and market approaches, depending on the component. Generally, we apply the cost or income approach as the primary methods in estimating the fair value of land and buildings as the market approach is less reliable based on potential significant differences between the property being valued and the potentially comparable sales of similar properties.
Goodwill
We test goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if events and circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Events that could indicate impairment and trigger an interim impairment assessment include, but are not limited to current economic and market conditions, including a decline in market capitalization, a significant adverse change in legal factors, business climate, operational performance of the business or key personnel, and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Our annual impairment test date is the first day of our fiscal fourth quarter.
In performing the test, we either use the qualitative assessment permitted by ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, or the single step quantitative approach prescribed under ASC 350 including amendments under ASU 2017-04. Under the qualitative approach we consider a number of factors, including the amount by which the previous quantitative test's fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting units, the forecasts in our then-current strategic plan compared to the forecasts in the previous quantitative test, an evaluation of discount rates, long-term growth rates including the terminal year rate, if tax rates would have significantly changed, an evaluation of current economic factors for both the worldwide economy and specifically the medical device industry, and any significant changes in customer and supplier relationships. We weigh these factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value. If after
performing a qualitative assessment, indicators are present, or we identify factors that cause us to believe it is appropriate to perform a more precise calculation of fair value, we would move beyond the qualitative assessment and perform a quantitative impairment test.
Under the quantitative impairment test, we perform a comparison of the reporting unit’s carrying value to its fair value. We consider a number of factors to determine the fair value of a reporting unit, including an independent valuation to conduct this test. The valuation is based upon expected future discounted operating cash flows of the reporting unit as well as analysis of recent sales and ratio comparisons of similar companies. We base the discount rate on the weighted average cost of capital, or WACC, of market participants. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, we apply the single step approach under ASU 2017-04. As a result of this simplified approach the goodwill impairment is calculated as the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value to the extent of the goodwill balance.
We conducted our fiscal 2021 annual impairment test on the first day of the fourth quarter and utilized the quantitative approach. We utilized discounted cash flows, or DCF, and market approaches to estimate the fair value of our reporting units as of June 27, 2021 and ultimately used the fair value determined by the DCF in making our impairment test conclusions. We believe we used reasonable estimates and assumptions about future revenue, cost projections, cash flows, market multiples and discount rates as of the measurement date. As a result of completing this analysis, all of our reporting units had fair values exceeding their carrying values.
At September 25, 2021, we believe that our reporting units, with goodwill aggregating $3.3 billion, were not at risk of failing the goodwill impairment test based on its current forecasts and qualitative assessment.
Since the fair value of our reporting units was determined by use of the DCF, and the key assumptions that drive the fair value in this model are the WACC, terminal values, growth rates, and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, significant judgment is applied in determining fair value. If the current economic environment were to deteriorate, this would likely result in a higher WACC because market participants would require a higher rate of return. In the DCF as the WACC increases, the fair value decreases. The other significant factor in the DCF is our projected financial information (i.e., amount and timing of expected future cash flows and growth rates) and if these assumptions were to be adversely impacted, this could result in a reduction of the fair value of a reporting unit.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and stated net of accumulated amortization and impairments. We amortize intangible assets that have finite lives using either the straight-line method, or if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefit of the asset is expected to be utilized. We evaluate the recoverability of our definite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances or business conditions indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable based on expectations of future undiscounted cash flows for each asset group. If the carrying value of an asset or asset group exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, the Company estimates the fair value of the assets, generally utilizing a discounted cash flow analysis based on the present value of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the assets using a risk-adjusted discount rate. To estimate the fair value of the assets, the Company uses market participant assumptions pursuant to ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from the sale of our products, primarily medical imaging systems and diagnostic and surgical disposable products, and related services, which are primarily support and maintenance services on our medical imaging systems. See Note 3 for further discussion of revenue recognition.
We consider revenue to be earned when all of the following criteria are met: we have a contract with a customer that creates enforceable rights and obligations; promised products or services are identified; the transaction price, or the amount that we expect to receive, including an estimate of uncertain amounts subject to a constraint to ensure revenue is not recognized in an amount that would result in a significant reversal upon resolution of the uncertainty, is determinable; and we have transferred control of the promised items to the customer. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in the contract. The transaction price for the contract is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for the goods and services expected to be transferred. A contract's transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, control of the distinct good or service is transferred. Transfer of control for our products is generally at shipment or delivery, depending on contractual terms, but occurs when title and risk of loss transfers to the customer which represents the point in time when the customer obtains the use of and substantially all of the remaining benefit of the product. As such, the performance obligation related to product sales is satisfied at a point in time. Revenue from support and maintenance contracts and extended warranties are recognized over time based on the contract term, which represents a faithful depiction of the transfer of goods and services
given the stand-ready nature of the performance obligations. Service revenue related to professional services for installation, training and repairs is recognized as the services are performed based on the specific nature of the service.
We recognize receivables when we have an unconditional right to payment, which represents the amount we expect to collect in a transaction and is most often equal to the transaction price in the contract. Payment terms are typically 30 days in the U.S. but may be longer in international markets. We treat shipping and handling costs performed after a customer obtains control of the good as a fulfillment cost and record these costs within costs of product revenue when the corresponding revenue is recognized.
Some of our contracts have multiple performance obligations. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we are required to allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. We determine the best estimate of standalone selling price using average selling prices over 3- to 12-month periods of data depending on the products or nature of the services coupled with current market considerations. If the product or service does not have a history of sales or if sales volume is not sufficient, we rely on prices set by our pricing committees or applicable marketing department adjusted for expected discounts.
We also place instruments (or equipment) at customer sites but retain title to the instrument (for example, the ThinPrep Processor, ThinPrep Imaging System, and the Panther system). The customer has the right to use the instrument for a period of time, and then we recover the cost of providing the instrument through the sales of disposables, namely tests and assays in Diagnostics and handpieces in GYN Surgical. These types of agreements include an embedded operating lease for the right to use an instrument and no instrument revenue is recognized at the time of instrument delivery. We recognize a portion of the revenue allocated to the embedded lease concurrent with the sale of disposables over the term of the agreement.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method for accounting for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, we recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of differences between the financial statement carrying amount of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and also for operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards at each reporting period. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates and laws applicable to the period and jurisdiction in which we expect the differences to affect taxable income. We evaluate both the positive and negative evidence that affects the realizability of net deferred tax assets and assess the need for a valuation allowance. The future benefit to be derived from our deferred tax assets is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income in each jurisdiction of the right type to realize the assets. We establish a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. To the extent we establish or release a valuation allowance, a tax charge or benefit will be recorded as a component of the income tax provision on the statement of operations in the reporting period that such determination is made.
We have recognized $228.6 million in net deferred tax liabilities at September 25, 2021 and $186.3 million at September 26, 2020. The increase was primarily due to purchase accounting related intangible additions to deferred liabilities in fiscal 2021. The liabilities primarily relate to deferred taxes associated with our acquisitions. The tax assets relate primarily to net operating loss carryforwards, accruals and reserves, stock-based compensation, and research credits.
Accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if, based on the technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon audit, including resolutions of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. Any change in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
As of September 25, 2021, we had $212.8 million in gross unrecognized tax benefits excluding interest, of which $197.0 million, if recognized, would reduce our effective tax rate. As of September 26, 2020, we had $197.1 million in gross unrecognized tax benefits excluding interest, of which $184.9 million, if recognized, would have reduced our effective tax rate. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act subjects a U.S. shareholder to tax on global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. The FASB Staff Q&A, Topic 740, No. 5, Accounting for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, states that an entity can make an accounting policy election to either recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or to provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred as a period expense only. The Company accounts for GILTI in the year the tax is incurred as a period cost.
In the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Judgment is required in determining our worldwide income tax provision. In our opinion, we have made adequate
provisions for income taxes for all years subject to audit. While we consider our estimates reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome will not be different than amounts reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. If our assumptions are incorrect, the differences could have a material impact on our income tax provision and operating results in the period in which such determination is made.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 15 of this Annual Report.