Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere herein. Unless otherwise noted, all dollar amounts in tables are in millions. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A.-Risk Factors" for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Senior Notes Offerings
On January 11, 2021, we issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Notes due 2029. On February 4, 2021, we issued an additional $300 million aggregate principal amount of the 5.75% Senior Notes at an issue price of 101.5% for gross proceeds of $304.5 million. We used $250 million of the proceeds from these issuances to repay a portion of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan A Facility and $655 million of the remaining proceeds to repay a portion of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan B Facility.
Amendment to the Senior Secured Credit Facility and Term Loan A Facility
In January 2021, we entered into amendments to the Senior Secured Credit Facility and the Term Loan A Facility (the "2021 Amendments") to:
•extend the maturity for approximately $237 million of the approximately $434 million outstanding loans under the Term Loan A Facility after giving effect to the application of the proceeds of the 5.75% Senior Notes offering, from February 2023 to February 2025, subject to the foregoing:
◦if on or before March 2, 2023, the 4.875% Senior Notes have not been extended, refinanced or replaced to have a maturity date after May 10, 2025 (or are not otherwise discharged, defeased or repaid by March 2, 2023), the maturity date of the Extended Term Loan A will be March 2, 2023;
◦if on or before November 9, 2024, the Term Loan B Facility under the Senior Secured Credit Agreement is not extended, refinanced or replaced to have a maturity date after May 10, 2025 (or otherwise repaid prior to November 9, 2024), the maturity date of the Extended Term Loan A will be November 9, 2024;
•extend the maturity of approximately $948 million of the $1,425 million commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility from February 2023 to February 2025, subject to the earlier springing maturity dates applicable to the Extended Term Loan A described above; and
•make certain modifications to the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement, including amendments that reduce the maximum permitted senior secured leverage ratio (the financial covenant under such agreements) for the applicable trailing twelve-month period to below the levels that had been permitted under the amendments to the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement that we entered into in July 2020 (the "2020 Amendments").
As was the case under the 2020 Amendments, the modified senior secured leverage ratio set forth in the 2021 Amendments will remain in place through the second quarter of 2022, unless earlier terminated by us, and on and after the second quarter of 2022, the senior secured leverage ratio will return to 4.75 to 1.00 (which was the applicable level prior to the effectiveness of the 2020 Amendments and 2021 Amendments).
See the pro forma debt table as of December 31, 2020 after giving effect to the foregoing refinancing transactions under the header "Financial Obligations" below. See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", and Note 20, "Subsequent Events", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the 2020 and 2021 Amendments.
Inclusion of Cartus Relocation Services in Continuing Operations
The results of the Company's global relocation operations, Cartus Relocation Services, were presented as discontinued operations commencing in the fourth quarter of 2019 pending the sale of that business to a third party. However, during the
fourth quarter of 2020, following termination of the proposed sale of that business and change in the company's expectations for sale, management determined that the held for sale and discontinued operations criteria in ASC Topic 360 and ASC Topic 205 were no longer met. As a result, the assets and liabilities of Cartus Relocation Services, previously presented as held for sale, have been reclassified to held and used on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020 and the results of Cartus Relocation Services have been reclassified from discontinued operations to continuing operations and included in the Realogy Franchise Group segment for all periods presented (see Note 18, "Segment Information", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information). Cartus Relocation Services’ assets and liabilities were measured at fair value upon reclassification and the reduction to the carrying value is reported in the Impairments line in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
CURRENT BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY TRENDS
According to the National Association of Realtors ("NAR"), during 2020, homesale transaction volume increased 14% due to a 8% increase in the average homesale price and a 6% increase in the existing homesale transactions.
Homesale transaction volume on a combined basis for Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups increased 13% during 2020 compared to 2019. Homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise Group increased 16%, as a result of a 13% increase in average homesale price and a 3% increase in existing homesale transactions, and homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group increased 9%, as a result of a 6% increase in average homesale price and a 2% increase in existing homesale transactions.
The table below shows the trend of homesale transaction volume from January to December 2020 compared to the prior year and reflects the negative impact of COVID-19 starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 and recovery late in the second quarter of 2020.
COVID-19 Crisis. A strong recovery in the residential real estate market began late in the second quarter of 2020, following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020. We attribute the recovery to date to increased demand driven by a favorable mortgage rate environment and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price. In addition, we have observed continued strength in certain trends that we believe are largely driven by behavioral changes related to the COVID-19 crisis, including home buyer preferences for certain geographies, including suburban locations and attractive tax and weather destinations and second home purchases.
We believe that the increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise Group as compared to the broader market during the second half of 2020 was primarily driven by strong performance in the high-end of the market, in particular by one of our franchised brands. In addition to the foregoing factor, we believe lower homesale transaction volume for our company owned brokerages compared to franchised brokerages during the second half of 2020 is largely attributable to geographic footprint of our company-owned brokerages, in particular in New York City, which has continued to meaningfully lag the general residential real estate market. Overall, we believe our company owned and franchise operations benefited in the second half of 2020 from geographic and high-end transaction mix.
In mid-March 2020, we began taking a series of proactive cost-saving measures in reaction to the evolving COVID-19 crisis, including salary reductions, furloughs and reductions in marketing and other spending which resulted in substantial cost-savings in the second quarter of 2020 to partially offset the decline in revenues. While these temporary cost-saving measures resulted in approximately $150 million of aggregate savings in the second and third quarter of 2020, substantially all such measures were reversed during the third quarter of 2020 based upon the significant improvement in the volume of homesale transactions and ongoing business needs. We intend to endeavor to convert a limited portion of these temporary expense reductions to permanent reductions, however, we do not expect to realize comparable cost-savings from these prior temporary initiatives in future periods, the absence of which is expected to have a negative impact on period-over-period comparisons of our expenses and margins.
There remain significant uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 crisis, including the severity, duration and extent of the pandemic (and the impact of vaccines and virus mutations) as well as whether certain beneficial consumer trends may continue, whether at the same strength or at all, and whether such trends will continue to have a positive effect on our financial results. Our business could be negatively impacted if the crisis, including adverse economic consequences of the crisis, worsen, if directives and mandates requiring businesses to again curtail or cease normal operations are reinstated, if mortgage rates rise, if beneficial consumer trends weaken (including changes in consumer behavior in connection with wide-spread vaccination), or if housing inventory constraints, across geographies and price point, limit homesale transaction growth. These negative impacts may be more pronounced in future periods and could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and liquidity.
Inventory. Continued or accelerated declines in inventory, whether attributable to the COVID-19 crisis or otherwise, may result in insufficient supply to meet any increased demand driven by the lower interest rate environment and beneficial consumer trends. Additional inventory pressure arises from periods of slow or decelerated new housing construction. Even before the COVID-19 crisis, low housing inventory levels had been an industry-wide concern, in particular in certain highly sought-after geographies and at lower price points. According to NAR, the inventory of existing homes for sale in the U.S. decreased approximately 24% from 1.4 million as of December 2019 to 1.1 million as of December 2020. As a result, inventory has decreased from 3.0 months of supply in December 2019 to 1.9 months as of December 2020. These levels continue to be significantly below the 10-year average of 4.8 months, the 15-year average of 6.0 months and the 25-year average of 5.6 months.
While insufficient inventory levels generally have a negative impact on homesale transaction growth, during the six months ended December 31, 2020, Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups saw a 17% increase in homesale transactions on a combined basis compared to the same period in 2019. We believe that during the second half of 2020, the intensified pace of inventory supply turnover contributed to the reported low levels of inventory, without a correlating decrease in homesale transactions. For example, at our company owned Coldwell Banker brokerages, the speed at which a home that was listed for sale went under contract reduced to a median of 19 days and 21 days on the market in the third and fourth quarter of 2020, respectively, from a median of 31 days and 37 days on the market in the third and fourth quarter of 2019, respectively. There is significant uncertainty as to whether the pattern seen in the second half of 2020 of low inventory, but increased homesale transactions driven by supply turnover will continue as constraints in home inventory levels have typically had and may continue to have an adverse impact on the number of homesale transactions closed by Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups. In addition, in periods of rapid inventory turnover there is an increased risk that new homesale unit listings will not keep pace with demand, which could also negatively impact homesale transaction volume.
Unemployment. Following the onset of the pandemic, many companies announced reductions in work weeks and salaries, although many people have recently returned to the labor market following weeks or months of COVID-19 induced restrictions. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, while the U.S. unemployment rate declined to 6.7% in December 2020, easing from a high of 14.8% reached in April 2020, this jobless rate still represents a 3.2% increase compared to February 2020. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact employment levels and economic activity for a substantial period, or if jobs recovery continues to slow or worsens, it could lead to an increase in loan defaults and foreclosure activity and may make it more difficult for potential home buyers to arrange financing.
Mortgage Rates. We have been in an unusually prolonged period of historic low interest rates. A wide variety of factors can contribute to mortgage rates, including federal interest rates, demand, consumer income, unemployment levels and foreclosure rates. Yields on the 10-year Treasury note hit all-time lows during the COVID-19 crisis and as of December 31, 2020 were 0.93% as compared to 1.92% as of December 30, 2019. In addition, the benchmark interest rate of the Federal Reserve Board has been at a range of 0% to 0.25% since March 15, 2020. According to Freddie Mac, mortgage rates on commitments for a 30-year, conventional, fixed-rate first mortgage lowered to an average of 3.11% for 2020 compared to 3.94% for 2019. On December 31, 2020, mortgage rates were 2.68%, according to Freddie Mac.
Our financial results are favorably impacted by a low interest rate environment as a decline in mortgage rates generally drives increased refinancing activity and homesale transactions. For example, the Company recorded equity earnings from our mortgage origination joint venture, Guaranteed Rate Affinity, of $126 million and $15 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 which represented approximately 17% of the Company's Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 (as compared to 3% of the Company's Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019). Realogy Title Group also experienced a 146% increase in the number of title and closing units processed as a result of homeowners refinancing their home loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior period. The refinancing volume of these businesses are inherently cyclical and this level of volume may not be maintained or may meaningfully decrease with fluctuations in market conditions such as mortgage rates.
Due to the economic effects of the COVID-19 crisis, banks may tighten mortgage standards, even as rates decline, which could limit the availability of mortgage financing. In addition, many individuals and businesses have benefited and may be continuing to benefit from one or more federal and/or state monetary or fiscal programs meant to assist in the navigation of COVID-related financial challenges (including mortgage forbearance programs), and the termination or substantial curtailment of, or failure to extend, such programs could have a negative impact on their financial health. Increases in mortgage rates adversely impact housing affordability and we have been and could again be negatively impacted by a rising interest rate environment.
Affordability. The fixed housing affordability index, as reported by NAR, increased from 167 for December 2019 to 172 for December 2020. A housing affordability index above 100 signifies that a family earning the median income has sufficient income to purchase a median-priced home, assuming a 20 percent down payment and ability to qualify for a mortgage. Housing affordability may be impacted in future periods by increases in average homesale price and the low inventory environment as well as the rise in unemployment and economic challenges as a result of the COVID-19 crisis, but we are unable to estimate the extent due to the uncertainties of the COVID-19 crisis and its related impact on the U.S. economy.
Recruitment and Retention of Independent Sales Agents; Commission Income. Recruitment and retention of independent sales agents and independent sales agent teams are critical to the business and financial results of a brokerage, including our company owned brokerages and those operated by our affiliated franchisees. In 2020, agents affiliated with our company owned brokerages grew 2% and, based on information from such franchisees, agents affiliated with our U.S. franchisees remained flat, in each case as compared to 2019. Aggressive competition for the affiliation of independent sales agents has negatively impacted recruitment and retention efforts at both Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups, in particular with respect to more productive sales agents, and has previously had and may continue to have a negative impact on our market share. These competitive market factors also may continue to put upward pressure on the average share of commissions earned by independent sales agents and may impact our franchisees; such franchisees have and may continue to seek reduced royalty fee arrangements or other incentives from us to offset the continued business pressures on such franchisees, which would result in a reduction in royalty fees paid to us.
This competitive environment has continued throughout most of the COVID-19 crisis, particularly at the outset of the pandemic, when we took proactive measures to preserve liquidity, including in connection with our recruitment and retention efforts. For additional information, see "Item 1.-Business-Housing Market and Market Share" and "-Competition."
Non-Traditional Market Participants. While real estate brokers using historical real estate brokerage models typically compete for business primarily on the basis of services offered, brokerage commission, reputation, utilization of technology and personal contacts, participants pursuing non-traditional methods of marketing real estate may compete in other ways, including companies that employ technologies intended to disrupt historical real estate brokerage models or minimize or eliminate the role traditional brokers and sales agents perform in the homesale transaction process.
A growing number of companies are competing in non-traditional ways for a portion of the gross commission income generated by homesale transactions. For example, many iBuying business models seek to disintermediate real estate brokers
and independent sales agents from buyers and sellers of homes by reducing or eliminating brokerage commissions that may be earned on those transactions. In October 2020, we continued to evolve our agent-focused iBuying offerings through the launch of a joint venture with Home Partners of America intended to expand the geographic reach of our RealSure program, which is available in 11 U.S. markets as of December 31, 2020. Under the RealSure Sell program, sellers with qualifying properties receive a cash offer valid for 45 days immediately upon listing, and during this time frame have the opportunity to pursue a better price by marketing their property with an affiliated independent sales agent. Sellers who are enrolled in RealSure Sell can utilize RealSure Buy to make a more competitive offer on their next home before their current home is sold by leveraging their RealSure Sell cash offer.
In addition, the concentration and market power of the top listing aggregators allow them to monetize their platforms by a variety of actions, including but not limited to, setting up competing brokerages and/or expanding their offerings to include products (including agent tools) and services ancillary to the real estate transaction, such as title, escrow and mortgage origination services, that compete with services offered by us, charging significant referral, listing and display fees, diluting the relationship between agents and brokers and between agents and the consumer, tying referrals to use of their products, consolidating and leveraging data, and engaging in preferential or exclusionary practices to favor or disfavor other industry participants. These actions divert and reduce the earnings of other industry participants, including our company owned and franchised brokerages. Aggregators could intensify their current business tactics or introduce new programs that could be materially disadvantageous to our business and other brokerage participants in the industry and such tactics could further increase pressures on the profitability of our company owned and franchised brokerages and affiliated independent sales agents, reduce our franchisor service revenue and dilute our relationships with our franchisees and our and our franchisees' relationships with affiliated independent sales agents and buyers and sellers of homes. For example, one dominant listing aggregator recently launched a brokerage with employee sales agents in several locations to support its iBuying offering and has joined many local multiple listing services, known as MLSs, as a participating broker to gain electronic access directly to real estate listings rather than relying on disparate electronic feeds from other brokers participating in the MLSs or MLS syndication feeds.
New Development. Realogy Brokerage Group has relationships with developers, primarily in major cities, in particular New York City, to provide marketing and brokerage services in new developments. New development closings can vary significantly from year to year due to timing matters that are outside of our control, including long cycle times and irregular project completion timing. In addition, the new development industry has also experienced significant disruption due to the COVID-19 crisis. Accordingly, earnings attributable to this business can fluctuate meaningfully from year to year, impacting both homesale transaction volume and the share of gross commission income we realize on such transactions.
Relocation Spending. Global corporate spending on relocation services has continued to shift to lower cost relocation benefits as corporate clients engage in cost reduction initiatives and/or restructuring programs, as well as changes in employment relocation trends. As a result of a shift in the mix of services and number of services being delivered per move, our relocation operations have been increasingly subject to a competitive pricing environment and lower average revenue per relocation. Lower volume growth, in particular with respect to global relocation activity, has also impacted the operating results of our relocation operations. The COVID-19 crisis as well as recent U.S. immigration and visa restrictions have exacerbated these trends. These factors are expected to continue to put pressure on the financial results of Cartus Relocation Services (part of the Realogy Franchise Group segment).
Leads Generation. Through Realogy Leads Group, a part of Realogy Franchise Group, we seek to provide high-quality leads to affiliated agents, including through real estate benefit programs that provide home-buying and selling assistance to members of organizations such as credit unions and interest groups that have established members who are buying or selling a home as well as to consumers and corporations who have expressed interest in a certain brand, product or service (such as relocation services). We operate several real estate benefit programs, including a program with a large long-term client as well as other programs we have launched in the past 18 months, including AARP® Real Estate Benefits. There can be no assurance that we will be able to maintain or expand these programs, but even if we are successful in these efforts, such programs may not generate a meaningful number of high-quality leads.
Existing Homesales
For the year ended December 31, 2020, NAR existing homesale transactions increased to 5.6 million homes or up 6% compared to 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, homesale transactions on a combined basis for Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups increased 3% compared to 2019 due primarily to a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began late in the second quarter of 2020, following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We attribute the recovery to date to increased demand driven by a favorable mortgage rate environment, certain favorable consumer trends, and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price, partially offset by the impact of competition, the loss of certain franchisees and the geographic concentration of Realogy Brokerage Group. The annual and quarterly year-over-year trends in homesale transactions are as follows:
_______________
(a) Historical existing homesale data is as of the most recent NAR press release, which is subject to sampling error.
(b) Existing homesale data, on a seasonally adjusted basis, is as of the most recent Fannie Mae press release.
As of their most recent releases, NAR is forecasting existing homesale transactions to increase 15% in 2021 and to decrease 1% in 2022 while Fannie Mae is forecasting existing homesale transactions to increase 7% in 2021 and to decrease 5% in 2022.
Existing Homesale Price
In 2020, NAR existing homesale average price increased 8% compared to 2019. In 2020, average homesale price on a combined basis for Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups increased 10% compared to 2019 which consisted of a 13% increase in average homesale price for Realogy Franchise Group and a 6% increase in average homesale price for Realogy Brokerage Group. We believe that the delta between Realogy Brokerage Group and Realogy Franchise Group in 2020 was primarily driven by strong performance by Realogy Franchise Group in the high-end market, in particular by one of our franchised brands, as well as Realogy Brokerage Group's geographic footprint, in particular in New York City. We believe that the delta between Realogy Franchise Group and NAR in 2020 was primarily driven by particularly strong performance by one of Realogy Franchise Group's brands in the high-end of the market. The annual and quarterly year-over-year trends in the price of homes are as follows:
_______________
(a) Historical homesale price data is for existing homesale average price and is as of the most recent NAR press release.
(b) Existing homesale price data is for median price and is as of the most recent Fannie Mae press release.
As of their most recent releases, NAR is forecasting median existing homesale price to increase 7% in 2021 and 3% in 2022 while Fannie Mae is forecasting median existing homesale price to increase 8% in 2021 and 3% in 2022.
KEY DRIVERS OF OUR BUSINESSES
Within Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups, we measure operating performance using the following key operating metrics: (i) closed homesale sides, which represents either the "buy" side or the "sell" side of a homesale transaction, (ii) average homesale price, which represents the average selling price of closed homesale transactions, and (iii) average homesale broker commission rate, which represents the average commission rate earned on either the "buy" side or "sell" side of a homesale transaction.
For Realogy Franchise Group, we also use net royalty per side, which represents the royalty payment to Realogy Franchise Group for each homesale transaction side taking into account royalty rates, average broker commission rates, volume incentives achieved and other incentives. We utilize net royalty per side as it includes the impact of changes in average homesale price as well as all incentives and represents the royalty revenue impact of each incremental side.
For Realogy Brokerage Group, we also use gross commission income per side, which represents gross commission income divided by closed homesale sides. Gross commission income includes commissions earned in homesale transactions and certain other activities, primarily leasing transactions. Realogy Brokerage Group, as a franchisee of Realogy Franchise Group, pays a royalty fee of approximately 6% per transaction to Realogy Franchise Group from the commission earned on a real estate transaction. The remainder of gross commission income is split between the broker (Realogy Brokerage Group) and the independent sales agent in accordance with their applicable independent contractor agreement (which specifies the portion of the broker commission to be paid to the agent), which varies by each agent agreement.
In Realogy Title Group, operating performance is evaluated using the following key metrics: (i) purchase title and closing units, which represent the number of title and closing units we process as a result of home purchases, (ii) refinance title and closing units, which represent the number of title and closing units we process as a result of homeowners refinancing their home loans, and (iii) average fee per closing unit, which represents the average fee we earn on purchase title and refinancing title sides. Results are favorably impacted by the low mortgage rate environment. An increase or decrease in homesale transactions will impact the financial results of Realogy Title Group; however, their financial results are not significantly impacted by a change in homesale price.
The following table presents our drivers for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. See "Results of Operations" below for a discussion as to how these drivers affected our business for the periods presented.
_______________
(a)Includes all franchisees except for Realogy Brokerage Group.
A decline in the number of homesale transactions and/or decline in homesale prices could adversely affect our results of operations by: (i) reducing the royalties we receive from our franchisees, (ii) reducing the commissions our company owned brokerage operations earn, (iii) reducing the demand for our title, escrow and settlement and underwriting services, and (iv) increasing the risk of franchisee default due to lower homesale volume. Our results could also be negatively affected by a decline in commission rates charged by brokers or greater commission payments to sales agents or by an increase in volume or other incentives paid to franchisees.
With the exception of 2020, since 2014, we have experienced approximately a one basis point decline in the average homesale broker commission rate each year, which we believe has been largely attributable to increases in average homesale prices (as higher priced homes tend to have a lower broker commission) and, to a lesser extent, competitors providing fewer or similar services for a reduced fee.
Royalty fees are charged to all franchisees pursuant to the terms of the relevant franchise agreements and are included in each of the real estate brands' franchise disclosure documents. Most of our third-party franchisees are subject to a 6% royalty rate and entitled to volume incentives, although a royalty fee generally equal to 5% of franchisee commission (capped at a set amount per independent sales agent per year) is applicable to franchisees operating under the capped fee model that was launched for our Better Homes and Gardens® Real Estate franchise business in January 2019. Volume incentives are calculated as a progressive percentage of the applicable franchisee's eligible annual gross commission income and generally result in a net or effective royalty rate ranging from 6% to 3% for the franchisee (prior to taking into account other incentives that may be applicable to the franchisee). Volume incentives increase or decrease as the franchisee's gross commission income generated increases or decreases, respectively. We have the right to adjust the annual volume incentive tables on an annual basis in response to changing market conditions. In addition, certain of our franchisees (including some of our largest franchisees) have a flat royalty rate of less than 6% and are not eligible for volume incentives.
Other incentives may also be used as consideration to attract new franchisees, grow franchisees (including through independent sales agent recruitment) or extend existing franchise agreements, although in contrast to volume incentives, the majority of other incentives are not homesale transaction based.
Transaction volume growth has exceeded royalty revenue growth due primarily to the growth in gross commission income generated by our top 250 franchisees and our increased use of other sales incentives, both of which directly impact royalty revenue. Over the past several years, our top 250 franchisees have grown faster than our other franchisees through organic growth and market consolidation. If the amount of gross commission income generated by our top 250 franchisees continues to grow at a quicker pace relative to our other franchisees, we would expect our royalty revenue to continue to increase, but at a slower pace than homesale transaction volume. Likewise, our royalty revenue would continue to increase, but at a slower pace than homesale transaction volume, if the gross commission income generated by all of our franchisees grows faster than the applicable annual volume incentive table increase or if we increase our use of standard volume or other incentives. However, in the event that the gross commission income generated by our franchisees increases as a result of increased transaction volume, we would expect to recognize an increase in overall royalty payments to us.
We face significant competition from other national real estate brokerage brand franchisors for franchisees and we expect that the trend of increasing incentives will continue in the future in order to attract, retain, and help grow certain franchisees. We expect to experience pressures on net royalty per side, largely due to the impact of competitive market factors noted above, continued concentration among our top 250 franchisees, and the impact of affiliated franchisees of our Better Homes and Gardens® Real Estate brand moving to the "capped fee model" we adopted in 2019; however, these pressures were offset by increases in homesale prices in the three and twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2020.
Realogy Brokerage Group has a significant concentration of real estate brokerage offices and transactions in geographic regions where home prices are at the higher end of the U.S. real estate market, particularly the east and west coasts, while Realogy Franchise Group has franchised offices that are more widely dispersed across the United States. Accordingly, operating results and homesale statistics may differ between Realogy Brokerage Group and Realogy Franchise Group based upon geographic presence and the corresponding homesale activity in each geographic region. In addition, the share of commissions earned by independent sales agents directly impacts the margin earned by Realogy Brokerage Group. Such share of commissions earned by independent sales agents varies by region and commission schedules are generally progressive to incentivize sales agents to achieve higher levels of production. Commission share has been and we expect will continue to be subject to upward pressure in favor of the independent sales agent for a variety of factors, including more aggressive recruitment and retention activities taken by us and our competitors as well as growth in independent sales agent teams.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Discussed below are our consolidated results of operations and the results of operations for each of our reportable segments. The reportable segments presented below represent our segments for which separate financial information is available and which is utilized on a regular basis by our chief operating decision maker to assess performance and to allocate resources. In identifying our reportable segments, we also consider the nature of services provided by our segments. Management evaluates the operating results of each of our reportable segments based upon revenue and Operating EBITDA. Operating EBITDA is defined by us as net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net, income taxes, and other items that are not core to the operating activities of the Company such as restructuring charges, former parent legacy items, gains or losses on the early extinguishment of debt, impairments, gains or losses on discontinued operations and gains or losses on the sale of investments or other assets. Our presentation of Operating EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our consolidated results comprised the following:
Net revenues increased $351 million or 6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by higher homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group and Realogy Franchise Group and an increase in volume at Realogy Title Group due to a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began late in the second quarter of 2020, following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We attribute the recovery to date to increased demand driven by a favorable mortgage rate environment and low inventory contributing to higher average homesale price. In addition, we have observed continued strength in certain trends that we believe are largely driven by behavioral changes related to the COVID-19 crisis, including home buyer preferences for certain geographies, including suburban locations and attractive tax and weather destinations and second home purchases.
Total expenses increased $753 million or 12% compared to 2019 primarily due to:
•non-cash impairments of $682 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $271 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-cash impairments during the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
◦a goodwill impairment charge of $413 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group during the first quarter of 2020;
◦an impairment charge of $30 million related to Realogy Franchise Group's trademarks during the first quarter of 2020;
◦$133 million of reserves recorded during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (while Cartus Relocation Services was held for sale) to reduce the net assets to the estimated proceeds which were included in Impairments in connection with the reclassification of Cartus Relocation Services as continuing operations during the fourth quarter of 2020;
◦a goodwill impairment charge of $22 million related to Cartus Relocation Services during the fourth quarter of 2020;
◦an impairment charge of $34 million related to Cartus Relocation Services' trademarks during the fourth quarter of 2020; and
◦other asset impairments of $50 million primarily related to lease asset impairments,
compared to a non-cash impairments during the year ended December 31, 2019, which includes a goodwill impairment charge of $237 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group, a $22 million reduction to record net assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell, for Cartus Relocation Services which was presented as held for sale at December 31, 2019 and $12 million of other impairment charges primarily related to lease asset impairments. See Note 5, "Goodwill and Intangible Assets", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information;
•a $371 million increase in commission and other sales agent-related costs primarily due to an increase in homesale transaction volume as well as a result of higher agent commission costs primarily driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruitment and retention efforts, and business and geographic mix;
•a $15 million increase in restructuring costs;
•an $8 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the refinancing transactions in June 2020 compared to a $5 million net gain on the early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the repurchase of Senior Notes during the third quarter of 2019; and
•a $10 million increase in operating and general and administrative expenses primarily due to higher employee incentive accruals, partially offset by lower employee-related, occupancy and other operating costs as a result of temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives in the second and third quarter of 2020,
partially offset by:
•a $49 million decrease in marketing expense primarily due to the absence of in person meetings and conferences and lower advertising costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020; and
•a $4 million net decrease in interest expense primarily due to LIBOR rate decreases and lower revolver borrowings, partially offset by a $12 million increase in expense related to mark-to-market adjustments for interest rate swaps that resulted in losses of $51 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to losses of $39 million during the same period of 2019.
Equity in earnings were $131 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to earnings of $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an improvement in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity at Realogy Title Group. Equity in earnings for Guaranteed Rate Affinity was $126 million, representing approximately 17% of the Company's Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020, increasing by $111 million from $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This improvement was the result of the low mortgage rate environment, an increase in refinancing transactions and improved margins in the venture. Equity in earnings for Realogy Title Group's other equity method investments was $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which increased by $2 million from $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $67 million of restructuring costs primarily related to the Company's restructuring program focused on office consolidation and instituting operational efficiencies to drive profitability. Additional facility and operational efficiencies were identified and implemented in the second half of 2020 and additional facility initiatives are expected in 2021. The two most significant lease impairments recognized by the Company are the corporate headquarters in Madison, New Jersey which has a lease term expiring in December 2029 for which approximately 44% of the space (approximately 120,000 square feet) is impaired and the relocation service's main corporate operations in Danbury, Connecticut which has a lease term expiring in November 2030 with an early termination date in November 2025. The Company expects the estimated total cost of the program to be approximately $168 million, with $112 million incurred to date and $56 million remaining primarily related to future expenses as a result of reducing the leased-office footprints at the locations discussed above. See Note 12, "Restructuring Costs", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The provision for income taxes was a benefit of $104 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an expense of $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective tax rate was 23% and negative 8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 11, "Income Taxes", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and a reconciliation of the Company’s effective income tax rate.
The following table reflects the results of each of our reportable segments during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
_______________
* not meaningful
(a)Includes the elimination of transactions between segments, which consists of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group of $316 million and $293 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(b)Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020 include $15 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $37 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $4 million at Realogy Title Group and $11 million at Corporate and Other. Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2019 include $14 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $25 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $3 million at Realogy Title Group and $10 million at Corporate and Other.
(c)Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2020 include:
•a goodwill impairment charge of $413 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group during the first quarter of 2020;
•an impairment charge of $30 million related to Realogy Franchise Group's trademarks during the first quarter of 2020;
•$133 million of reserves recorded during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (while Cartus Relocation Services was held for sale) to reduce the net assets to the estimated proceeds which were included in Impairments in connection with the reclassification of Cartus Relocation Services as continuing operations during the fourth quarter of 2020;
•a goodwill impairment charge of $22 million related to Cartus Relocation Services during the fourth quarter of 2020;
•an impairment charge of $34 million related to Cartus Relocation Services' trademarks during the fourth quarter of 2020; and
•other asset impairments of $50 million primarily related to lease asset impairments.
Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2019 include a goodwill impairment charge of $237 million related to Realogy Brokerage Group, a $22 million reduction to record net assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell, for Cartus Relocation Services which was presented as held for sale at December 31, 2019 and $12 million of other impairment charges primarily related to lease asset impairments.
(d)Former parent legacy items are recorded in Corporate and Other.
(e)Loss (gain) on the early extinguishment of debt is recorded in Corporate and Other. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a net gain on the early extinguishment of debt of $5 million which consisted of a $10 million gain as a result of the repurchase of Senior Notes completed in the third quarter of 2019, partially offset by a $5 million loss as a result of the refinancing transactions in the first quarter of 2019.
As described in the aforementioned table, Operating EBITDA margin for "Total Company" expressed as a percentage of revenues increased 2 percentage points to 12% from 10% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. On a segment basis, Realogy Franchise Group's margin increased 3 percentage points to 56% from 53% primarily due to an increase in royalty revenue as a result of an increase in homesale transaction volume, partially offset by a decrease in revenue related to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements. Realogy Brokerage Group's margin increased 1 percentage point to 1% from zero primarily due to lower operating expenses principally driven by temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives, partially offset by higher agent commission costs driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix. Realogy
Title Group's margin increased 20 percentage points to 31% from 11% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a $111 million increase in equity in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity as a result of the low mortgage rate environment, an increase in refinancing transactions and improved margins in the venture, as well as an increase in underwriter, refinance and resale activity at Realogy Title Group.
Corporate and Other Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 declined $44 million to negative $142 million primarily due to higher employee incentive accruals.
Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups on a Combined Basis
The following table reflects Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups' results before the intercompany royalties and marketing fees as well as on a combined basis to show the Operating EBITDA contribution of these business segments to the overall Operating EBITDA of the Company. The Operating EBITDA margin for the combined segments remained flat at 12% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019:
_______________
(a)The segment numbers noted above do not reflect the impact of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group to Realogy Franchise Group of $316 million and $293 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Realogy Franchise Group
Revenues decreased $99 million to $1,059 million and Operating EBITDA decreased $22 million to $594 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
Third-party domestic franchisee royalty revenue increased $35 million primarily due to a 16% increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Franchise Group, which consisted of a 13% increase in average homesale price and a 3% increase in existing homesale transactions, and a $24 million increase in intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group.
Realogy Franchise Group revenue includes intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group of $306 million and $282 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are eliminated in consolidation against the expense reflected in Realogy Brokerage Group's results.
Royalty revenue increases were offset by:
•a $113 million decrease in service and other revenue primarily related to a $110 million decrease in relocation service revenue, driven by lower volume largely related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decrease in revenues from our lead generation and relocation operations, driven by lower volume and lead transactions primarily due to discontinuation of the USAA real estate benefit program that ceased new enrollments in the third quarter of 2019, which at the time was our largest real estate benefit program;
•a $28 million decrease in registration revenue and brand marketing fund revenue (associated with the waiver of marketing fees from affiliates in the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic), which had a related expense decrease of $37 million resulting in a net $9 million net positive impact on Operating EBITDA, due to the absence of in person meetings and conferences and lower advertising costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•a $17 million decrease in revenue related to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements.
The $22 million decrease in Operating EBITDA was primarily due to the $99 million decrease in revenues discussed above and $7 million of higher expense for bad debt primarily due to the early termination of third party listing fee agreements. These Operating EBITDA decreases were partially offset by a $47 million decrease in employee and other operating costs principally due to cost savings initiatives, including temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives
during the second and third quarters of 2020, partially offset by higher employee incentive accruals, and the $37 million decrease in marketing expense discussed above.
Realogy Brokerage Group
Revenues increased $333 million to $4,742 million and Operating EBITDA increased $44 million to $48 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
The revenue increase of $333 million was primarily driven by a 9% increase in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group which primarily consisted of a 6% increase in average homesale price and a 2% increase in existing homesale transactions. There was a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began in the late second quarter of 2020 following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020.
Operating EBITDA increased $44 million primarily due to:
•the $333 million increase in revenues discussed above;
•a $76 million decrease in employee-related, occupancy and other operating costs due primarily to temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives, partially offset by higher employee incentive accruals;
•a $27 million decrease in marketing expense due to lower advertising costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•a $3 million gain on the sale of assets,
partially offset by:
•a $371 million increase in commission expenses paid to independent sales agents from $3,156 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $3,527 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Commission expense increased primarily as a result of the impact of higher homesale transaction volume as discussed above, as well as higher agent commission costs primarily driven by a shift in mix to more productive, higher compensated agents, the impact of recruiting and retention efforts, as well as business and geographic mix; and
•a $24 million increase in royalties paid to Realogy Franchise Group from $282 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $306 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with the homesale transaction volume increase as described above.
Realogy Title Group
Revenues increased $140 million to $736 million and Operating EBITDA increased $158 million to $226 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
Revenues increased $140 million primarily as a result of a $68 million increase in underwriter revenue (including a $61 million increase in underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents, which had a $10 million net positive impact on Operating EBITDA due to the related expense increase of $51 million) and a $50 million increase in refinance revenue due to an increase in activity in the refinance market driven by the favorable interest rate environment. In addition there was a $21 million increase in resale revenue attributable to increased purchase unit activity due to a strong recovery in the residential real estate market which began in the late second quarter of 2020 following a period of sharp decline in homesale transactions starting in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020.
Operating EBITDA increased $158 million primarily as a result of the $140 million increase in revenues discussed above and a $113 million increase in equity in earnings mostly related to Guaranteed Rate Affinity due to the favorable mortgage rate environment and improved margins in the venture. These increases were partially offset by a $51 million increase in variable operating costs related to the increase in underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents discussed above where the revenue and expense are recorded on a gross basis and a $44 million increase in employee and other operating costs due to higher variable costs as a result of higher volume and higher employee incentive accruals, partially offset by temporary COVID-19 related cost savings initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2018
Our consolidated results comprised the following:
Net revenues decreased $209 million or 3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily driven by lower homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group.
Total expenses increased $189 million or 3% compared to 2018 primarily due to:
•non-cash impairments of $271 million including a goodwill impairment charge of $237 million during the third quarter of 2019 (which reduced the net carrying value of Realogy Brokerage Group by $180 million after accounting for the related income tax benefit of $57 million), a $22 million adjustment to record net assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell, for Cartus Relocation Services which was presented as held for sale at December 31, 2019 and $12 million of other impairment charges primarily related to lease asset impairments;
•a $60 million net increase in interest expense primarily due to a $35 million net expense related to our mark-to-market adjustments for our interest rate swaps that resulted in losses of $39 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to losses of $4 million during the same period of 2018, and a $25 million increase in interest expense primarily due to the refinancing of Senior Notes in the first quarter of 2019; and
•an increase of $10 million in variable operating costs at Realogy Title Group primarily due to an increase in refinance revenue and underwriter revenue.
The expense increases were partially offset by:
•a $126 million decrease in commission and other sales agent-related costs primarily as a result of the impact of lower homesale transactions at Realogy Brokerage Group;
•a $5 million net gain on the early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a $7 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2018; and
•a $9 million decrease in employee-related costs, professional fees and other operating costs.
Earnings from equity investments were $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to losses of $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to an improvement in earnings of Guaranteed Rate Affinity.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $52 million of restructuring costs primarily related to the Company's restructuring program focused on office consolidation and instituting operational efficiencies to drive profitability.
The provision for income taxes was an expense of $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to an expense of $65 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The following table reflects the results of each of our reportable segments during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
_______________
* not meaningful
(a)Includes the elimination of transactions between segments, which consists of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group of $293 million and $306 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(b)Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2018 includes $2 million of amortization expense related to Guaranteed Rate Affinity's purchase accounting included in the "Equity in (earnings) losses of unconsolidated entities" line on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
(c)Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2019 include $14 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $25 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $3 million at Realogy Title Group and $10 million at Corporate and Other. Restructuring charges incurred for the year ended December 31, 2018 include $14 million at Realogy Franchise Group, $37 million at Realogy Brokerage Group, $4 million at Realogy Title Group and $3 million at Corporate and Other.
(d)Non-cash impairments for the year ended December 31, 2019 include a goodwill impairment charge of $237 million during the third quarter (which reduced the net carrying value of Realogy Brokerage Group by $180 million after accounting for the related income tax benefit of $57 million), a $22 million adjustment to record net assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value, less costs to sell, for Cartus Relocation Services which was presented as held for sale at December 31, 2019 and $12 million of other impairment charges primarily related to lease asset impairments.
(e)Former parent legacy items and (Gain) loss on the early extinguishment of debt are recorded in Corporate and Other. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a gain on the early extinguishment of debt of $5 million which consisted of a $10 million gain as a result of the repurchase of Senior Notes completed in the third quarter of 2019, partially offset by a $5 million loss as a result of the refinancing transactions in the first quarter of 2019.
As described in the aforementioned table, Operating EBITDA margin for "Total Company" expressed as a percentage of revenues decreased 1 percentage point to 10% from 11% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. On a segment basis, Realogy Franchise Group's margin decreased 1 percentage point to 53% from 54% primarily due to a decrease in royalty revenues partially offset by a decrease in employee-related costs. Realogy Brokerage Group's margin decreased 1 percentage point to zero from 1% primarily due to lower transaction volume during 2019 compared to 2018. Realogy Title Group's margin increased 3 percentage points to 11% from 8% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 primarily as a result of improved earnings from equity method investments.
Corporate and Other Operating EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 declined $13 million to negative $98 million primarily due to an increase in employee-related costs, professional fees and other costs.
Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups on a Combined Basis
The following table reflects Realogy Franchise and Brokerage Groups' results before the intercompany royalties and marketing fees, as well as on a combined basis to show the Operating EBITDA contribution of these business units to the overall Operating EBITDA of the Company. The Operating EBITDA margin for the combined segments decreased 1 percentage point from 13% to 12% primarily due to lower transaction volume during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018:
_______________
(a)The segment numbers noted above do not reflect the impact of intercompany royalties and marketing fees paid by Realogy Brokerage Group to Realogy Franchise Group of $293 million and $306 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Realogy Franchise Group
Revenues decreased $40 million to $1,158 million and Operating EBITDA decreased $34 million to $616 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 2018.
Revenues decreased $40 million primarily as a result of:
•a $29 million decrease in service and other revenue primarily related to a $22 million net decrease in revenue from our relocation and lead generation operations driven by lower volume;
•a $13 million decrease in intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group;
•an $8 million decrease in third-party domestic franchisee royalty revenue primarily due to flat homesale transaction volume with an increase in the number of transactions closed by our top 250 franchisees, the impact of the "capped fee model" that was launched for our Better Homes and Gardens® Real Estate franchise business in January 2019 and a decrease in the average broker commission rate; and
•a $2 million decrease in international royalties,
partially offset by a $3 million increase in international area development fee revenue as a result of contract terminations of non-performing master franchisors.
Registration revenue and brand marketing fund revenue increased $9 million and related expenses increased $11 million, primarily due to the level and timing of advertising spending and conferences including the RGX event during 2019 compared with 2018.
Realogy Franchise Group revenue includes intercompany royalties received from Realogy Brokerage Group of $282 million and $295 million during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which are eliminated in consolidation against the expense reflected in Realogy Brokerage Group's results.
The $34 million decrease in Operating EBITDA was principally due to the $23 million decrease in royalty revenues, the $29 million decrease in service and other revenues and the net $2 million of marketing expense discussed above, as well as $3 million higher expense for bad debt and notes reserves, partially offset by a $17 million decrease in net employee-related and other costs primarily due to cost savings initiatives and a $3 million increase in international area development fee revenue as a result of contract terminations discussed above.
Realogy Brokerage Group
Revenues decreased $198 million to $4,409 million and Operating EBITDA decreased $40 million to $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 2018.
The revenue decrease of $198 million was primarily driven by a 4% decrease in homesale transaction volume at Realogy Brokerage Group. Realogy Brokerage Group saw lower transaction volume primarily driven by the competitive environment as well as our geographic concentration.
Operating EBITDA decreased $40 million primarily due to the $198 million decrease in revenues discussed above partially offset by:
•a $126 million decrease in commission expenses paid to independent sales agents from $3,282 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $3,156 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Commission expense decreased primarily as a result of the impact of lower homesale transaction volume as discussed above;
•a $19 million decrease in other costs including occupancy costs, employee-related costs and other operating costs; and
•a $13 million decrease in royalties paid to Realogy Franchise Group from $295 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $282 million in 2019.
Realogy Title Group
Revenues increased $16 million to $596 million and Operating EBITDA increased $19 million to $68 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 2018.
Revenues increased $16 million primarily as a result of a $20 million increase in refinance revenue due to an increase in activity in the refinance market and a $14 million increase in underwriter revenue due to an increase of underwriter premiums as a result of a shift in mix to unaffiliated agents, partially offset by a $17 million decrease in resale revenue due to a decline in purchase transactions.
Operating EBITDA increased $19 million primarily as a result of the $16 million increase in revenue discussed above and a $20 million increase in earnings from equity investments primarily related to Guaranteed Rate Affinity during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 2018. These increases were partially offset by an increase of $10 million in operating costs primarily due to an increase in refinance revenue and underwriter revenue with unaffiliated agents where the revenue and expense is recorded on a gross basis and a $7 million increase in employee related and other costs.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Financial Condition
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total assets decreased $609 million primarily due to:
•a $550 million decrease in goodwill primarily as a result of the impairments at Realogy Brokerage Group and Cartus Relocations Services during 2020;
•a $110 million net decrease in franchise agreements and other amortizable intangible assets primarily due to amortization;
•a $100 million net decrease in operating lease assets;
•a $64 million decrease in trademarks as a result of the impairments at Realogy Franchise Group during 2020 related to franchise tradenames and the relocation tradename;
•a $64 million decrease in relocation receivables due to lower volume; and
•a $25 million decrease in property and equipment,
partially offset by:
•a $257 million increase in cash and cash equivalents; and
•a $43 million increase in other current and non-current assets primarily related to an increase in our investment in Guaranteed Rate Affinity due to higher equity earnings partially offset by dividends received, an increase in prepaid incentives and an increase in marketable securities due to the reinvestment of certificates of deposit at Realogy Title Group.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total liabilities decreased $280 million primarily due to:
•a $238 million decrease in corporate debt primarily due to lower borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•a $114 million decrease in deferred tax liabilities primarily due to the recognition of an income tax benefit of $99 million related to the goodwill impairment charge at Realogy Brokerage Group;
•a $100 million decrease in securitization obligations;
•a $65 million decrease in operating lease liabilities; and
•a $9 million decrease in accounts payable,
partially offset by:
•a $195 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities primarily due to higher employee-related accruals; and
•a $51 million increase in other non-current liabilities primarily due to mark-to-market adjustments on the Company's interest rate swaps.
Total equity decreased $329 million primarily due to a net loss of $360 million, primarily driven by impairments of $682 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a $34 million increase in additional paid in capital related to the Company's stock-based compensation activity for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically satisfied our liquidity needs with cash flows from operations and funds available under our Revolving Credit Facility and securitization facilities. Our primary liquidity needs have been to service our debt and finance our working capital and capital expenditures. We currently expect to prioritize investing in our business and reducing indebtedness. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, representing a reduction of $190 million as compared to the amount drawn on December 31, 2019. Additionally, we discontinued acquiring stock under our share repurchase programs in the first quarter of 2019 and discontinued our quarterly dividend in the fourth quarter of 2019.
We are significantly encumbered by our debt obligations. As of December 31, 2020, our total debt, excluding our securitization obligations, was $3,239 million compared to $3,472 million as of December 31, 2019. Our liquidity position has been and is expected to continue to be negatively impacted by the interest expense on our debt obligations, which could be intensified by a significant increase in LIBOR (or any replacement rate) or ABR.
In January and February 2021, Realogy Group entered into refinancing transactions, including the issuance in the aggregate of $900 million of 5.75% Senior Notes due 2029 (the proceeds of which were used to pay down $250 million of the Term Loan A Facility and $655 million of the Term Loan B Facility) and the amendments of the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement (the "2021 Amendments"). The 2021 Amendments provide for the extension of the maturity of a portion of the remaining balance of the Term Loan A facility from 2023 to 2025 and the extension of the maturity of a portion of the Revolving Credit Facility from 2023 to 2025, in each case subject to certain earlier springing maturity dates. The 2021 Amendments also reduce the maximum permitted senior secured leverage ratio (the financial covenant under such agreements) under the Senior Secured Credit and Term Loan A Agreements to below the levels that had been permitted under the amendments to the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement entered into by the Company in July 2020 (the "2020 Amendments"). As was the case under the 2020 Amendments, the revised senior secured leverage ratio will remain in place through the second quarter of 2022, unless earlier terminated by us, and on and after the second quarter of 2022, the senior secured leverage ratio will return to 4.75 to 1.00 (which was the applicable level prior to the effectiveness of the 2020 and 2021 Amendments). See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", and Note 20, "Subsequent Events", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the financial covenant in each of the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and the Term Loan A Agreement with a senior secured leverage ratio of 1.70 to 1.00 (as compared to the maximum ratio of 5.25 to 1.00 permitted under the 2021 Amendments for such period). We believe that we will continue to be in compliance with the senior secured leverage ratio and meet our cash flow needs during the next twelve months.
Under the 2020 Amendments, we are restricted from making certain restricted payments, including dividend payments or share repurchases during the covenant period. The covenants in the indentures governing the 9.375% Senior Notes, 5.75% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes further restrict our ability to make dividend payments or repurchase shares in any amount unless the Company's consolidated leverage ratio is below 4.00 to 1.00. See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
For additional information, see below under the header "Financial Obligations-Covenants under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, Term Loan A Facility and Indentures".
We will continue to evaluate potential refinancing and financing transactions, subject to the restrictions during the covenant period described in the 2020 Amendments, including refinancing certain tranches of our indebtedness and extending maturities, among other potential alternatives. There can be no assurance as to which, if any, of these alternatives we may pursue as the choice of any alternative will depend upon numerous factors such as market conditions, our financial performance and the limitations applicable to such transactions under our existing financing agreements and the consents we may need to obtain under the relevant documents. Financing may not be available to us on commercially reasonable terms, on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. Any future indebtedness may impose various additional restrictions and covenants on us which could limit our ability to respond to market conditions, to make capital investments or to take advantage of business opportunities.
Historically, operating results and revenues for all of our businesses have been strongest in the second and third quarters of the calendar year, although the strong recovery in the second half of 2020 resulted in higher than historic operating results and revenues in the fourth quarter of 2020. A significant portion of the expenses we incur in our real estate brokerage operations are related to marketing activities and commissions and therefore, are variable. However, many of our other expenses, such as interest payments, facilities costs and certain personnel-related costs, are fixed and cannot be reduced during the seasonal fluctuations in the business. Consequently, our need to borrow under the Revolving Credit Facility and corresponding debt balances are generally at their highest levels at or around the end of the first quarter of every year.
We may from time to time seek to repurchase our outstanding Unsecured Notes or 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes through tender offers, open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
In addition, we are required to pay quarterly amortization payments for the Term Loan A Facility and Term Loan B Facility. On a pro forma basis, giving effect to the refinancing transaction that took place in January 2021 and the completion of the 2021 Amendments, we expect payments for 2021 to total $4 million and $11 million for the Term Loan A Facility and Term Loan B Facility, respectively.
We have historically utilized net operating losses to offset the majority of our federal and state income tax payments. Based upon current financial projections, we expect that we will utilize the majority of our remaining net operating losses during 2022.
If the recovery of the residential real estate market were to materially slow or reverse itself, if the economy as a whole does not improve or continues to weaken or if the broader real estate industry (including REITs, commercial and rental markets) were to experience a significant downturn, our business, financial condition and liquidity may be materially adversely affected, including our ability to access capital, grow our business and return capital to stockholders.
Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2020 vs. Year ended December 31, 2019
At December 31, 2020, we had $523 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, an increase of $257 million compared to the balance of $266 million at December 31, 2019. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $377 million more cash was provided by operating activities compared to the same period in 2019 principally due to:
•$242 million less cash used for accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities;
•$98 million more cash from dividends received primarily from Guaranteed Rate Affinity;
•$35 million more cash provided by operating results;
•$25 million less cash used for other assets; and
•$9 million more cash provided by the net change in relocation and trade receivables,
partially offset by $32 million more cash used for other operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $38 million less cash for investing activities compared to the same period in 2019 primarily due to:
•$24 million less cash used for property and equipment additions;
•$23 million more cash provided from the sale of assets; and
•$7 million less cash used for investments in unconsolidated entities,
partially offset by $16 million more cash used for other investing activities primarily due to the reinvestment of certificates of deposit.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $402 million of cash was used in financing activities compared to $215 million of cash used during the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $402 million of cash was used as follows:
•$190 million repayment of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility;
•$99 million net decrease in securitization borrowings;
•$43 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$41 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases;
•$22 million of cash paid primarily as a result of the refinancing transactions in the second quarter of 2020; and
•$5 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, $215 million of cash was used as follows:
•$80 million repayment of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility;
•$31 million of dividend payments;
•$30 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$26 million net decrease in securitization borrowings;
•$22 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases;
•$20 million for the repurchase of our common stock;
•$6 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation; and
•$3 million for payments of contingent consideration,
partially offset by $3 million of net cash received as a result of the refinancing transactions in 2019.
Year ended December 31, 2019 vs. Year ended December 31, 2018
At December 31, 2019, we had $266 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, an increase of $28 million compared to the balance of $238 million at December 31, 2018. The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
For the year ended December 31, 2019, $23 million less cash was provided by operating activities compared to the same period in 2018 principally due to $139 million less cash provided by operating results, partially offset by:
•$53 million more cash provided by the net change in relocation and trade receivables;
•$49 million less cash used for accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities;
•$10 million less cash used for other assets; and
•$4 million less cash used for other operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $37 million more cash for investing activities compared to the same period in 2018 primarily due to:
•the absence in 2019 of $19 million of net cash proceeds received from the dissolution of our interest in PHH Home Loans, LLC (our former 49.9% mortgage joint venture) which occurred in 2018;
•$14 million more cash used for property and equipment additions; and
•$7 million less cash provided by other investing activities,
partially offset by $3 million less cash used for investments in unconsolidated entities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, $215 million of cash was used in financing activities compared to $297 million of cash used during the same period in 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2019, $215 million of cash was used as follows:
•$80 million repayment of borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility;
•$31 million of dividend payments;
•$30 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$26 million net decrease in securitization borrowings;
•$22 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance leases;
•$20 million for the repurchase of our common stock;
•$6 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation; and
•$3 million for payments of contingent consideration,
partially offset by $3 million of net cash received as a result of the refinancing transactions in 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, $297 million of cash was used as follows:
•$402 million for the repurchase of our common stock;
•$45 million of dividend payments;
•$28 million of other financing payments primarily related to finance/capital leases;
•$25 million of quarterly amortization payments on the term loan facilities;
•$22 million for payments of contingent consideration;
•$10 million of tax payments related to net share settlement for stock-based compensation; and
•$3 million for cash paid as a result of the refinancing transactions in February 2018 related to $16 million of debt issuance costs and $4 million repayment of borrowings under the Term Loan B Facility, partially offset by $17 million of proceeds received under the Term Loan A Facility,
partially offset by:
•$200 million of additional borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility; and
•$38 million net increase in securitization borrowings.
Financial Obligations
Pro Forma Indebtedness Table
The following table sets forth the Company's borrowing arrangements as of December 31, 2020 on a pro forma basis giving effect to the refinancing transactions that took place in January and February 2021, including the issuance in the aggregate of $900 million of 5.75% Senior Notes due 2029 (the proceeds of which were used to pay down a portion of the amounts outstanding under the Term Loan A and B Facilities) and the entry into the 2021 Amendments:
_______________
(1)The available capacity under the Non-extended Revolving Credit Commitment is $477 million, while the available capacity under the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment is $948 million. As of December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under either the Non-extended Revolving Commitment or Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and $42 million of outstanding undrawn letters of credit. The Non-extended Revolving Credit Commitment expires in February 2023 and, subject to earlier spring maturity described in footnote (3), the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment expires in February 2025, but in each instance, amounts outstanding would be classified on the balance sheet as current due to the revolving nature and terms and conditions of the facilities. On February 19, 2021, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.
(2)Interest rates with respect to revolving loans under the Senior Secured Credit Facility at December 31, 2020 were based on, at the Company's option, (a) adjusted London Interbank Offering Rate ("LIBOR") plus an additional margin or (b) JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A.'s prime rate ("ABR") plus an additional margin, in each case subject to adjustment based on the then current senior secured leverage ratio. Based on the previous quarter's senior secured leverage ratio, the LIBOR margin was 2.00% and the ABR margin was 1.00% for the three months ended December 31, 2020.
(3)The maturity date of each of the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and Extended Term Loan A may spring forward to a date prior to February 2025 as follows: (i) if on or before March 2, 2023, the 4.875% Senior Notes have not been extended, refinanced or
replaced to have a maturity date after May 10, 2025 (or are not otherwise discharged, defeased or repaid by March 2, 2023), the maturity date of the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and Extended Term Loan A Facility will be March 2, 2023; and (ii) if on or before November 9, 2024, the Term Loan B Facility under the Senior Secured Credit Agreement is not extended, refinanced or replaced to have a maturity date after May 10, 2025 (or otherwise repaid prior to November 9, 2024), the maturity date of the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and Extended Term Loan A Facility will be November 9, 2024.
(4)In January and February 2021, we used a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of 5.75% Senior Notes to pay down $655 million of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan B Facility. The Term Loan B Facility provides for quarterly amortization payments totaling 1% per annum of the $1,080 million original principal amount. The interest rate with respect to term loans under the Term Loan B Facility is based on, at the Company’s option, (a) adjusted LIBOR plus 2.25% (with a LIBOR floor of 0.75%) or (b) ABR plus 1.25% (with an ABR floor of 1.75%).
(5)In January 2021, prior to the effective date of the 2021 Amendments, we used a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of 5.75% Senior Notes to pay down $250 million of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan A Facility. The interest rates with respect to each of the Non-extended Term Loan A and Extended Term Loan A are based on, at the Company's option, (a) adjusted LIBOR plus an additional margin or (b) ABR plus an additional margin, in each case subject to adjustment based on the then current senior secured leverage ratio. Based on the previous quarter's senior secured leverage ratio, the LIBOR margin was 2.00% and the ABR margin was 1.00% for the three months ended December 31, 2020.
(6)The Company is not required to make amortization payments on the Non-extended Term Loan A. The balance of the Non-Extended Term Loan A is due at maturity on February 8, 2023.
(7)The Extended Term Loan A has quarterly amortization payments, commencing with the quarter ending June 30, 2021, equal to a percentage per quarter of the $237 million principal amount of the Extended Term Loan A outstanding on January 27, 2021 (the effective date of the 2021 Amendments), as follows: 0.625% per quarter from June 30, 2021 to March 31, 2022; 1.25% per quarter from June 30, 2022 to March 31, 2023; 1.875% per quarter from June 30, 2023 to March 31, 2024; and 2.50% per quarter for periods ending on or after June 30, 2024, with the balance of the Term Loan A due at maturity on February 8, 2025.
See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt", to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information on the Company's indebtedness as of December 31, 2020, and Note 20, "Subsequent Events", to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for a detailed description of the refinancing transactions.
LIBOR Transition
LIBOR is the subject of recent national, international and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. As a result of concerns about the accuracy of the calculation of LIBOR, a number of British Bankers’ Association member banks entered into settlements with certain regulators and law enforcement agencies with respect to the alleged manipulation of LIBOR, and LIBOR and other “benchmark” rates are subject to ongoing national and international regulatory scrutiny and reform. The cessation date for submission and publication of rates for certain tenors of LIBOR has since been extended by the ICE Benchmark Administration until mid-2023. In response to concerns regarding the future of LIBOR, the United States Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, a steering committee comprised of large U.S. financial institutions, is considering replacing LIBOR with a new index calculated by short-term repurchase agreements, backed by U.S. Treasury securities: the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or ‘‘SOFR.’’ We are unable to predict whether SOFR will attain market traction as a LIBOR replacement or the impact of other reforms, whether currently enacted or enacted in the future. Any new benchmark rate, including SOFR, will likely not replicate LIBOR exactly and if future rates based upon a successor rate are higher than LIBOR rates as currently determined, it could result in an increase in the cost of our variable rate indebtedness and may have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Our primary interest rate exposure is interest rate fluctuations, specifically with respect to LIBOR, due to its impact on our variable rate borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facility (for our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan B) and the Term Loan A Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had interest rate swaps based on LIBOR with a notional value of $1.0 billion to manage a portion of our exposure to changes in interest rates associated with our variable rate borrowings.
Covenants under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, Term Loan A Facility and Indentures
The Senior Secured Credit Agreement, Term Loan A Agreement, and the indentures governing the Unsecured Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes contain various covenants that limit (subject to certain exceptions) Realogy Group’s ability to, among other things:
•incur or guarantee additional debt or issue disqualified stock or preferred stock;
•pay dividends or make distributions to Realogy Group’s stockholders, including Realogy Holdings;
•repurchase or redeem capital stock;
•make loans, investments or acquisitions;
•incur restrictions on the ability of certain of Realogy Group's subsidiaries to pay dividends or to make other payments to Realogy Group;
•enter into transactions with affiliates;
•create liens;
•merge or consolidate with other companies or transfer all or substantially all of Realogy Group's and its material subsidiaries' assets;
•transfer or sell assets, including capital stock of subsidiaries; and
•prepay, redeem or repurchase subordinated indebtedness.
Pursuant to the 2020 Amendments to the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement, certain of these restrictions were tightened, including reducing (or eliminating) the amount available for certain types of additional indebtedness, liens, restricted payments (including dividends and stock repurchases), investments (including acquisitions and joint ventures), and voluntary junior debt repayments.
As a result of the covenants to which we remain subject, we are limited in the manner in which we conduct our business and we may be unable to engage in favorable business activities or finance future operations or capital needs. In addition, the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement require us to maintain a senior secured leverage ratio. We are further restricted under the indentures governing the 9.375% Senior Notes, 5.75% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes from making restricted payments, including our ability to issue dividends in excess of $45 million per calendar year or our ability to repurchase shares in any amount if our consolidated leverage ratio is equal to or greater than 4.00 to 1.00 and then (unless that ratio falls below 3:00 to 1:00) only to the extent of available cumulative credit, as defined under those indentures.
Senior Secured Leverage Ratio applicable to our Senior Secured Credit Facility and Term Loan A Facility
The senior secured leverage ratio is tested quarterly. Prior to the 2020 Amendments, the senior secured leverage ratio could not exceed 4.75 to 1.00. Pursuant to the 2021 Amendments, the financial covenant contained in each of the Senior Secured Credit Agreement and Term Loan A Agreement has been amended to require that Realogy Group maintain a senior secured leverage ratio not to exceed 5.25 to 1.00 commencing with the fourth quarter of 2020 through and including the second quarter of 2021, and thereafter will step down to 5.00 to 1.00 through and including the first quarter of 2022, and will return to 4.75 to 1.00 on and after the second quarter of 2022. As was the case under the 2020 Amendments, we also may elect to end the covenant period at any time, provided the senior secured leverage ratio does not exceed 4.75 to 1.00 as of the most recently ended quarter for which financial statements have been delivered. In such event, the senior secured leverage ratio will reset to the pre-amendment level of 4.75 to 1.00 thereafter.
The senior secured leverage ratio is measured by dividing Realogy Group's total senior secured net debt by the trailing twelve-month EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis, as those terms are defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement. Total senior secured net debt does not include the 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes, our unsecured indebtedness, including the Unsecured Notes, or the securitization obligations. EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis, as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement, includes adjustments to EBITDA for restructuring, retention and disposition costs, former parent legacy cost (benefit) items, net, loss (gain) on the early extinguishment of debt, non-cash charges and incremental securitization interest costs, as well as pro forma cost savings for restructuring initiatives, the pro forma effect of business optimization initiatives and the pro forma effect of acquisitions and new franchisees, in each case calculated as of the beginning of the twelve-month period. The Company was in compliance with the senior secured leverage ratio covenant at December 31, 2020.
A reconciliation of net loss attributable to Realogy Group to Operating EBITDA and EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis, as those terms are defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 is set forth in the following table:
_______________
(a)Net loss attributable to Realogy consists of: (i) loss of $462 million for the first quarter of 2020, (ii) loss of $14 million for the second quarter of 2020, (iii) income of $98 million for the third quarter of 2020 and (iv) income of $18 million for the fourth quarter of 2020.
(b)Operating EBITDA consists of: (i) $32 million for the first quarter of 2020, (ii) $175 million for the second quarter of 2020, (iii) $313 million for the third quarter of 2020 and (iv) $206 million for the fourth quarter of 2020.
(c)Represents the twelve-month pro forma effect of business optimization initiatives.
(d)Represents the elimination of non-cash expenses including $39 million of stock-based compensation expense and $3 million for the change in the allowance for doubtful accounts and notes reserves less $5 million of other items and $2 million of foreign exchange benefits for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
(e)Represents the estimated impact of acquisitions and franchise sales activity, net of brokerages that exited our franchise system as if these changes had occurred on January 1, 2020. Franchisee sales activity is comprised of new franchise agreements as well as growth through acquisitions and independent sales agent recruitment by existing franchisees with our assistance. We have made a number of assumptions in calculating such estimates and there can be no assurance that we would have generated the projected levels of Operating EBITDA had we owned the acquired entities or entered into the franchise contracts as of January 1, 2020.
(f)Incremental borrowing costs incurred as a result of the securitization facilities refinancing for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
(g)Represents total borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facility (including the Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan B Facility) and Term Loan A Facility and borrowings secured by a first priority lien on our assets of $1,732 million plus $32 million of finance lease obligations less $369 million of readily available cash as of December 31, 2020. Pursuant to the terms of our senior secured credit facilities, total senior secured net debt does not include our securitization obligations, 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes or unsecured indebtedness, including the Unsecured Notes.
Consolidated Leverage Ratio applicable to our 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes
The consolidated leverage ratio is measured by dividing Realogy Group's total net debt by the trailing twelve-month EBITDA. EBITDA, as defined in the indentures governing the 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes, is substantially similar to EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis for the period presented, as those terms are defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement. Net debt under the indentures is Realogy Group's total indebtedness (excluding securitizations) less (i) its cash and cash equivalents in excess of restricted cash and (ii) a $200 million seasonality adjustment permitted when measuring the ratio on a date during the period of March 1 to May 31.
The consolidated leverage ratio under the indentures governing the 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 is set forth in the following table:
_______________
(a)As set forth in the immediately preceding table, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, EBITDA, as defined under the indentures governing the 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes, was the same as EBITDA calculated on a Pro Forma Basis, as those terms are defined in the Senior Secured Credit Agreement.
See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt-Senior Secured Credit Facility and Term Loan A Facility", "-Unsecured Notes" and "-Senior Secured Second Lien Notes", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2020, the amount of the Company's cumulative credit under the 9.375% Senior Notes and 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes was approximately $430 million. At December 31, 2020, the cumulative credit basket available for restricted payments was approximately $409 million under the indenture governing the 9.375% Senior Notes and approximately $430 million under the indenture governing 7.625% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes. See Note 9, "Short and Long-Term Debt-Unsecured Notes" and "-Senior Secured Second Lien Notes", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The SEC has adopted rules to regulate the use in filings with the SEC and in public disclosures of "non-GAAP financial measures," such as Operating EBITDA. These measures are derived on the basis of methodologies other than in accordance with GAAP.
Operating EBITDA is defined by us as net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net (other than relocation services interest for securitization assets and securitization obligations), income taxes, and other items that are not core to the operating activities of the Company such as restructuring charges, former parent legacy items, gains or losses on the early extinguishment of debt, impairments, gains or losses on discontinued operations and gains or losses on the sale of investments or other assets. Operating EBITDA is our primary non-GAAP measure.
We present Operating EBITDA because we believe it is useful as a supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our operating businesses and provides greater transparency into our results of operations. Our management, including our chief operating decision maker, uses Operating EBITDA as a factor in evaluating the performance of our business. Operating EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income or other statement of operations data prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We believe Operating EBITDA facilitates company-to-company operating performance comparisons by backing out potential differences caused by variations in capital structures (affecting net interest expense), taxation, the age and book depreciation of facilities (affecting relative depreciation expense) and the amortization of intangibles, as well as other items that are not core to the operating activities of the Company such as restructuring charges, gains or losses on the early extinguishment of debt, former parent legacy items, impairments, gains or losses on discontinued operations and gains or
losses on the sale of investments or other assets, which may vary for different companies for reasons unrelated to operating performance. We further believe that Operating EBITDA is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in their evaluation of companies, many of which present an Operating EBITDA measure when reporting their results.
Operating EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider Operating EBITDA either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•this measure does not reflect changes in, or cash required for, our working capital needs;
•this measure does not reflect our interest expense (except for interest related to our securitization obligations), or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•this measure does not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
•this measure does not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often require replacement in the future, and this measure does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•other companies may calculate this measure differently so they may not be comparable.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
_______________
(a)The Revolving Credit Facility expires in February 2023; however outstanding borrowings under this facility would be classified on the balance sheet as current due to the revolving nature of the facility.
(b)The Company’s Term Loan B has quarterly amortization payments totaling 1% per annum of the $1,080 million original principal amount of the Term Loan B issued under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with the balance payable in February 2025.
(c)The Company’s Term Loan A has quarterly amortization payments, based on a percentage of the $750 million original principal amount of the Term Loan A, as follows: 0.625% per quarter from June 30, 2018 to March 31, 2020; 1.25% per quarter from June 30, 2020 to March 31, 2021; 1.875% per quarter from June 30, 2021 to March 31, 2022; and 2.50% per quarter for periods ending on or after June 30, 2022, with the balance of the Term Loan A due at maturity on February 2023.
(d)Interest payments are based on applicable interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020 and include the impact of derivative instruments designed to fix the interest rate of a portion of the Company's variable rate debt.
(e)The Apple Ridge securitization facility expires in June 2021 and the Cartus Financing Limited agreements expire in August 2021.
(f)The lease amounts included in the above table are not discounted and do not include variable costs.
(g)Purchase commitments include a minimum licensing fee that the Company is required to pay to Sotheby’s from 2009 through 2054. The annual minimum licensing fee is approximately $2 million. Purchase commitments also include a minimum licensing fee to be paid to Meredith from 2009 through 2058 for the licensing of the Better Homes and Gardens Real Estate brand. The annual minimum fee was $4 million in 2020 and will generally remain the same thereafter.
(h)The contractual obligations table does not include other non-current liabilities such as pension liabilities of $30 million and unrecognized tax benefits of $19 million as the Company is not able to estimate the year in which these liabilities could be paid.
(i)The contractual obligations table does not include other incentives offered to certain franchisees which are paid at certain points during the franchise agreement period provided the franchisee maintains a certain level of annual gross commission income and the franchisee is in compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement at the time of payment. If current annual gross commission income levels are maintained by our franchisees, we would pay a total of $11 million over the next four years.
Contractual Obligations Update
The following table summarizes the Company's future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 on a pro forma basis after giving effect to the refinancing transactions that took place in January and February 2021, including the issuance in the aggregate of $900 million of 5.75% Senior Notes due 2029 (the proceeds of which were used to pay down a portion of the amounts outstanding under the Term Loan A Facility and Term Loan B Facility) and the entry into the 2021 Amendments as of December 31, 2020:
_______________
(a)The Non-extended Revolving Credit Commitment expires in February 2023 and, subject to earlier spring maturity described in footnote (c), the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment expires in February 2025; but in each instance, amounts outstanding would be classified on the balance sheet as current due to the revolving nature and terms and conditions of the facilities.
(b)The maturity date of each of the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and Extended Term Loan A may spring forward to a date prior to February 2025 as follows: (i) if on or before March 2, 2023, the 4.875% Senior Notes have not been extended, refinanced or replaced to have a maturity date after May 10, 2025 (or are not otherwise discharged, defeased or repaid by March 2, 2023), the maturity date of the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and Extended Term Loan A will be March 2, 2023; and (ii) if on or before November 9, 2024, the Term Loan B Facility under the Senior Secured Credit Agreement is not extended, refinanced or replaced to have a maturity date after May 10, 2025 (or otherwise repaid prior to November 9, 2024), the maturity date of the Extended Revolving Credit Commitment and Extended Term Loan A will be November 9, 2024.
(c)In January and February 2021, we used a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of 5.75% Senior Notes to pay down $655 million of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan B Facility. The Company’s Term Loan B Facility has quarterly amortization payments totaling 1% per annum of the $1,080 million original principal amount of the Term Loan B Facility issued under the Senior Secured Credit Agreement with the balance payable in February 2025.
(d)In January 2021, prior to the effective date of the 2021 Amendments, we used a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of 5.75% Senior Notes to pay down $250 million of outstanding borrowings under the Term Loan A Facility.
(e)The Company is not required to make amortization payments on the Non-extended Term Loan A. The balance of the Non-extended Term Loan A is due at maturity on February 8, 2023. The Company’s Extended Term Loan A has quarterly amortization payments, equal to a percentage per quarter of the $237 million principal amount of the Extended Term Loan A outstanding on January 27, 2021 (the effective date of the 2021 Amendments), commencing with the quarter ending June 30, 2021, as follows: 0.625% per quarter from June 30, 2021 to March 31, 2022; 1.25% per quarter from June 30, 2022 to March 31, 2023; 1.875% per quarter from June 30, 2023 to March 31, 2024; and 2.50% per quarter for periods ending on or after June 30, 2024, with the balance of the Extended Term Loan A due at maturity on February 8, 2025.
(f)The 5.75% Senior Notes mature on January 15, 2029 and bear interest at a rate of 5.75% per annum. Interest on the Notes will be payable semiannually to holders of record at the close of business on January 15 or July 15 immediately preceding the interest payment date on January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing July 15, 2021.
(g)Represents interest payments based on our pro forma debt balances as of December 31, 2020 and assuming LIBOR rates as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles is based on the selection and application of accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates and assumptions about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Several of the estimates and assumptions we are required to make relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical to the understanding of our financial statements and involve subjective and complex judgments that could potentially affect reported results. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions and any such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition costs over the fair value of the net tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Other indefinite-lived intangible assets primarily consist of trademarks acquired in business combinations. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived assets are not amortized, but are subject to impairment testing. The aggregate carrying values of our goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets were $2,910 million and $705 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and are subject to an impairment assessment annually as of October 1, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable. This assessment compares carrying values of the goodwill reporting units and other indefinite lived intangible assets to their respective fair values and, when appropriate, the carrying value is reduced to fair value.
In testing goodwill, the fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using the income approach, a discounted cash flow approach. For the other indefinite lived intangible assets, fair value is estimated using the relief from royalty method. Management utilizes long-term cash flow forecasts and the Company's annual operating plans adjusted for terminal value assumptions. The fair value of the Company's reporting units and other indefinite lived intangible assets are determined utilizing the best estimate of future revenues, operating expenses, including commission expense, market and general economic conditions, trends in the industry, as well as assumptions that management believes marketplace participants would utilize including discount rates, cost of capital, trademark royalty rates, and long-term growth rates. The trademark royalty rate was determined by reviewing similar trademark agreements with third parties. Although management believes that assumptions are reasonable, actual results may vary significantly. These impairment assessments involve the use of accounting estimates and assumptions, changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. To address this uncertainty, a sensitivity analysis is performed on key estimates and assumptions.
Significant negative industry or economic trends, disruptions to our business, unexpected significant changes or planned changes in use of the assets, a decrease in our business results, growth rates that fall below our assumptions, divestitures, and a sustained decline in our stock price and market capitalization may have a negative effect on the fair values and key valuation assumptions. Such changes could result in changes to our estimates of our fair value and a material impairment of goodwill or other indefinite-lived intangible assets.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company determined that the impact on future earnings related to the COVID-19 pandemic qualified as a triggering event for all of our reporting units and accordingly, the Company performed an impairment assessment of goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2020. This assessment resulted in the recognition of an impairment of Realogy Franchise Group trademarks of $30 million and a goodwill impairment of $413 million for Realogy Brokerage Group. The primary drivers of the impairments were a significant increase in the weighted average cost of capital due to the volatility in the capital and debt markets due to COVID-19 and the related lower projected financial results.
The Company recorded $133 million of reserves during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 (while Cartus Relocation Services was held for sale) to reduce the net assets to the estimated proceeds. Upon reclassification of Cartus Relocation Services to held and used on the Consolidated Balance Sheets in the fourth quarter of 2020, the reserves (including $105 million related to goodwill) were included in the Impairments line in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company performed an impairment assessment upon reclassification during the fourth quarter of 2020 and the impairment assessment indicated that the carrying value of Cartus Relocation Services exceeded its estimated fair value. The Company believes that the reduced fair value is a result of the impact of the COVID-19 crisis resulting in lower relocation activity which has negatively impacted the operating results of the relocation services. Furthermore, recent U.S. immigration and visa restrictions have exacerbated these trends. As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company
recognized an additional goodwill impairment charge of $22 million and a trademark impairment charge of $34 million related to Cartus Relocation Services (which is reported within the Realogy Franchise Group reportable segment).
The impairment charges are recorded on a separate line in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and are non-cash in nature.
The results of the Company's annual impairment assessment indicated no other impairment charges were required for the other reporting units or other indefinite-lived intangibles. Management evaluated the effect of lowering the estimated fair value for each of the passing reporting units by 10% and determined no impairment of goodwill. Due to the impairments during 2020 for the Realogy Franchise Group and Cartus Relocation Service trademarks, there was little to no excess fair value over carrying value as of December 31, 2020.
Common stock valuation
On an annual basis, we grant stock-based awards to certain senior management, employees and directors. These awards are measured based on the fair value on the grant date. The fair value of restricted stock, restricted stock units and performance share units without a market condition is equal to the closing sale price of the Company's common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of options is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the fair value of performance share units with market conditions is estimated on the date of grant using the Monte Carlo Simulation method. Expense for stock-based awards is recognized over the service period based on the vesting requirements, or when requisite performance metrics or milestones are achieved, and forfeitures are recognized as they occur. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires considerable judgment, including estimating expected volatility, expected term and risk-free rate.
Our expected volatility is based on the average volatility rates of the Company and similar actively traded companies since we only have trading history as a public company since October 2012. The expected term is calculated based on the simplified method and is estimated to be 6.25 years for time vesting stock options. The risk-free rate is derived from the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant using the estimated grant holding period. If factors change and we employ different assumptions, the fair value of future awards and resulting stock-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have estimated historically.
Income taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Our provision for income taxes is based on domestic and international statutory income tax rates in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions as well as deferred tax asset and liability balances, including the estimation of valuation allowances and the evaluation of tax positions.
Net deferred tax assets and liabilities are primarily comprised of temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards that are available to reduce taxable income in future periods. The determination of the amount of valuation allowance to be provided on deferred tax assets involves estimates regarding (1) the timing and amount of the reversal of taxable temporary differences, (2) expected future taxable income, and (3) the impact of tax planning strategies.
Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and in evaluating tax positions. We establish additional reserves for income taxes when, despite the belief that tax positions are fully supportable, there remain certain positions that do not meet the minimum recognition threshold. The approach for evaluating certain and uncertain tax positions is defined by the authoritative guidance and this guidance determines when a tax position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority. In the normal course of business, the Company and its subsidiaries are examined by various federal, state and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the potential outcomes of these examinations and any future examinations for the current or prior years in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We continually assess the likelihood and amount of potential adjustments and adjust the income tax provision, the current tax liability and deferred taxes in the period in which the facts that give rise to a revision become known.
Recently Issued SEC Guidance and Accounting Pronouncements
The SEC issued a final rule on Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary Financial Information adopting amendments to modernize, simplify, and enhance certain financial disclosure requirements
in Regulation S-K. In summary, the amendments eliminate the requirement to provide selected financial data in Item 301, replace the requirement for tabular supplementary financial information in Item 302 with a principles-based disclosure requirement regarding material retrospective changes and make amendments to Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) in Item 303 intended to eliminate duplicative disclosures and modernize and enhance MD&A disclosures for the benefit of investors, while simplifying compliance efforts for registrants. The amendments became effective on February 10, 2021 and companies are required to comply with the amendments beginning with the first fiscal year that ends on or after the date that is 210 days after publication in the Federal Register (which was on January 11, 2021). Therefore, the Company will not be required to comply with the amended rules until its 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K. The rules may be applied early on an Item by Item basis as long as all of the amendments within an Item comply.
The SEC issued its final rule on the Modernization of Regulation S-K Items 101, 103, and 105 which is intended to improve readability of disclosure documents, as well as discourage repetition and disclosure of information that is not material. The new rule amends disclosure requirements relating to the description of a company's business, legal proceedings and risk factors made in applicable registration statements and reports filed on and after November 9, 2020, including this Annual Report.
See Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies", to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.