Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations
The following analysis is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition, and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes located in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including matters discussed in this Item 7. “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contains forward-looking statements relating to our plans, estimates and beliefs that involve important risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for a discussion of uncertainties and assumptions that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements.
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 which we filed with the SEC on March 30, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading nationwide franchisor of offices providing on-demand labor solutions in the light industrial and blue-collar segments of the staffing industry. Through our franchisees, we provided various types of temporary personnel in 2020 via two business models operating under the trade names “HireQuest Direct” and “HireQuest.” HireQuest Direct specializes primarily in unskilled and semi-skilled industrial and construction personnel. HireQuest specializes primarily in skilled and semi-skilled industrial personnel as well as clerical and administrative personnel. As of December 31, 2020 we had 139 franchisee-owned offices in 30 states and the District of Columbia. We provide employment for an estimated 57,000 individuals annually working for thousands of clients in many industries including construction, recycling, warehousing, logistics, auctioneering, manufacturing, hospitality, landscaping, and retail.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has materially adversely impacted our business. With widespread infection in the United States and abroad, national, state, and local authorities recommended social distancing and took dramatic action, including ordering the workforce to stay home, banning all non-essential businesses from operating, refusing to issue new building permits, and invalidating current building permits causing work to stop at many of our jobsites. These measures, while implemented to protect human life, have had, and are expected to continue to have, serious adverse impacts on our business and the economy as a whole. While several states have advanced significantly into the reopening process, it is unclear when, or if, a full economic recovery will occur. It is also unclear whether businesses will remain open or another broad shutdown will occur. The long-term effectiveness of economic stabilization efforts, including government payments to affected citizens and industries, and government vaccination efforts, is also uncertain.
We entered 2020 with a strong balance sheet. Our assets exceeded liabilities by more than $28 million. Throughout 2020, we improved our liquidity position, primarily by converting accounts receivable into cash. Current assets improved from $37.0 million on December 31, 2019 to $39.6 million on December 31, 2020. We remained profitable throughout 2020. Still, the sweeping and persistent nature of the COVID-19 pandemic depressed system-wide sales, resulting revenue, and net income in 2020.
On a year-over-year basis, the relative decrease in our system-wide-sales has consistently shrunk since March of 2020. The decrease in the beginning of the pandemic reached 38% but has consistently shrunk. By the end of 2020, our system-wide-sales were down 16% year-over-year. We continue to expect negative impacts on system-wide sales and resulting revenue in the first and second quarter of 2021, and likely beyond. It remains unclear how long we will stay at this comparatively reduced level of sales, and the evolving nature of the pandemic makes reliable predictions extremely difficult.
To date, our franchisees have closed or consolidated 13 offices at least, in part, due to the financial impacts of COVID-19. Of these closures, 11 were in metropolitan areas where our franchisees still maintain at least one office that we expect can service customers of the closed or consolidated offices. The other two offices did not historically produce significant amounts of system-wide sales or resulting revenue. It is possible that other offices may still be forced to close. Some of our franchisees may experience economic hardship or even failure. In general, those franchisees whose businesses are oriented towards construction, manufacturing, logistics, or waste services have been less impacted to date than those whose businesses are more focused on hospitality, catering, special events, or auto auction services. Despite tough economic conditions, our franchisees also opened 5 new offices in 2020.
In response to depressed economic conditions, we took measures to control and reduce selling, general, and administrative expense ("SG&A"). In addition, we placed a reserve of $1.6 million on the promissory notes we hold from our franchisees and the purchaser of our previously owned California offices.
As discussed more fully below, our already strong liquidity position has improved since December 31, 2019 because of decreased funding requirements for temporary employees and the decrease in our accounts receivable balance as amounts are collected and converted to cash. We increased our cash balance by approximately $9.5 million from $4.2 million at December 31, 2019 to $13.7 million at December 31, 2020. When combined with our borrowing capacity under our line of credit and lack of debt, we expect that we have sufficient liquidity to continue our operations for the next 12 months and beyond, even under the current circumstances presented by COVID-19. That said, the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on availability of capital or credit is difficult to predict and may be significant.
Any of the above factors, or other cascading effects of the COVID-19 pandemic that are not currently foreseeable, could materially negatively impact our revenue, net income, and other results of operations, reduce system-wide sales, cause office closings or cause us to lose franchisees, and impact our liquidity position, possibly significantly. The duration of any such impacts cannot be predicted at this time.
Results of Operations
The following table displays our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands, except percentages):
Total Revenue
Our total revenue consists of franchise royalties and service revenue.
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $13.8 million compared to $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 13.0%. This decrease was largely due to the economic slowdown caused by COVID-19 and resulting decrease in orders for temporary personnel.
Sales at company-owned offices are not reflected in revenue, but are reflected net of costs, expenses, and taxes associated with those sales as “Income from discontinued operations, net of tax.”
Franchise Royalties
We charge our franchisees a royalty fee on the basis of one of two models: the HireQuest Direct model, and the HireQuest model. Under the HireQuest Direct model, the royalty fee charged ranges from 6% of gross billings to 8% of gross billings. Royalty fees are charged at 8% for the first $1,000,000 of billing with the royalty fee dropping 0.5% for every $1,000,000 of billing thereafter until the royalty fee is 6% once gross billings reach $4,000,000 annually. The smaller royalty fee is charged only on the incremental dollars resulting in an actual royalty fee at a blended rate of between 6% and 8%. We grant our franchisees credits for low margin business. For the HireQuest business line, our royalty fee is 4.5% of the temporary payroll we fund plus 18% of the gross margin for the territory.
Franchise royalties for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $12.8 million compared to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 12.8%. This decrease was largely due to the economic slowdown caused by COVID-19.
Service Revenue
Service revenue consists of interest we charge our franchisees on overdue customer accounts receivable and other miscellaneous fees for optional services we provide. As accounts receivable age over 42 days, our franchisees pay us interest on these accounts equal to 0.5% of the amount of the uncollected receivable each 14 day period. Accounts that age over 84 days are charged back to the franchisee and are not charged interest.
Service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $1.0 million compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 15.5%. This decrease is largely due to a decrease in miscellaneous fees charged for optional services.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)
SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $8.7 million compared to $13.1 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 33.7%. This decrease in 2020 is primarily due to the absence of Merger-related expenses incurred in 2019, the most significant of which included professional fees of approximately $1.8 million for investment bankers, attorneys, and other professionals, $1.9 million of non-recurring compensation including severance payments and accelerated vesting of stock, $835,000 for reorganizational and rebranding expenses, and $566,000 in other non-recurring expenses. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation of approximately $469,000 and a $1.6 million reserve placed on notes receivable we issued to finance the sale of offices acquired in the Merger. This reserve is directly related to the negative impact COVID-19 has had on the economy, the financial condition of the makers of such notes, and the value of the underlying collateral.
Provision for income tax
Provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $741,000 compared to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the absence of a one-time Merger-related charge of approximately $4.0 million incurred in 2019. Prior to the Merger, Legacy HQ had a significant amount of uncollected accounts receivable. As a cash-basis taxpayer, Legacy HQ did not owe taxes on those uncollected accounts. When Legacy HQ merged into and became a part of a public company, it was required to switch to the accrual basis of accounting and changed its tax status from a partnership to a corporation. Accordingly, we recognized a provision for the taxes which would become due related to these changes.
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax
During the quarter ended September 29, 2019, we sold substantially all of the offices acquired in the Merger. Accordingly, the operating results of these businesses are presented as discontinued operations, separate from our continuing operations, for all periods presented in our consolidated financial statements, unless indicated otherwise.
There was no income from discontinued operations in 2020, compared to income of $215,000, net of tax, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to the absence of any company owned offices in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our major source of liquidity and capital is cash generated from our ongoing operations consisting of royalty revenue and service revenue. We also receive principal and interest payments on notes receivable that we issued in connection with the conversion of company-owned offices to franchised offices. In addition, we have the capacity to borrow under our line of credit with Truist. We are currently negotiating with Truist to expand our borrowing capacity, however, no expanded line of credit has yet been finalized.
At December 31, 2020, our current assets exceeded our current liabilities by approximately $29.5 million. Our current assets included approximately $13.7 million of cash and $21.3 million of accounts receivable, which our franchisees have billed to customers and which we own in accordance with our franchise agreements. Our largest current liabilities include approximately $2.0 million due to our franchisees, $2.8 million related to our workers’ compensation claims liability, and $2.0 million of accrued benefits and payroll taxes.
Our working capital requirements are driven largely by temporary employee payroll and accounts receivable from customers. Since receipts lag employee pay, which is typically daily or weekly, our working capital requirements increase as system-wide sales increase, and vice-versa. When the economy contracts, our cash balance tends to increase in the short-term as payroll funding requirements decrease and accounts receivable are converted to cash upon collection. We saw this happen in the first half of 2020. As the economy recovers, our cash balance generally decreases and accounts receivable increase.
We believe that our current cash balance, together with the future cash generated from operations, principal and interest payments on notes receivable, and our borrowing capacity under our line of credit, will be sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs, capital asset purchases, future dividends, and other liquidity requirements associated with our continuing operations for at least the next 12 months. Our access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors including overall liquidity in the capital or credit markets, the state of the economy and our credit strength as viewed by potential lenders. We cannot provide assurances that we will have future access to the capital or credit markets on acceptable terms. The impact of the COVID-19 crisis on availability of capital or credit is difficult to predict and may be significant.
Operating Activities
During 2020, net cash generated by operating activities was approximately $10.9 million. Operating activity for the year included net income of approximately $5.4 million and a decrease in accounts receivable of approximately $6.9 million. We also had significant non-cash expenses in 2020, including approximately $1.2 in stock-based compensation and an increase in our allowance for losses on notes receivable of approximately $1.6 million. These provisions of cash were partially offset by a decrease in deferred taxes of approximately $1.8 million, and a decrease in our risk management incentive program liability of approximately $953,000. During 2019, net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was approximately $5.0 million and included a net loss from continuing operations of approximately $505,000, an increase in accounts receivable of approximately $7.5 million, and a decrease in accrued benefits and payroll taxes of approximately $1.4 million. These uses were offset by an increase in our workers’ compensation claims liability of approximately $2.0 million, a decrease in prepaid expense and other current assets of approximately $1.6 million, and an increase in the amount due to our franchisees of approximately $1.2 million.
Investing Activities
During 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $36,000 and included proceeds from payments on notes receivable of approximately $2.0 million. This provision was offset by the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $1.4 million, most of which was related to the construction of a new building at our corporate headquarters. During 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $9.8 million and was largely due to the cash acquired in the Merger of approximately $5.4 million and payments on notes receivable of approximately $3.6 million. These provisions were offset by the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $507,000.
Financing Activities
During 2020, net cash used by financing activities was approximately $1.4 million which was primarily due to the payment of dividends of approximately $1.4 million and the purchase of treasury stock of approximately $146,000. During 2019, net cash used by financing activities was approximately $11.9 million and was largely due to an $8.4 million tender offer where we purchased our own stock in conjunction with the Merger. We also made payments to affiliates of approximately $5.5 million. These uses were partially offset by net contribution of Legacy HQ members of approximately $1.2 million.
Key Performance Indicator: System-Wide Sales
We refer to total sales generated by our franchisees as “franchise sales.” For the period prior to their conversion to franchises, we refer to sales at company-owned and operated offices as “company-owned sales.” In turn, we refer to the sum of franchise sales and company-owned sales as “system-wide sales.” In other words, system-wide sales include sales at all offices, whether owned and operated by us or by our franchisees. System-wide sales is a key performance indicator. While we do not record system-wide sales as revenue, management believes that information on system-wide sales is important to understanding our financial performance because those sales are the basis on which we calculate and record much of our franchise royalty revenue, are directly related to all other royalty revenue and service revenue, and are indicative of the financial health of our franchisee base. Management uses system-wide sales to benchmark current operating levels to historic operating levels. System-wide sales should not be considered as an alternative to revenue.
During 2020, all of our offices were franchised. As such, system-wide sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were all derived from franchised offices. The following table reflects our system-wide sales broken into its components for the periods indicated:
The following table reflects our system-wide sales broken into its components for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
System-wide sales were $210.9 million in 2020, a decrease of 12.7%, from $241.6 million in 2019. The decrease in system-wide sales is related to the economic downturn due to COVID-19.
Number of Offices
We examine the number of offices we open and close every year. The number of offices is directly tied to the amount of royalty and service revenue we earn. On a net basis, we closed 8 offices in 2020 by opening 5 and closing 13 offices. The majority of the closures in 2020 were related to the economic shutdown due to COVID-19. In 2019, we added 50 offices on a net basis by opening or acquiring 60 and closing 10. The vast majority of the additions arose from the Merger.
The following table accounts for the number of offices opened and closed in 2019 and 2020.
Seasonality
Our revenue fluctuates quarterly and is generally higher in the second and third quarters of our year. Some of the industries in which we operate are subject to seasonal fluctuation. Many of the jobs filled by employees are outdoor jobs that are generally performed during the warmer months of the year. As a result, in an average year, activity increases in the spring and continues at higher levels through summer, then begins to taper off during fall and through winter.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of HQI and all of its wholly-owned subsidiaries. Intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
U.S. GAAP requires the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity (a “VIE”), to consolidate that entity. To be the primary beneficiary of a VIE, an entity must have both the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance, and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that are significant to it. We provide acquisition financing to some of our franchises that results in some of them being considered a VIE. We have reviewed these franchises and determined that we are not the primary beneficiary of any of these entities, and accordingly, these entities have not been consolidated.
Revenue Recognition
Our primary source of revenue comes from royalty fees based on the operation of our franchised offices. Royalty fees from our HireQuest Direct business line are based on a percentage of sales for services our franchisees provide to customers and usually range from 5% to 8%. Royalty fees from our HireQuest business line are 4.5% of the payroll we fund plus 18% of the gross margin for the territory. Revenue is presented on a net basis as agent as opposed to a gross basis as principal, and recognized when we satisfy our performance obligations. Our performance obligations take the form of a franchise license and promised services. Promised services consist primarily of paying temporary employees, completing all payroll related statutory obligations, and providing workers' compensation insurance. Because these performance obligations are interrelated, we do not consider them to be individually distinct and account for them as a single performance obligation. Because our franchisees receive and consume the benefits of our services simultaneously, our performance obligations are satisfied when our services are provided. Franchise royalties are billed on a weekly basis. We also offer various incentive programs for franchisees including royalty incentives and other support initiatives. Royalty fees are reduced to reflect any royalty incentives earned or granted under these programs. Additionally, we provide franchise royalty credits and incentives. These credits and incentives are provided to drive new location development, organic growth, and to limit workers' compensation exposure. Franchise royalty fees are presented net of these credits and incentives.
Service revenue consists of interest we charge our franchisees on overdue customer accounts receivable and other miscellaneous fees for optional services we provide. Interest income is recognized based on the effective interest rate applied to the outstanding principal balance. Revenue for optional services is recognized as services are provided.
Workers’ compensation claims liability
We maintain reserves for workers’ compensation claims based on their estimated future cost. These reserves include claims that have been reported but not settled, as well as claims that have been incurred but not reported. Annually, we use third party actuarial estimates of the future costs of these claims discounted by a 3% present value interest rate to estimate the amount of our reserves. Quarterly, we use development factors provided by a third-party actuary to estimate the amount of our reserves. We make adjustments as necessary. If the actual cost of the claims exceeds the amount estimated, additional reserves may be required.
Workers’ compensation Risk Management Incentive Program (“RMIP”)
Our RMIP is designed to incentivize our franchises to keep our temporary employees safe and control exposure to large workers’ compensation claims. We accomplish this by paying our franchisees an amount equivalent to a percentage of the amount they pay for workers’ compensation insurance if they keep their workers’ compensation loss ratios below specified thresholds.
Notes Receivable
Notes receivable consist primarily of amounts due to us related to the financing of franchised locations. We report notes receivable at the principal balance outstanding less an allowance for losses. We charge interest at a fixed rate and interest income is calculated by applying the effective rate to the outstanding principal balance. Notes receivable are generally secured by the assets of each location and the ownership interests in the franchise. We monitor the financial condition of our franchisees and record provisions for estimated losses when we believe it is probable that our franchisees will be unable to make their required payments. We evaluate the potential impairment of notes receivable based on various analyses, including estimated discounted future cash flows, at least annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. When a note receivable is deemed impaired, we discontinue accruing interest and only recognize interest income when payment is received. Our allowance for losses on notes receivable was approximately $1.6 million and $-0- at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Intangible Assets - Internal Use Software
We capitalize costs to develop or purchase computer software for internal use which are incurred during the application development stage. These costs include fees paid to third parties for development services and payroll costs for employees' time spent developing the software. We expense costs when incurred during the preliminary project stage and the post-implementation stage.
Capitalized development costs will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the software. The capitalization and ongoing assessment of recoverability of development costs requires considerable judgment by management with respect to certain external factors, including, but not limited to, technological and economic feasibility, and estimated economic life.