ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements, the accompanying notes, and the other financial information included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Annual Report”). The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties such as our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences in our actual results include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and those discussed elsewhere within this Annual Report, particularly in the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and the Item entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Harbor Diversified, Inc. (the “Company”) is a non-operating holding company that is the parent of a consolidated group of subsidiaries, including AWAC Aviation, Inc. (“AWAC”), which is the sole member of Air Wisconsin Airlines LLC (“Air Wisconsin”), a regional air carrier. The Company is also the direct parent of three other subsidiaries: (1) Lotus Aviation Leasing, LLC, which leases flight equipment to Air Wisconsin, (2) Air Wisconsin Funding LLC, which provides flight equipment financing to Air Wisconsin, and (3) Harbor Therapeutics, Inc., which is a non-operating entity with no material assets. Because the Company consolidates Air Wisconsin for financial statement purposes, disclosures relating to activities of Air Wisconsin also apply to the Company, unless otherwise noted. When appropriate, Air Wisconsin is named specifically for its individual contractual obligations and related disclosures. Where reference is intended to include the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries, they may be jointly referred to as “we,” “us,” or “our.” Where reference is intended to refer only to Harbor Diversified, Inc., it is referred to as the “Company.”
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin operated a fleet of 64 CRJ-200 regional jets under a capacity purchase agreement (the “United capacity purchase agreement”) with its sole major airline partner, United Airlines, Inc. (“United”), with a significant presence at both Chicago O’Hare and Washington-Dulles, two of United’s key domestic hubs. All of Air Wisconsin’s flights are operated as United Express pursuant to the terms of the United capacity purchase agreement. More than 99% of our operating revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was derived from operations associated with the United capacity purchase agreement.
Subject to certain limited exceptions, the United capacity purchase agreement provides Air Wisconsin fixed daily revenue for each aircraft covered under the agreement, a fixed payment for each departure and block hour flown, and reimbursement of certain direct operating expenses in exchange for providing regional flying service for United. The agreement also provides for the payment or accrual of certain amounts by United to Air Wisconsin based on certain scheduling benchmarks. The United capacity purchase agreement also has the effect of protecting Air Wisconsin, to an extent, from many of the elements that typically cause volatility in airline financial performance, including fuel prices, variations in ticket prices, and fluctuations in the number of passengers. In providing regional flying under the United capacity purchase agreement, Air Wisconsin uses United’s logos, service marks, and aircraft paint schemes. United controls route selection, pricing, seat inventories, marketing and scheduling. In addition, United provides Air Wisconsin with ground support services and gate access. In October 2020, Air Wisconsin entered into an amendment to the United capacity purchase agreement that, among other things, settled certain disputes that had existed between United and Air Wisconsin over amounts owed to Air Wisconsin under the United capacity purchase agreement.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business and Industry
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak a global pandemic, and, in response, federal, state, local, and foreign governments implemented “shelter-in-place” and “stay-at-home” orders and guidelines, quarantine orders, travel restrictions, and other similar restrictions in an attempt to control the spread and mitigate the impact of COVID-19. As of the date of this Annual Report, there continue to be widespread concerns regarding the ongoing impacts and disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in the regions in which Air Wisconsin operates.
Focus on Safety for Employees and Passengers
The safety and well-being of our employees and passengers are our priority. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, Air Wisconsin has taken numerous steps to provide its employees and passengers with the ability to take appropriate safety measures in accordance with guidelines provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, including working with United to:
•
Enhance Air Wisconsin’s aircraft cleaning and sanitation procedures;
•
Provide gloves, masks and other personal protective equipment for crewmembers;
•
Provide options to Air Wisconsin’s employees who are diagnosed with COVID-19, including pay protection and extended leave options;
•
Implement workforce social distancing, mask requirements and other protection measures, and enhanced cleaning of our facilities;
•
Add work-from-home flexibility for administrative employees; and
•
Provide regular, ongoing communication regarding impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including health and safety protocols and procedures.
Reduction in Demand for Air Travel
Governmental restrictions, orders and guidelines have resulted in the mandatory closure of “non-essential” businesses in some jurisdictions, led to the cancellation of many public events, including conferences, sporting events and concerts, led to an unprecedented and sustained material decline in passenger demand for air travel, and resulted in significant disruptions to regional and global economies.
This decline in passenger demand for air travel led to a material reduction in seat capacity in April 2020, during which month the International Air Transport Association (“IATA”) reported that seat capacity in the United States was 60% lower than in the same period in April 2019. Roughly two-thirds of the global commercial fleet was grounded by the end of April. In May 2020, the Transportation Security Administration reported that 87% fewer people passed through U.S. airport checkpoints than on the same day in the previous year. Since April 2020, industry-wide capacity contraction has shown modest improvements; however, the pace of improvement has remained slow, with new spikes in COVID-19 cases slowing or reversing recoveries. In December 2020, IATA reported that domestic seat capacity was 42.9% lower than the same period in December 2019, with industry-wide passenger load factor (a measure of capacity utilization of airlines) on average 17.8 percentage points lower than 2019. While some indicators of business activity, such as retail sales, suggest that the ease of lockdowns and resumption of business may steady the decline of passenger demand, IATA has reported that fresh outbreaks of COVID-19 and government reliance on travel restrictions and quarantine orders may continue to subdue consumer confidence in air travel.
Air Wisconsin’s recent and anticipated levels of flying remain significantly impacted by the unprecedented material decline in passenger demand for air travel resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. United, Air Wisconsin’s sole airline partner, began experiencing a significant decline in domestic and international demand related to the pandemic during the first quarter of 2020 and has stated that it expects demand will remain suppressed in 2021. As a result of lowered demand, United cut approximately 80% of its scheduled capacity for April 2020, 90% for May and June 2020, 75% for July 2020, 70% for August 2020, 60% for September 2020, 55% for October 2020, 50% for November 2020, and 55% for December 2020.
In response to lower demand for air travel, in the months of April through December 2020, United cut its scheduled capacity by between approximately 50% and 90%. As a result, beginning in March 2020, United significantly reduced Air Wisconsin’s scheduled departures and block hours actually flown, and temporarily ceased Air Wisconsin’s operations at Washington-Dulles from May 2020 through August 2020. While the continued severity and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are difficult to predict, the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to impact our financial condition and results of operations through the date of this Annual Report, which we expect to continue in the near term and result in a material impact on our financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations in future periods. Thus, the magnitude and scope of the effects on our business, including
the number of daily flights operated by us, and future results of operations, are highly uncertain and subject to change. Our forecasted expense reduction and liquidity management measures discussed below may be modified as we more clearly understand the timing of the recovery of passenger demand for air travel, and the scope of the broader economic impacts of the pandemic. However, Air Wisconsin’s receipt of governmental assistance has mitigated to some extent the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, liquidity and results of operations.
Impact on Competitive Environment
Worldwide, several regional and larger carriers have ceased operations as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In July 2020, United announced that it was terminating its flying agreement with ExpressJet Airlines, Inc. (“ExpressJet”). ExpressJet ceased operations in September 2020. As of the date of this filing, in addition to ExpressJet, Miami Air International, Trans States Airlines and Compass Airlines, each of which are domestic regional or charter airlines, have either filed for Chapter 11 or Chapter 7 bankruptcy or ceased operations.
Expense Management
We have taken a number of actions in response to the financial uncertainty and health concerns raised by the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we implemented cost-reduction initiatives to mitigate the impact on our operations and financial condition, while also protecting the safety of our customers and employees. Air Wisconsin delayed certain planned capital and operating expenditures, through actions it took such as delaying non-essential planned heavy airframe maintenance events, delaying non-essential maintenance events associated with engines and rotable parts, seeking concessions from third-party suppliers, offering voluntary short-term unpaid leave to employees, deferring the payment of the employer’s portion of employees’ social security tax payments, and furloughing certain employees. Air Wisconsin has been able to responsibly delay certain non-essential maintenance events primarily as a result of its reduced flight schedules.
In July 2020, Air Wisconsin informed approximately 871 employees that they might be furloughed or laid off as of October 1, 2020, through notices given pursuant to the federal Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (“WARN”) Act; and on October 1, 2020, Air Wisconsin furloughed or laid off approximately 305 employees, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting decrease in passenger demand for air travel. As of the date of this Annual Report, 116 of those employees who were furloughed have been recalled, accepted the recall offer and remain employed by Air Wisconsin. Through notices given in January 2021 pursuant to the WARN Act, Air Wisconsin informed approximately 150 pilots, each of whom had received the October 2020 WARN Act notices, that they might be furloughed on April 1, 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting decrease in passenger demand for air travel. As of the date of this Annual Report, no furloughs have yet been issued pursuant to these notices. The necessity and scope of any additional furloughs are highly uncertain and will be impacted by a number of factors, including the demand for air travel generally, the actual or estimated block hours for which Air Wisconsin is scheduled under the United capacity purchase agreement, and the timing and extent of any additional governmental assistance provided under the CARES Act, the PSP Extension Law and the American Rescue Plan (each described below) or otherwise.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), intended to provide economic relief to United States businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, was signed into law. In April 2020, Air Wisconsin received a $10.0 million loan (“SBA Loan”) under the small business Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) established under the CARES Act and administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The loan is forgivable subject to certain limitations, including that the loan proceeds be used to retain workers and for payroll, mortgage payments, leave payments and utility payments. These amounts were expended by Air Wisconsin during the year ended December 31, 2020. However, the process for applying for forgiveness with the lender has not been announced as of the date of filing this Annual Report. Therefore, as of the filing of this Annual Report, the loan has not been forgiven.
Payroll Support Program
In April 2020, Air Wisconsin entered into a Payroll Support Program Agreement (“PSP-1 Agreement”) with respect to payroll support from the U.S. Department of the Treasury (“Treasury”) under the payroll support program (“Payroll Support Program”) provided by the CARES Act. Pursuant to the Payroll Support Program, Air Wisconsin received approximately $42.2 million in 2020. These funds have been used to pay for the salaries and benefits of Air Wisconsin’s employees. The PSP-1 Agreement contains various covenants, including that the Payroll Support Program proceeds must be used exclusively for the payment of wages, salaries and benefits, that Air Wisconsin could not involuntarily terminate or furlough any employee prior to October 1, 2020, and that Air Wisconsin could not reduce any employee’s pay rates or benefits prior to October 1, 2020 without that employee’s consent. Through September 30, 2021, the PSP-1 Agreement also prohibits: (i) Air Wisconsin or any of its affiliates from purchasing an equity security of Air Wisconsin or any direct or indirect parent company of Air Wisconsin that is listed on a national securities exchange and (ii) Air Wisconsin from paying dividends, or making any other capital distributions, with respect to the common stock (or equivalent equity interest) of Air Wisconsin. If Air Wisconsin fails to comply with its obligations under the PSP-1 Agreement, it may be required to repay the funds provided to it under that agreement. Any such default, acceleration, insolvency or failure to comply would likely have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition, the CARES Act authorizes the Secretary of the Department of Transportation to impose certain air service obligations on recipients of payroll support under the CARES Act until March 1, 2022. To date, no such service obligation has been imposed on Air Wisconsin. The Treasury commenced a routine audit of Air Wisconsin’s compliance with the terms of the agreement. For additional information, refer to Note 8, Commitments and Contingencies, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
In December 2020, Congress adopted, and the President signed, the federal Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 (the “PSP Extension Law”), Subtitle A of Title IV of Division N of which provides for additional payroll support to eligible air carriers. In March 2021, pursuant to the PSP Extension Law, Air Wisconsin entered into a Payroll Support Program Extension Agreement (the “PSP-2 Agreement”), which is substantially similar to the PSP-1 Agreement. Air Wisconsin expects to receive approximately $28.3 million pursuant to the PSP-2 Agreement, approximately $15.5 million of which was received in March 2021 and the balance of which is expected to be received in April 2021.
In March 2021, Congress adopted, and the President signed, the federal American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, Subtitle C of Title VII (the “American Rescue Plan”) of which provides further payroll support to eligible air carriers. Air Wisconsin expects to apply for payroll support under the American Rescue Plan and expects that it will be required to enter into an agreement substantially similar to the PSP-1 Agreement and the PSP-2 Agreement, if it receives payroll support under the American Rescue Plan.
For additional information related to the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the sections entitled “Business - Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business and Industry,” and “Risk Factors” within this Annual Report within this Annual Report.
2020 Financial Highlights
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had total operating revenue of $185.9 million, a 29.5% decrease, compared to $263.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $39.8 million, or net income of $0.71 per basic share and $0.56 per diluted share, compared to a net loss of $19.2 million, or $0.35 per basic and diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information, refer to Note 12, Earnings per Share, and Note 13, Stock Options, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Revenue
The number of aircraft we have in scheduled service and the block hours and departures we generate from our flights are primary drivers of our revenue under the United capacity purchase agreement. As a result of lower passenger demand from the COVID-19 pandemic, block hours decreased from 161,566 during the year ended December 31, 2019 to 74,438 during the year ended December 31, 2020, or by 53.9%, and the number of departures decreased from 105,360 in 2019 to 52,405 in 2020, or by 50.3%.
Primarily as a result of the reduced flight schedules during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue from the United capacity purchase agreement decreased by 29.5% to $186.0 million. Furthermore, we deferred recognizing revenue of $43.2 million related to fixed payments received under the United capacity purchase agreement during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of significant reductions to our flight schedules. For additional information, refer to the section entitled “-Revenue Recognition.”
However, as a result of the October 2020 amendment to the United capacity purchase agreement, we recognized $28.7 million of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from the payment or accrual by United to Air Wisconsin based on certain scheduling benchmarks. For additional information, refer to Note 1 to Consolidated Financial Statements “-Contract and Other Revenues.”
Operating Expenses
Our total operating expenses decreased $141.9 million, or 49.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due to a number of factors including a significant reduction in the number of flights we operated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, due to the acquisitions of formerly leased aircraft in 2019 and 2020 aircraft rent decreased by $36.4 million in 2020 when compared to 2019, partially offset by an increase in depreciation of $8.9 million in 2020. Additionally, we recorded $42.2 million in payroll support grants received from the Treasury under the CARES Act as an offset to our operating expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020. For additional information, refer to the section entitled “-Results of Operations-Operating Expenses.”
Stock Repurchase Program
The Company’s board of directors has adopted a stock repurchase program pursuant to which the Company may initially repurchase up to $1.0 million of shares of its common stock during the first calendar month of the program, subject to an automatic increase of $1.0 million per calendar month thereafter. The number of shares to be repurchased, and the timing of any such repurchases, will depend on a number of factors, including the trading price of the common stock, the Company’s financial performance and liquidity position, general market conditions, applicable legal requirements and other factors. Repurchases may be affected through open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions, or any other lawful means. The Company may, but is not required to, effect repurchases under a trading plan adopted pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act, or subject to Rule 10b-18 under the Exchange Act. The Company is not obligated under the program to acquire any particular number or value of shares and can suspend or terminate the program at any time.
Economic Conditions, Challenges and Risks Impacting Financial Results
We believe that, although the United capacity purchase agreement reduces Air Wisconsin’s exposure to certain risks, its operating and business performance is driven by various factors that typically affect regional airlines and their markets, including factors that affect the broader airline and travel industries. The following key factors, in addition to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, may materially affect our future performance.
Contract Disputes. More than 99% of our operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were derived from operations associated with the United capacity purchase agreement. Agreements such as the United capacity purchase agreement are subject to interpretation, and disputes may arise if the parties apply different interpretations to the agreements.
Market Volatility. The airline industry is volatile and affected by economic cycles and other factors, such as tourist activity, consumer confidence, discretionary spending, fear of terrorism or war, global pandemics, as well as economic conditions, fare initiatives, fuel prices, labor actions, changes in governmental regulations, changes in taxes and fees, and weather. These factors have contributed to a number of reorganizations, bankruptcies, liquidations and business combinations among major and regional airlines. The effect of economic cycles and these other factors may be somewhat mitigated by Air Wisconsin’s reliance on the United capacity purchase agreement. If, however, United experiences a prolonged decline in passenger demand, or is negatively affected by low ticket prices or high fuel cost, it may materially reduce or inefficiently schedule Air Wisconsin’s scheduled flights in order to reduce its costs. Our financial performance could be negatively impacted by any adverse changes to the utilization of Air Wisconsin’s aircraft or operating efficiency of the flights scheduled under the United capacity purchase agreement.
Competition. The airline industry is highly competitive. Air Wisconsin competes principally with other regional airlines. We believe that major airlines typically award capacity purchase agreements to regional airlines based on the following criteria: aircraft fleet type; ability to fly proposed schedules; availability of labor resources, including pilots; proposed economic terms; aircraft and engine resources; financial resources; operational reliability; reputation; customer service levels; and other factors. The extension of the United capacity purchase agreement and Air Wisconsin’s ability to earn additional flying opportunities in the future will depend, in significant part, on its ability to maintain a low-cost structure competitive with other regional air carriers.
Maintenance Contracts, Costs and Timing. Air Wisconsin’s employees perform routine airframe and engine maintenance along with periodic inspections of equipment at its maintenance facilities. It also uses third-party vendors for certain heavy airframe and engine maintenance work, along with parts procurement and component overhaul services for Air Wisconsin’s aircraft. As of December 31, 2020, the average age of Air Wisconsin’s CRJ-200 regional jets was more than 18 years. We expect that maintenance costs will increase as its fleet continues to age.
We use the direct expense method of accounting for Air Wisconsin’s maintenance of airframes, rotable parts, and normal recurring maintenance and for Lotus’ maintenance of engines, pursuant to which we recognize the expense when the maintenance work is completed. We use the deferral method of accounting for Air Wisconsin’s planned major maintenance activities for engines pursuant to which the capitalized engine overhaul costs are amortized over the estimated useful life measured in engine cycles remaining until the next scheduled shop visit.
While Air Wisconsin keeps a record of expected maintenance events, the actual timing and costs of maintenance expense are subject to variables such as estimated usage, government regulations and the level of unscheduled maintenance events and their actual costs.
Aircraft Leases. As of December 31, 2019, Air Wisconsin had thirteen aircraft in its fleet under lease. During the year ended December 31, 2020, in three different transactions, Air Wisconsin acquired all of the remaining aircraft that were under various lease agreements. Therefore, as of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin no longer had any operational aircraft under lease. In order to determine the proper classification of its leased aircraft as either operating leases or finance leases, we must make certain estimates at the inception of the lease relating to the economic useful life and the fair value of the aircraft, as well as select an appropriate discount rate to be used in discounting future lease payments. These estimates are utilized by management to assess whether the lease is classified as an operating lease or a finance lease under existing accounting standards. All of Air Wisconsin’s aircraft leases are classified as operating leases. In accordance with the new accounting standard Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 842, which the Company adopted in 2019, these leases have been included on the Balance Sheet under Other Assets as operating lease right-of-use assets. For additional information, refer to Note 4, Property and Equipment, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Labor. The airline industry is heavily unionized. The wages, benefits and work rules of unionized airline industry employees are determined by collective bargaining agreements. As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin had 1,042 full-time employees and 21 part-time employees, for a total of 1,063 employees, of which 841 were represented by unions. Air Wisconsin’s pilots, represented by the Airline Pilots Association, ratified a three-year extension to their collective bargaining agreement with Air Wisconsin in November 2019, and the agreement now becomes amendable in November 2022. Air Wisconsin’s collective bargaining agreement with its mechanics and related employees, represented by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers is amendable and is in mediated negotiations. Conflicts between airlines and their unions can lead to work slowdowns or stoppages. A strike or other significant labor dispute with Air Wisconsin’s unionized employees may adversely affect Air Wisconsin’s ability to conduct business.
Availability and Training of Qualified Pilots. On July 8, 2013, as directed by the U.S. Congress, the FAA issued more stringent pilot qualification and crew member flight training standards, which, among other things, increased the required training time for new airline pilots from 250 hours to 1,500 hours of flight time. These changes dramatically reduced the supply of qualified pilot candidates eligible for hiring by the airline industry and, in response, regional airlines implemented significant pilot wage and bonus increases. In recent years, Air Wisconsin experienced a significant increase in pilot attrition, and our results of operations may be negatively impacted if Air Wisconsin is unable to hire and train pilots in a timely manner; however, as a result of the reduction in scheduled flights due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the airline industry is currently experiencing a surplus of pilots.
Refer to the section entitled “Risk Factors” within this Annual Report for a discussion of certain risks and uncertainties applicable to our business and operations.
Seasonality
Our results of operations for any interim period are not necessarily indicative of those for the entire year because the airline industry is subject to seasonal fluctuations and general economic conditions. While Air Wisconsin’s operations can be negatively impacted by factors outside of its control, including inclement weather, the United capacity purchase agreement mitigates some of the risks associated with seasonal fluctuations.
Components of Our Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key components of our consolidated statements of operations.
Operating Revenue
Our consolidated operating revenue consists primarily of contract revenue from flight services.
Contract Revenue. Contract revenue consists of the fixed monthly amounts per aircraft received pursuant to the United capacity purchase agreement, along with the additional amounts received based on the number of flights and block hours flown. The United capacity purchase agreement includes provisional cash payments four times a month based on a projected level of flying each month. Air Wisconsin and United subsequently reconcile these payments to the actual completed flight activity on a monthly basis. In addition, contract revenue in 2020 includes the impact of the amendment to the United capacity purchase agreement that Air Wisconsin entered into in October 2020 which, among other things, settled certain disputes that had existed between United and Air Wisconsin regarding amounts owed to Air Wisconsin under the United capacity purchase agreement and provides for the payment or accrual of certain amounts by United to Air Wisconsin based on certain scheduling benchmarks. The accruals are evidenced by notes receivable from United to Air Wisconsin.
Contract Services and Other. Contract services and other revenue are not material and primarily consist of the sale of parts.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of the following items:
Payroll and Related Costs. Payroll and related expenses primarily relate to wages, benefits and payroll taxes for all Air Wisconsin’s employees, as well as costs related to lodging of our flight crews and crew training expenses.
Aircraft Fuel and Oil. Substantially all aircraft fuel and related fueling costs for flying under the United capacity purchase agreement are directly paid and supplied by United; we do not record any revenue or expense for such fuel. We include the cost of aircraft oil, which we are responsible for under the United capacity purchase agreement, although that expense is not material.
Aircraft Maintenance, Materials and Repairs. Aircraft maintenance, materials and repairs include costs related to airframe and rotable overhauls, normal recurring maintenance and the cost of aircraft materials and parts related to Air Wisconsin’s CRJ-200 regional jets and the cost of engine maintenance by Lotus. With the exception of engine overhauls by Air Wisconsin, we record these costs using the direct expense method of accounting, pursuant to which the expense is recognized when the maintenance work is completed. As a result of using the direct expense method, the timing of maintenance expense reflected in the financial statements may vary from period to period. We capitalize Air Wisconsin’s engine overhaul costs, and the amortization expense is included in aircraft maintenance, materials and repairs using the deferral method of accounting; Air Wisconsin’s engine overhaul costs are amortized over the estimated useful life of the overhaul measured in engine cycles remaining until the next scheduled shop visit.
Aircraft Rent. Aircraft rent includes costs related to leased aircraft, including any lease termination expenses related to aircraft acquired prior to the end of their lease term.
Other Rents. Other rents include expenses related to leased engines, costs related to leased flight simulators used to train Air Wisconsin’s pilots, and building rents such as crew and maintenance bases and corporate office space.
Depreciation, Amortization and Obsolescence. Depreciation expense is a periodic non-cash charge primarily related to aircraft, engine and rotable parts depreciation. Obsolescence expense is a periodic non-cash charge primarily related to the provision for obsolescence on our expendable aircraft parts.
Purchased Services and Other. Purchased services and other expense primarily includes third-party aircraft line maintenance support in Chicago (O’Hare) and Washington (Dulles), information technology systems, legal fees, professional and technical fees, insurance and property taxes and other administrative expenses. The majority of insurance and property taxes are pass-through costs to United.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest Expense. Interest expense is interest primarily relating to Air Wisconsin’s debt under the Aircraft Credit Agreements and the Other Credit Agreements.
Interest Income. Interest income includes interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalent balance and notes receivable due from United.
Other. Other income (expense) includes income (expense) derived from activities not classified in any other area of the consolidated statements of income.
Segment Reporting
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing operating performance. In consideration of ASC 280, “Segment Reporting,” we are not organized around specific services or geographic regions. We currently operate in one service line providing scheduled flight services in accordance with the United capacity purchase agreement.
Our chief operating decision maker uses consolidated financial information to evaluate our performance, which is the same basis on which she communicates our results and performance to the Company’s board of directors. She bases all significant decisions regarding the allocation of our resources on a consolidated basis. Based on the information described above and in accordance with the applicable literature, management has concluded that we are organized and operated as one operating and reportable segment.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
We had operating income of $43.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to an operating loss of $20.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net income of $39.8 million compared to a net loss of $19.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Revenue
Total operating revenue decreased by $77.7 million, or 29.5%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Contract revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $77.6 million, or 29.5%, primarily due to a decrease in flying as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Air Wisconsin’s block hours flown during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 53.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, also due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Payroll and Related Costs. Payroll and related costs decreased $27.4 million, or 21.7%, to $99.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in pilot wages, bonuses and training expenses of $11.8 million. Other wages, taxes and benefits decreased by $9.0 million, and personnel expenses decreased by $6.6 million.
Aircraft Fuel and Oil. Substantially all fuel costs related to flying under Air Wisconsin’s capacity purchase agreement with United during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were directly paid to suppliers by United. Aircraft fuel and oil expense primarily reflects the costs associated with aircraft oil purchases. This decrease was primarily due to a significant reduction in the number of flights we operated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Aircraft Maintenance, Materials and Repairs. Aircraft maintenance, materials and repairs costs decreased $30.5 million, or 52.7%, to $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily driven a by a decrease in required maintenance due to a reduction in flying attributable to reduced passenger demand for air transportation.
Aircraft Rent. Aircraft rent expense decreased $36.4 million, or 84.4%, to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was partly attributable to Air Wisconsin’s acquisition of 14 CRJ-200 aircraft in July 2019 resulting in aircraft lease termination costs in the amount of $19.4 million that was recorded as rent expense in September 2019. Comparable rent expense for these 14 aircraft in 2019 was $8.7 million. The Company’s acquisition from an affiliate of aircraft and engines in January 2020 resulted in reduced rent expense of $1.8 million for 2020 compared to 2019. In May 2020, Air Wisconsin purchased eight additional aircraft that it had previously leased resulting in a decrease of $6.9 million in aircraft rent, net of a lease termination fee of $0.8 million in 2020 when compared to 2019. In September 2020, Air Wisconsin purchased the remaining two leased aircraft that resulted in aircraft lease termination costs in the amount of $0.5 million that was recorded as rent expense in September 2020. Rent for these two aircraft in 2020 was $1.8 million compared to $2.7 million in 2019. For additional information, refer to Note 4, Property and Equipment, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other Rents. Other rents expense decreased $3.8 million, or 45.3%, to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $1.6 million in engine rents resulting from the Company’s acquisition from an affiliate of engines in January 2020 and a decrease of $2.2 million in flight training simulator rental expense.
Depreciation, Amortization and Obsolescence. Depreciation, amortization and obsolescence expense increased $2.0 million, or 7.9%, to $27.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to the acquisitions in July 2019, January 2020, May 2020 and September 2020 of aircraft and engines previously leased by Air Wisconsin. For additional information, refer to Note 4, Property and Equipment, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
CARES Act Payroll Support Program. In April 2020, Air Wisconsin entered into the PSP-1 Agreement to receive emergency relief through the Payroll Support Program in the form of payroll support paid in installments through October 2020. Air Wisconsin received approximately $42.2 million under the PSP-1 Agreement all of which was recognized during 2020 as a reduction in expense over the periods the payroll support was intended to offset payroll expenses.
Purchased Services and Other. Purchased services and other expense decreased $3.5 million, or 14.9%, to $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a $0.5 million decrease in uncollectible accounts and a $1.4 million decrease in on call maintenance expense, line maintenance and charters, this is offset by a $0.5 million increase in professional, legal expenses, and other in 2020 compared to 2019, and $2.1 million more in losses on the sale and retirement of assets in 2019 when compared to 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income. Interest income decreased $0.6 million, or 50.6%, to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in interest earned on short-term investments offset by interest earned on notes receivable from United in the amount of $0.3 million.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $0.07 million, or 3.9%, to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due primarily to a decrease in the principal amount outstanding under Air Wisconsin’s credit agreements with its lender. For additional information, refer to the subsection entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Debt and Credit Facilities” within this Annual Report.
Other Income (Expense). Other income (expense) decreased $2.5 million, or 100.8%, to $0.02 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributable to the receipt of periodic payments in the year ended December 31, 2019 relating to the termination of residual value agreements on 35 owned aircraft.
Income Taxes
In the year ended December 31, 2020, our effective tax rate was 5.8%, compared to 1.8% in the year ended December 31, 2019. Our tax rate can vary depending on changes in tax laws, adoption of accounting standards, the amount of income we earn in each state and the state tax rate applicable to such income, as well as any valuation allowance required on our federal and state net operating losses.
We recorded an income tax provision of $2.5 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted in an effective tax rate of 5.8%, which differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to the impact of state taxes and permanent differences between financial statement and taxable income and changes in federal and state valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. In addition to the state effective tax rate impact, other state impacts include changes in state apportionment and statutory rates.
The income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted in an effective tax rate of 1.8%, which differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of state taxes and permanent differences between financial statement and taxable income and changes in federal and state valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. In addition to the state effective tax rate impact, other state impacts include changes in state apportionment and statutory rates.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, signed into law on December 22, 2017, decreased the federal statutory rate to 21% and also allowed for federal net operating losses to have an indefinite life with certain limitations. The Company’s net operating losses incurred in the year ended December 31, 2019 may be used to offset up to 80% of taxable income in a given year.
As of December 31, 2020, we had aggregate federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $27.6 million and $9.1 million. The federal net operating losses do not have an expiration date while the state net operating losses expire beginning in 2024, with some states having either longer expiration periods or none at all.
Refer to Note 5, Income Taxes, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. As such, the ongoing impact that the pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations is highly uncertain. Management is actively monitoring the impact on our operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. We are taking actions based on currently available information to address the changing business environment; however, we cannot predict what changes in circumstances and future developments may occur or what effect those changes or developments may have on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity. The travel restrictions and other initiatives adopted to limit the spread of the virus have had, and will continue to have, a material adverse impact on the demand for air travel.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Air Wisconsin requires cash to fund its operating expenses and working capital requirements, which include outlays for capital expenditures, labor, maintenance, aircraft rent and to pay debt service obligations, including principal and interest payments. Our cash needs vary from period to period primarily based on the timing and costs of significant maintenance events. Our principal sources of liquidity are cash on hand, and cash generated from operations. In the near term, Air Wisconsin expects to fund its primary cash requirements through cash generated from operations and cash and cash equivalents balances.
Air Wisconsin’s ability to service its long-term debt obligations and to fund working capital, capital expenditures and business development efforts will depend on its ability to generate cash from operating activities, which is subject to, among other things, its future operating performance, as well as other factors, some of which may be beyond our control. If Air Wisconsin fails to generate sufficient cash from operations, it may need to obtain debt financing to achieve its longer-term objectives, which may not be available on acceptable terms.
We believe our available working capital and anticipated cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report. To the extent that results or events differ from our financial projections or business plans, our liquidity may be adversely impacted.
During the ordinary course of business, we evaluate our cash requirements and, if necessary, adjust operating and capital expenditures to reflect the current market conditions and our projected demand. Our capital expenditures are typically used to acquire or maintain aircraft and flight equipment for Air Wisconsin. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid $8.7 million in capital expenditures primarily related to purchases of aircraft and, rotable parts and capitalized engine overhauls. Future capital expenditures may be impacted by events and transactions that are not currently forecasted.
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $130.4 million, inclusive of the $50.8 million in cash and cash equivalents held by Air Wisconsin. The United capacity purchase agreement and Air Wisconsin’s credit agreements with its lender contain restrictions that limit Air Wisconsin’s ability to pay, or prohibits it from paying, dividends or distributions to the Company. In addition, the PSP-1 Agreement and the PSP-2 Agreement prevent it from paying dividends prior to March 31, 2022.
Furthermore, as of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin had $107.8 million (including capitalized interest of $10.9 million) in secured indebtedness incurred in connection with the Aircraft Credit Agreements. In April 2020, Air Wisconsin also received $10.0 million under the PPP. Air Wisconsin’s primary uses of liquidity are capital expenditures and debt repayments. As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin had $23.6 million of short-term debt, and $94.2 million of long-term debt.
Sources of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily cash flow from operations of $73.2 million.
Restricted Cash
As of December 31, 2020, in addition to the cash and cash equivalents of $130.4 million, Air Wisconsin had $0.8 million in restricted cash which primarily relates to a credit facility used for the issuance of cash collateralized letters of credit supporting our worker’s compensation insurance program and landing fees at certain airports. Restricted cash includes amounts escrowed in an interest-bearing account that secure the credit facility.
Cash Flow
The following table presents information regarding our cash flow for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Flow Provided by Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash flow provided by operating activities was $73.2 million. We had net income of $39.8 million which primarily resulted from lower expenses as a result of payroll support received under the PSP-1 Agreement, and lower expenses related to reduced flying activity, further adjusted for increases in cash primarily related to long-term deferred revenue of $30.7 million under the United capacity purchase agreement, depreciation and engine overhaul amortization of $28.5 million, $2.5 million related to operating lease right of use assets, contract liabilities of $12.3 million and deferred income taxes of $3.6 million, partially offset by decreases in cash primarily related to notes receivable of $32.4 million, accounts payable of $7.8 million, amortization of contract costs of $2.5 million, prepaid expenses of $1.9 million and accounts receivable of $2.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our cash flow provided by operating activities of $25.5 million reflected Air Wisconsin’s improved block hour and departure production. We had a net loss of $19.2 million adjusted for the following significant non-cash items: depreciation, amortization and obsolescence of $25.2 million, lease termination costs of $19.4 million, amortization of engine overhauls of $4.1 million and amortization of contract costs of $3.7 million. We had a net change of $(3.7) million within other net operating assets and liabilities largely driven by accounts payable during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Cash Flow Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash flow used in investing activities was $8.7 million resulting primarily from the purchase of aircraft and an investment in rotable parts and engine overhauls to support Air Wisconsin’s fleet under the United capacity purchase agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our net cash flow used in investing activities was $20.9 million. We invested $21.5 million in new and used aircraft engines to support Air Wisconsin’s fleet under the United capacity purchase agreement, offset by $0.6 million from proceeds on disposition of property and equipment.
Net Cash Flow (Used in) Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in financing activities was $3.6 million, reflecting Air Wisconsin’s receipt of a $10.0 million loan under the PPP established pursuant to the CARES Act, partially offset by a dividend payment of $0.8 million on the Series C Preferred and payments of long-term debt of $12.8 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our net cash flow provided by financing activities was $4.6 million. Air Wisconsin received $11.8 million in proceeds from a note payable further described in the section entitled “- Other Credit Agreements” within this Annual Report. Air Wisconsin made $7.2 million of principal repayments on long-term debt during the period under those same agreements.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin had $126.8 million of long-term debt (including principal and projected interest obligations) and operating lease obligations (including current maturities). This amount consisted of $97.0 million in long-term notes payable related to owned aircraft used in continuing operations and a long-term note payable in the amount of $10.0 million under the PPP. As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin also had $7.1 million of operating lease obligations primarily related to facilities. Air Wisconsin’s debt obligations set forth below include an aggregate of $12.7 million in projected interest costs through 2025 and beyond.
The following table sets forth our cash obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The principal amount of the Aircraft Notes is payable in semi-annual installments of $3.5 million commencing June 30, 2021, with certain additional amounts payable based on excess cash flow. No excess cash flow payments are anticipated in the above table. As of December 31, 2020, all of our long-term debt was subject to fixed interest rates. For additional information, refer to Note 6, Debt, included in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Series C Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock Financing
In January 2020, the Company completed an acquisition from Southshore Aircraft Holdings, LLC and its affiliated entities (“Southshore”) of three CRJ-200 regional jets, each having two General Electric (“GE”) engines, plus five additional GE engines, in exchange for the issuance of 4,000,000 shares of the Company’s Series C Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock (the “Series C Preferred”) with an aggregate value of $13.2 million, or $3.30 per share (the “Series C Issue Price”). Air Wisconsin had leased each of these CRJ-200 regional jets and GE engines from Southshore under lease arrangements described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Economic Conditions, Challenges and Risks Impacting Results - Aircraft Leases” contained within our 2019 Annual Report.
In November 2019, the Board of Directors formed a special committee to evaluate this acquisition from Southshore. Messrs. Bederman and Degen, each of whom was a “disinterested director” for purposes of the transaction, were appointed to serve as members of the special committee. The committee retained special committee counsel, a financial advisor, and an independent valuation firm to advise it on the acquisition. The special committee met frequently, including with its advisors, throughout the process of analyzing, negotiating and completing the transaction, with both members present for all meetings. The special committee’s financial advisor delivered to the special committee its opinion as to the fairness, from a financial point of view, to the Company and its stockholders of the consideration to be paid by the Company in the acquisition. The Company completed the acquisition following the approval of the special committee. In January 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Designations, Preferences, and Rights of Series C Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock (“Certificate of Designations”) with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, which establishes the rights, preferences, privileges, qualifications, restrictions and limitations relating to the Series C Preferred.
Series C Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock
The Series C Preferred accrues cumulative quarterly dividends at the rate per share of 6.0% of the Series C Issue Price per annum, which are cumulative and compound quarterly to the extent dividends have not been declared by the Board of Directors (the “Preferential Dividends”). From and after December 31, 2023, upon the election of holders of a majority of the outstanding Series C Preferred, the rate of the Preferential Dividends shall be increased by an additional 1.0% per annum per share for each and every six-month period following such election (the “Dividend Ratchet”). At the option of the Board of Directors, in lieu of paying the Preferential Dividends and the Conversion Cap Excess Dividends (as defined below) in cash, all or some of such dividends may be paid in additional shares of Series C Preferred (the “PIK Dividends”).
Each share of Series C Preferred is initially convertible, at any time after issuance, into that number of shares of common stock determined by dividing the then applicable Series C Liquidation Amount (defined below) by $0.80, subject to certain adjustments set forth in the Certificate of Designations (the “Conversion Price”). One of the requirements of the Certificate of Designations is that the Conversion Price be adjusted to equal the Weighted Average Price (as defined in the Certificate of Designations) of the common stock during the Reporting Adjustment Period. The “Reporting Adjustment Period” is the first 90-trading day period commencing on or after August 28, 2020 (which is the first trading day following the day that is 45 days following the date on which the Company provided notice to its stockholders of the filing of its 2019 Annual Report) during which an aggregate of at least 5.0% of the outstanding shares of common stock are traded. The Conversion Price has been adjusted as of January 7, 2021 to be $0.15091.
The conversion of Series C Preferred is subject to a limitation on the number of shares of the common stock that may be issued upon conversion of Series C Preferred equal to the sum of (a) 16,500,000, plus (b) the quotient of (i) the aggregate amount of all accrued and unpaid Preferential Dividends divided by (ii) $0.80, (the “Conversion Cap”) plus (c) the quotient of (i) the number of shares of Series C Preferred issued as PIK Dividends multiplied by the Series C Issue Price, divided by (ii) $0.80. Any outstanding shares of Series C Preferred that may not be converted pursuant to the limitation described herein (the “Conversion Cap Excess Shares”), from and after December 31, 2022, in addition to the Preferential Dividends, shall accrue cumulative quarterly dividends equal to an amount per share equal to 0.5% of the Series C Liquidation Amount (as defined below) of each outstanding Conversion Cap Excess Share in the first quarter after December 31, 2022, and increasing an additional 0.5% of the Series C Liquidation Amount in each subsequent quarter (the “Conversion Cap Excess Dividends”). As of the date of the adjustment to the Conversion Price, effective as of January 7, 2021, the Conversion Cap equaled 16,500,000 shares of common stock, and 3,245,450 shares of the Series C Preferred would be deemed Conversion Cap Excess Shares.
In the event of any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company or a sale of the Company, the Series C Preferred shall be entitled to receive, prior and in preference to any distribution of any assets of the Company to the common stock or other junior capital stock, an amount equal to the Series C Issue Price, plus an amount equal to all accrued but unpaid Preferential Dividends, Conversion Cap Excess Dividends and any other accrued but unpaid dividends (the “Series C Liquidation Amount”).
At any time following the earliest of (a) the date that is four years after the earlier of the Reporting Date or (i) any merger or consolidation to which the Company is a constituent party and to which one or more third-party entities, unaffiliated with the Company, are constituent parties or (ii) any transaction or series of related transactions pursuant to which the Company shall issue or sell a number of shares of common stock greater than 5.0% of the number of shares of common stock then outstanding, (b) the date the Dividend Ratchet has been initiated, (c) any time that fewer than 800,000 shares of Series C Preferred are outstanding, and (d) December 31, 2024, the Company shall have the right to redeem all, but not less than all, of the shares of Series C Preferred then outstanding at a per share price equal to the then current Series C Liquidation Amount (the “Redemption Price”). At any time after the outstanding shares of Series C Preferred are deemed Conversion Cap Excess Shares, the Company shall have the right to redeem all, but not less than all, of the Conversion Cap Excess Shares then outstanding at the Redemption Price.
In January 2020, the Company also entered into an Investors’ Rights Agreement with Southshore, pursuant to which the Company agreed, if requested by Southshore at any time following the 180-day period after the Company became subject to the reporting requirements under the Exchange Act, to file with the SEC a registration statement on a Form S-1 with respect to at least 40% of the common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series C Preferred then outstanding (or a lesser percent if the anticipated aggregate offering price, net of selling expenses, would exceed $10 million), along with other registration rights. All reasonable expenses related to any such registration shall be borne by the Company. The Investors’ Rights Agreement further provides that, whenever the members of the Board of Directors are to be elected, Southshore will vote to elect a majority of directors comprising the Board of Directors that qualify as independent directors.
On April 15, 2020, June 30, 2020, September 29, 2020 and December 30, 2020, the Board of Directors declared dividends of $165, $198, $198 and $198, respectively, on the Series C Preferred, which were paid on April 20, 2020, July 1, 2020, September 30, 2020, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Based on the applicable accounting guidance, the Company is required to apply the “if-converted” method to the Series C Preferred to determine the weighted average number of shares outstanding for purposes of calculating the net income (loss) per share of common stock. However, conversion is not assumed for purposes of computing diluted earnings per share if the effect would be anti-dilutive.
The number of shares of common stock into which the Series C Preferred is convertible, as determined for purposes of calculating the net income (loss) per share of common stock, may not be consistent with the actual number of shares into which the Series C Preferred is convertible pursuant to the Certificate of Designations on any particular date.
As of December 31, 2020, pursuant to the Certificate of Designations, the Series C Preferred was convertible into an aggregate of 16,500,000 shares of common stock. Following the adjustment of the conversion price of the Series C Preferred effective as of January 7, 2021, the Series C Preferred is convertible into an aggregate of 16,500,000 shares of common stock, representing approximately 23.1% of the fully diluted shares of capital stock of the Company (assuming the full conversion of the Series C Preferred into common stock). Following the adjustment of the Conversion Price to $0.15091 per share, effective as of January 7, 2021, in accordance with the Conversion Cap set forth in the Certificate of Designations, the Series C Preferred remains convertible into an aggregate of 16,500,000 shares of common stock as of the date of filing this Annual Report.
The Company accounts for its Series C Preferred in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Based on the applicable accounting guidance, preferred stock that is conditionally redeemable is classified as temporary or “mezzanine” equity. Accordingly, the Series C Preferred, which is subject to conditional redemption, is presented at redemption value as mezzanine equity outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the consolidated balance sheets.
Aircraft Operating Leases
As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin had no operating aircraft remaining on lease. As of December 31, 2019, Air Wisconsin had 13 aircraft remaining on lease with lease terms ending within 12 months. Future minimum lease payments due under these aircraft operating leases were approximately $2.7 million as of December 31, 2019.
Debt and Credit Facilities
Aircraft Credit Agreements
In seven separate transactions occurring in 2003 and 2004, Air Wisconsin financed the acquisition of 35 CRJ-200 regional jets through the issuance of senior aircraft notes to a loan trustee on behalf of a senior lender (the “Lender”) and subordinated aircraft notes to the loan trustee on behalf of a subordinated lender (the “Subordinated Lender”). The senior aircraft notes and the subordinated aircraft notes were governed by seven credit agreements. Prior to December 2018, the Lender acquired all of the subordinated aircraft notes from the subordinated lender.
On December 24, 2018, Air Wisconsin entered into a debt restructuring arrangement with the Lender, as holder of all of the senior aircraft notes and subordinated aircraft notes, and a loan trustee for the Lender (the “Loan Trustee”). The seven original credit agreements were amended and restated as part of that restructuring, and those seven amended and restated credit agreements (the “Aircraft Credit Agreements”) remain in effect. Prior to the restructuring, the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the senior aircraft notes and the subordinated aircraft notes was approximately $246.8 million. Pursuant to the restructuring, the outstanding principal and accrued interest on the subordinated aircraft notes were forgiven and deemed paid in full, and the senior aircraft notes outstanding under the original credit agreements were cancelled and exchanged for notes in an outstanding principal amount of $70.0 million. All principal on the senior aircraft notes in excess of $70.0 million and all interest accrued on the senior aircraft notes prior to December 24, 2018 was forgiven and deemed paid in full. The notes issued under the Aircraft Credit Agreements (the “Aircraft Notes”) bear interest at the rate of 4% per annum and mature on December 31, 2025. Interest on the Aircraft Notes is paid quarterly. The principal amount of the Aircraft Notes is payable in semi-annual installments of $3.5 million commencing June 30, 2021, with certain additional amounts payable based on excess cash flow. Each Aircraft Note issued pursuant to an Aircraft Credit Agreement is secured by each aircraft acquired with the proceeds of any of the original seven credit agreements and by certain spare aircraft, spare engines and spare parts.
The Aircraft Credit Agreements contain covenants that, subject to exceptions described in the Aircraft Credit Agreements, include, without limitation, (i) require Air Wisconsin to provide certain financial and other information, (ii) provide certain inspection rights to the Loan Trustee, (iii) restrict Air Wisconsin’s ability to consolidate with or merge into any other person or sell, convey, lease or otherwise transfer all or substantially all of its assets to any other person, (iv) restrict Air Wisconsin’s ability to make payments to its affiliates, and (v) grant to the Loan Trustee security interests in certain after-acquired aircraft, spare engines and spare parts. The Aircraft Credit Agreements also contain customary events of default, including, without limitation: (a) payment defaults, (b) breach of covenants, (c) breach of representations and warranties, (d) cross-defaults, (e) certain bankruptcy-related defaults, (f) the occurrence of certain judgments, and (g) loss of first priority security interest in certain collateral. As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin was in compliance with the covenants under the Aircraft Credit Agreements, and no event of default existed under the Aircraft Credit Agreements. Neither the Company nor any of its other subsidiaries has guaranteed or provided any other credit support with respect to the Aircraft Notes or other obligations of Air Wisconsin under the Aircraft Credit Agreements.
Other Credit Agreements
Air Wisconsin entered into a credit agreement with the Lender in June 2017 in the amount of approximately $14.4 million. This loan bore interest at a rate of 5% per annum. Principal and interest were paid quarterly, provided that the Lender on March 30, 2020 agreed to a deferral until September 30, 2020, of all interest and principal payments due between March 31, 2020 and September 29, 2020. This loan was secured by certain aircraft, spare engines and spare parts and was paid in full in December 2020.
In January 2018, Air Wisconsin entered into a second credit agreement with the Lender to borrow approximately $15.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2018. On December 24, 2018, the Lender and Air Wisconsin entered into a first amendment to that credit agreement in which the Lender agreed to make an additional loan in the amount of $5.8 million on April 30, 2019. In April 2019, Air Wisconsin entered into a second amendment with respect to the 2018 credit agreement that extended the due date of one of the payments due in the amount of $7.3 million from July 2019 to July 2020. In June 2019, Air Wisconsin entered into a third amendment to the 2018 credit agreement that changed the due date of the installment payment of $7.3 million, due July 2020, to December 2021. The amendment also provided Air Wisconsin the option to make the March 2020 and June 2020 payments under the 2017 credit agreement, totaling $7.2 million, in December 2019, in return for allowing the deferral of the December 2019 payment under the 2018 credit agreement, in the amount of $7.9 million, to be made into two installments of $4.0 million due in March and June of 2022. Air Wisconsin exercised this option. The June 2019 amendment also increased the loan amount of the 2018 credit agreement by $6.0 million, to a total of $27.0 million, and the amendment extended the maturity date to June 30, 2022, at which time the $6.0 million is also due. The loans under the 2018 credit agreement have an interest rate of 5% and a maturity date of June 30, 2022, and are secured by Air Wisconsin’s owned aircraft and certain spare engines and spare parts. Air Wisconsin concluded that the amendments discussed above should be classified as a troubled debt restructuring due to the Lender granting changes to the amortization schedule and extending the loan maturity dates in the amendments. The 2017 credit agreement and the 2018 credit agreement with the Lender may be referred to herein as the “Other Credit Agreements.”
SBA Loan and Treasury Payroll Support
In April 2020, Air Wisconsin entered into an agreement with a lender for a $10.0 million loan under the small business Paycheck Protection Program established under the CARES Act and administered by the SBA to promote continued employment, which loan is forgivable subject to certain conditions, such as that the proceeds be used primarily for payroll purposes. Air Wisconsin has received the full amount of that loan. These amounts were expended by Air Wisconsin during the year ended December 31, 2020. However, the process for applying for forgiveness with the lender has not been announced as of the date of filing this Annual Report. Therefore, as of the date of filing this Annual Report, the loan has not been forgiven.
In April 2020, Air Wisconsin also entered into the PSP-1 Agreement with the Treasury for payroll support under the CARES Act in the amount of approximately $42.2 million, which was paid in several installments through October 2020. The PSP-1 Agreement contains various covenants, including that the payroll support proceeds must be used exclusively for the payment of wages, salaries and benefits, that Air Wisconsin could not involuntarily terminate or furlough any employee prior to October 1, 2020, and that Air Wisconsin could not reduce any employee’s pay rates or benefits prior to October 1, 2020, without that employee’s consent. As of December 31, 2020, Air Wisconsin has expended the amounts received and believes it has done so in accordance with the requirements of the PSP-1 Agreement.
Maintenance Commitments
Air Wisconsin has entered into three non-exclusive heavy maintenance services agreements for certain maintenance, repair and modification services with respect to airframes owned or operated by Air Wisconsin, and one exclusive engine maintenance agreement to perform certain maintenance, repair, restoration, overhaul, modification and other services on aircraft engines owned or operated by Air Wisconsin, with four maintenance and repair organizations, based on fixed pricing schedules. Two of the non-exclusive heavy maintenance services agreements are subject to certain escalation of labor rates, and have an initial term through September 2022 and December 2022, but Air Wisconsin has the right to extend the term for up to two renewal terms of one year each, on the same terms and conditions as during the initial terms. The third non-exclusive heavy maintenance service agreement is for a one-year term expiring on September 11, 2021. The exclusive engine maintenance agreement is subject to an annual escalation and has an initial term through May 2021, but Air Wisconsin has the right to extend the term for up to two renewal terms of one year each, on the same terms and conditions, including pricing, as during the initial term. Air Wisconsin has extended the term of this agreement for one year through May 2022. Due to reduced flying caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, Air Wisconsin’s expenditures under these agreements were significantly less in 2020 than in 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
An off-balance sheet arrangement is any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement involving an unconsolidated entity under which a company has (i) made guarantees, (ii) a retained or a contingent interest in transferred assets, (iii) an obligation under derivative instruments classified as equity or (iv) any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us, or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development arrangements with us.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements of the types described in the four categories above that we believe may have material current or future effect on financial condition, liquidity or results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. In doing so, we must make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, as well as related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations would be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting estimates, which we discuss below.
We have identified the accounting policies discussed below as critical to us. The discussion below is not intended to be a comprehensive list of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
Because our flights are distinct services that have the same pattern of transfer to the customer, satisfied over time with the measure of progress for each flight deemed to be substantially the same, the flight services promised in the capacity purchase agreement represent a series of services that are accounted for as a single performance obligation. Therefore, our contract revenues are recognized when service is provided and our performance obligation is determined on a per completed flight basis. The performance obligation of each completed flight is measured using departures.
Additionally, under the United capacity purchase agreement, we receive a fixed payment based on a daily rate for each aircraft covered by the agreement over the agreement term (“Fixed Payments”). We recognize revenue attributed to the Fixed Payments proportionate to the number of departures completed during each reporting period, relative to the estimated number of departures we anticipate completing over the remaining contract term. Due to the material decrease in completed departures in 2020 from historical levels and from anticipated future levels over the remaining contract term, we determined the amount of Fixed Payments we received in 2020 was disproportionately high relative to the number of departures we completed during 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we deferred recognizing revenue of $43.2 million in Fixed Payments we received during the 2020 calendar year. We deferred recognizing revenue of $22.5 million during the second quarter of 2020 when we had 4,663 departures, $15.4 million during the third quarter of 2020 when we had 8,527 departures, and $5.3 million during the fourth quarter of 2020 when we had 13,799 departures. The amount of deferred revenue from Fixed Payments we recognize will increase or decrease in future reporting periods depending on the number of departures we complete during such reporting period and our then-current forecast of departures we anticipate completing over the remaining contract term based on information available to us as that time. We anticipate we will continue to defer recognizing revenue in 2021 and may begin recognizing previously deferred amounts as revenue by the middle of 2021, depending upon actual and expected future departures.
Our revenues could be impacted by a number of factors, such as our flight schedules, terminations, weather, our estimates used to determine the amount of revenue we defer under the United capacity purchase agreement, and our ability to earn incentive payments. Under the United capacity purchase agreement, Air Wisconsin is eligible to receive incentive compensation upon the achievement of certain performance criteria (provided that, pursuant to the amendment to the United capacity purchase agreement, no incentive or penalty payments were made for the period from April 1, 2020 through September 30, 2020). The incentives are defined in the agreement and are measured and determined on a monthly basis. At the end of each month, Air Wisconsin calculates the incentives achieved during that period and recognizes revenue attributable to the agreement accordingly, subject to the variable constraint guidance under Topic 606.
The United capacity purchase agreement includes weekly provisional cash payments based on a projected level of flying each month. Air Wisconsin and United subsequently reconcile these payments to the actual completed flight activity on a monthly basis.
Other revenue is immaterial and primarily consist of the sales of parts to other airlines. The transaction price for the sale of these parts occurs at fair market value.
Long-Lived Assets
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $149.4 million of property and equipment and related assets net of accumulated depreciation. In accounting for these long-lived assets, we make estimates about the expected useful lives of the assets, the expected residual values of certain of these assets, and the potential for impairment based on the fair value of the assets and the cash flows they generate. Factors indicating potential impairment include, but are not limited to, significant decreases in the market value of the long-lived assets, a significant change in the condition of the long-lived assets and operating cash flow losses associated with the use of the long-lived assets. When considering whether or not impairment of long-lived assets exists, we group similar assets together at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and compare the undiscounted cash flows for each asset group to the net carrying amount of the assets supporting the asset group. Factors that may impact our estimates used for depreciation include anticipated useful lives and estimated residual values. Estimates may be impacted by future economic uncertainties. At December 31, 2020, we had 64 aircraft in service under the United capacity purchase agreement.
Income Taxes
The Company utilizes the asset and liability method for accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as measured by the current applicable tax rates. Deferred tax expense represents the result of changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
As required by the uncertain tax position guidance, the Company recognizes the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more-likely-than-not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. The Company has applied the uncertain tax position guidance to all tax positions for which the statute of limitations remains open.
The Company is subject to federal, state and local income taxes in the United States and various states. Tax regulations within each jurisdiction are subject to the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and require significant judgment to apply. The Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal income tax examinations for the years prior to 2017. With few exceptions, the Company is no longer subject to state, and local income tax examinations for the years prior to 2016. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding tax examinations.