ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, include forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Introduction
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided as a supplement to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes, included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, the changes in our financial condition and our results of operations. Our discussion is organized as follows:
•
Overview. This section provides a general description of our business and operating expenses.
•
Critical accounting policies and estimates. This section contains a discussion of the accounting policies that we believe are important to our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in their application. In addition, all of our significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies and estimates, are summarized in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•
Results of operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations presented in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss by comparing the results for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and comparing the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 to the results for the year ended December 31, 2018.
•
Liquidity and capital resources. This section provides an analysis of our cash flows and a discussion of our outstanding commitments and contingencies that existed as of December 31, 2020. Included in this discussion is our financial capacity to fund our future commitments and a discussion of other financing arrangements.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage biotechnology company focused on improving the lives of patients by developing best-in-class treatments to address some of the most important unmet patient needs. We are developing novel, patient-focused solutions that apply our innovative science and technologies to already-approved pharmacological agents for patients suffering from pain or cancer.
In August 2016, our first commercial product, SUSTOL® (granisetron) extended-release injection (“SUSTOL”), was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). SUSTOL is indicated in combination with other antiemetics in adults for the prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting associated with initial and repeat courses of moderately emetogenic chemotherapy (MEC) or anthracycline and cyclophosphamide (AC) combination chemotherapy regimens. SUSTOL is an extended-release, injectable 5-hydroxytryptamine type 3 (“5-HT3”) receptor antagonist that utilizes our Biochronomer Technology to maintain therapeutic levels of granisetron for ≥5 days. We commenced commercial sales of SUSTOL in the U.S. in October 2016.
In November 2017, our second commercial product, CINVANTI® (aprepitant) injectable emulsion (“CINVANTI”) was approved by the FDA. In October 2019, the FDA approved our supplemental New Drug Application (“sNDA”) for CINVANTI to expand the indication and recommended dosage to include the 130 mg single-dose regimen for patients receiving moderately emetogenic cancer chemotherapy (“MEC”). CINVANTI, in combination with other antiemetic agents, is indicated in adults for the prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting associated with initial and repeat courses of highly emetogenic cancer chemotherapy (HEC) including high-dose cisplatin as a single-dose regimen, delayed nausea and vomiting associated with initial and repeat courses of moderately emetogenic cancer chemotherapy (MEC) as a single-dose regimen, and nausea and vomiting associated with initial and repeat courses of MEC as a 3-day regimen. CINVANTI is an intravenous (“IV”) formulation of aprepitant, a substance P/neurokinin-1 (“NK1”) receptor antagonist. We commenced commercial sales of CINVANTI in the U.S. in January 2018. In February 2019, the FDA approved our sNDA for CINVANTI, for IV use, which expanded the administration of CINVANTI beyond the initially approved administration method (a 30-minute IV infusion) to include a 2-minute IV injection.
HTX-019 is an investigational agent for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting (“PONV”). HTX-019 is an IV injectable emulsion formulation designed to directly deliver aprepitant, the active ingredient in EMEND® (aprepitant) capsules, which is the only NK1 receptor antagonist approved in the U.S. for the prevention of PONV in adults. The FDA-approved dose of oral EMEND is 40 mg for PONV, which is given within 3 hours prior to induction of anesthesia for surgery. An Investigational New Drug application for HTX-019 for PONV was approved by the FDA in late September 2020. In a Phase 1 clinical trial, 32 mg of HTX-019 as a 30-second IV injection was demonstrated to be bioequivalent to oral aprepitant 40 mg. An NDA for HTX-019 is planned in late 2021 for prevention of PONV in adults.
In September 2020, our third approved product, ZYNRELEF™ (also known as HTX-011) was granted a marketing authorization by the European Commission (“EC”). ZYNRELEF is indicated for the treatment of somatic postoperative pain from small- to medium-sized surgical wounds in adults. ZYNRELEF, a non-opioid, is a dual-acting, fixed-dose combination of the local anesthetic bupivacaine with a low dose of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug meloxicam. It is the first and only extended-release local anesthetic to demonstrate in Phase 3 studies significantly reduced pain and opioid use through 72 hours compared to bupivacaine solution, the current standard-of-care local anesthetic for postoperative pain control. As we build large-scale manufacturing capacity to meet the anticipated commercial demand in the U.S. and the rest of the world, we are developing a coordinated global marketing strategy.
HTX-011 (ZYNRELEF in Europe) is an investigational agent in the U.S. and Canada. The FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy designation to HTX-011 and the New Drug Application (“NDA”) received Priority Review designation. A Complete Response Letter (“CRL”) was received from the FDA regarding the NDA for HTX-011 in June 2020. The CRL stated that the FDA is unable to approve the NDA in its present form based on the need for additional non-clinical information. Based on the complete review of the NDA, the FDA did not identify any clinical safety or efficacy issues or chemistry, manufacturing and controls issues. There are four non-clinical issues in the CRL, none of which relate to any observed toxicity. Three relate to confirming exposure of excipients in preclinical reproductive toxicology studies, and the fourth relates to changing the manufacturing release specification of the allowable level of an impurity based on animal toxicology coverage. At the Type A End-of-Review meeting in September 2020 (the “Type A Meeting”), the FDA agreed with the change to the manufacturing specification proposed by Heron to address the FDA’s concern and agreed with our proposal to bridge the clinical and nonclinical excipient exposure data to address the other 3 deficiencies. In November 2020, we resubmitted the NDA to the FDA for HTX-011 based on the outcome and final minutes of the Type A Meeting. The Prescription Drug User Fee Act goal date is May 12, 2021.
HTX-034, our next-generation product candidate for postoperative pain management, is an investigational non-opioid, fixed-dose combination, extended-release solution of the local anesthetic bupivacaine, the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug meloxicam and an additional agent that further potentiates the activity of bupivacaine. HTX-034 is formulated in the same proprietary polymer as HTX-011 (ZYNRELEF in the Europe). By combining two different mechanisms that each enhance the activity of the local anesthetic bupivacaine, HTX-034 is designed to provide superior and prolonged analgesia. Local administration of HTX-034 in a validated preclinical postoperative pain model resulted in sustained analgesia for 7 days. In May 2020, we initiated a Phase 1b/2 clinical study in patients undergoing bunionectomy of HTX-034. In the Phase 1b portion of this Phase 1b/2 double-blind, randomized, active-controlled, dose-escalation study in 33 patients undergoing bunionectomy, the reduction in pain intensity observed was greater with the lowest dose of HTX-034 evaluated (containing 21.7 mg of bupivacaine plus meloxicam and aprepitant) than with the bupivacaine 50 mg solution through 96 hours. In addition, 45.5% of HTX-034 patients remained opioid-free through Day 15 with median opioid consumption of 2.5 milligram morphine equivalents (same as one 5 mg oxycodone pill) through 72-hours, a 71% reduction compared to bupivacaine solution. We expect to initiate the expanded Phase 2 portion of the study for HTX-034 in the first quarter of 2021.
Net Product Sales
Net product sales include revenue recognized for sales of CINVANTI and SUSTOL to a limited number of specialty distributors and full line wholesalers (collectively, “Customers”), less applicable sales allowances. See the “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on our revenue recognition policy.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales relates to the costs to produce, package and deliver CINVANTI and SUSTOL to our Customers. These costs include raw materials, labor, manufacturing and quality control overhead, and depreciation of equipment, as well as shipping and distribution costs. See the “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on our inventory policy.
Research and Development Expense
All costs of research and development are expensed in the period incurred. Research and development expense primarily consists of salaries, stock-based compensation expense and other related costs for personnel in manufacturing, clinical and preclinical development, regulatory, quality and medical affairs. Other research and development expense includes professional fees paid to outside service providers and consultants, facilities costs and materials used in the clinical and preclinical trials and research and development.
At this time, due to the risks inherent in the clinical trial process, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of our Product Candidates. Other than costs for outsourced services associated with our clinical programs, we generally do not track research and development expense by project; rather, we track such expense by the type of cost incurred.
We expect research and development expense to remain comparable in 2021, as we continue our ongoing research and development efforts for our Product Candidates, clinical and manufacturing costs, and costs for postmarketing requirements for CINVANTI and SUSTOL. The lengthy process of completing our clinical trials and seeking regulatory approval for our Product Candidates requires the expenditure of substantial resources.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense primarily consists of salaries, stock-based compensation expense and other related costs for personnel in executive, finance and accounting, information technology, legal and human resource functions. Other general and administrative expense includes professional fees for legal, investor relations, accounting and other general corporate purposes, facility costs and insurance not otherwise included in research and development expense. We expect general and administrative expense in 2021 to remain consistent with 2020.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of salaries and related costs for personnel, stock-based compensation expense and other related costs for sales operations, marketing and market access. Other sales and marketing costs include professional fees and commercialization costs related to launch preparation activities for HTX-011 and ongoing costs related to CINVANTI and SUSTOL. We expect sales and marketing expense to significantly increase in 2021 to support the launch of HTX-011, if approved. The commercial launch process requires the expenditure of substantial resources.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and other income resulting from the disgorgement of short-swing profits arising from the sales of our common stock by a beneficial owner pursuant to Section 16(b) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange Act”). In addition, other income (expense), net includes interest expense on the Subordinated Secured Promissory Note (“Promissory Note”), as well as interest expense and amortization of debt discount related to our Senior Secured Convertible Notes (“Convertible Notes”), and impairment of property and equipment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to revenue recognition, investments, inventory, accrued clinical liabilities, income taxes and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis of making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements involve significant judgments and estimates and include the following:
Revenue Recognition
Product Sales
CINVANTI and SUSTOL are distributed in the U.S. through a limited number of Customers that resell to healthcare providers and hospitals, the end users of CINVANTI and SUSTOL.
Adoption of Topic 606
On January 1, 2018, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”) using the modified retrospective approach applied to those contracts that were not completed as of January 1, 2018. We recognize product sales as revenue when our products are sold to our Customers (sell-in approach). Product sales under Topic 606 are reported net of product sales allowances, which include product returns.
Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for our Products. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers within the scope of Topic 606, we performed the following 5 steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations of the contract(s); (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract(s); and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligations.
Product Sales Allowances
We recognize product sales allowances as a reduction of product sales in the same period the related revenue is recognized. Product sales allowances are based on amounts owed or to be claimed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration the terms of our agreements with Customers, historical product returns, rebates or discounts taken, the shelf life of the product and specific known market events, such as competitive pricing and new product introductions. If actual future results vary from our estimates, we may need to adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on product sales and earnings in the period of adjustment. Our product sales allowances include:
•
Product Returns-We allow our Customers to return product for credit for up to 12 months after its product expiration date. As such, there may be a significant period of time between the time the product is shipped and the time the credit is issued on returned product.
•
Distributor Fees-We offer contractually determined discounts to our Customers. These discounts are paid no later than two months after the quarter in which product was shipped.
•
Group Purchasing Organization (“GPO”) Discounts and Rebates-We offer cash discounts to GPO members. These discounts are taken when the GPO members purchase product from our Customers, who then charge back to us the discount amount. Additionally, we offer volume and contract-tier rebates to GPO members. Rebates are based on actual purchase levels during the quarterly rebate purchase period.
•
GPO Administrative Fees-We pay administrative fees to GPOs for services and access to data. These fees are based on contracted terms and are paid after the quarter in which the product was purchased by the GPOs’ members.
•
Medicaid Rebates-We participate in Medicaid rebate programs, which provide assistance to certain low-income patients based on each individual state’s guidelines regarding eligibility and services. Under the Medicaid rebate programs, we pay a rebate to each participating state, generally within three months after the quarter in which product was sold.
We believe our estimated allowance for product returns requires a high degree of judgment and is subject to change based on our experience and certain quantitative and qualitative factors. We believe our estimated allowances for distributor fees, GPO discounts, rebates and administrative fees and Medicaid rebates do not require a high degree of judgment because the amounts are settled within a relatively short period of time.
Our product sales allowances and related accruals are evaluated each reporting period and adjusted when trends or significant events indicate that a change in estimate is appropriate. Changes in product sales allowance estimates could materially affect our results of operations and financial position.
Investments
We invest in various types of securities, including U.S. treasury bills and government agency obligations, corporate debt securities and commercial paper. As of December 31, 2020, we had $159.3 million in investments which were classified as Level 1 or 2 within the fair value hierarchy. Fair values determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Fair values determined by Level 2 inputs utilize data points that are observable such as quoted prices for similar assets, quoted prices in markets that are not active or other inputs that are observable. These securities have been initially valued at the transaction price and subsequently valued utilizing a third-party service provider who assesses the fair value using inputs other than quoted prices that are observable either directly or indirectly, such as yield curve, volatility factors, credit spreads, default rates, loss severity, current market and contractual prices for the underlying instruments or debt, broker and dealer quotes, as well as other relevant economic measures. We perform certain procedures to corroborate the fair value of these holdings, and in the process, we apply judgment and estimates that if changed, could significantly affect our statements of financial positions.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value on a first-in, first-out, or FIFO, basis. We periodically analyze our inventory levels and write down inventory that has become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its estimated realizable value and inventory quantities that are in excess of expected sales requirements as cost of product sales. The determination of whether inventory costs will be realizable requires estimates by management. If actual market conditions are less favorable than projected by management, additional write-downs of inventory may be required, which would be recorded as cost of product sales.
Accrued Clinical Liabilities
We accrue clinical costs based on work performed, which relies on estimates of the progress of the clinical trials and the related expenses incurred. Clinical trial related contracts vary significantly in duration, and may be for a fixed amount, based on the achievement of certain contingent events or deliverables, a variable amount based on actual costs incurred, capped at a certain limit or contain a combination of these elements. Revisions are recorded to research and development expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. Historically, revisions have not resulted in material changes to research and development expense; however, a modification in the protocol of a clinical trial or cancellation of a clinical trial could result in a material charge to our results of operations.
Income Taxes
We make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of certain deferred tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes for each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our current tax exposure under the most recent tax laws and assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and financial statement purposes.
We assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets. In doing so, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including our historical levels of income and losses, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. At December 31, 2020, we established a valuation allowance to offset our deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty of realizing future tax benefits from our net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets.
Should there be a change in our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we would recognize a benefit to our tax provision in the period in which we determine that it is more likely than not that we will recover our deferred tax assets.
Stock-based Compensation
We generally grant stock-based payment awards under our stockholder-approved, stock-based compensation plans. We have granted, and may in the future grant, stock options and restricted stock awards to employees, directors, consultants and advisors under our Amended and Restated 2007 Equity Incentive Plan. In addition, all of our employees are eligible to participate in our 1997 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended, which enables employees to purchase common stock at a discount through payroll deductions. Prior to our relisting on The Nasdaq Capital Market in January 2014, we issued non-plan stock option grants to certain employees, as set forth under Item 12 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These non-plan stock option grants were registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on Form S-8.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This fair value is then amortized over the requisite service periods of the awards. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including each option’s expected life and price volatility of the underlying stock. Expected volatility is based on our historical stock price volatility. The expected life of employee stock options represents the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted-average vesting period, as permitted under the simplified method.
As stock-based compensation expense is based on awards ultimately expected to vest, it has been reduced for estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Forfeitures are estimated based on historical experience. Changes in assumptions used under the Black-Scholes option pricing model could materially affect our net loss and net loss per share.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Product Sales
Net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $88.6 million, compared to $146.0 million for the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net product sales of CINVANTI were $87.8 million, compared to $132.2 million for the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net product sales of SUSTOL were $0.8 million, compared to $13.8 million for the same period in 2019. On October 1, 2019, we made a business decision to discontinue all discounting of SUSTOL, to improve the reimbursement and net selling price of the product, which resulted in significantly lower SUSTOL net product sales in 2020. The decrease in net product sales of CINVANTI for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the impact of generic arbitrage. We believe that the most significant impact of the generic arbitrage is over and we expect growth of net product sales for our CINV franchise in 2021 and beyond.
Cost of Product Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of product sales was $36.2 million, compared to $61.6 million for the same period in 2019. Cost of product sales primarily included raw materials, labor and overhead related to the manufacturing of CINVANTI and SUSTOL, as well as shipping and distribution costs. In addition, cost of product sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included charges resulting from the write-off of short-dated SUSTOL inventory of $0.1 million and $3.3 million, respectively.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consisted of the following (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expense was $174.5 million, compared to $167.4 million for the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs and other expenses of $3.9 million, costs related to CINVANTI of $2.9 million and stock-based compensation expense of $1.5 million, partially offset by a decrease in costs related to HTX-034 of $1.4 million.
General and Administrative Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expense was $42.2 million, compared to $37.9 million for the same period in 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in facility-related costs resulting from the expansion of our office space in San Diego, California and an increase in stock-based compensation expense.
Sales and Marketing Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, sales and marketing expense was $63.9 million, compared to $89.8 million for the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in costs to support the ongoing commercialization of CINVANTI and SUSTOL, as well as a decrease in costs to support the launch preparation activities for HTX-011 (ZYNRELEF in Europe). In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized one-time costs associated with the retirement of our President in February 2019, including $8.4 million of stock-based compensation expense for stock option modifications. There was no comparable activity during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income, net was $0.9 million, compared to $5.9 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in interest income earned on our short-term investments.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net Product Sales
Net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $146.0 million, compared to $77.5 million for the same period in 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net product sales of CINVANTI were $132.2 million, compared to $56.2 million for the same period in 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net product sales of SUSTOL were $13.8 million, compared to $21.3 million for the same period in 2018. On October 1, 2019, we made a business decision to discontinue all discounting of SUSTOL which resulted in significantly lower SUSTOL net product sales.
Cost of Product Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cost of product sales was $61.6 million, compared to $27.5 million for the same period in 2018. Cost of product sales primarily included raw materials, labor and overhead related to the manufacturing of CINVANTI and SUSTOL, as well as shipping and distribution costs. In addition, cost of product sales for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 included charges resulting from the write-off of short-dated SUSTOL inventory of $3.3 million and $1.8 million, respectively.
Prior to FDA approval, $1.4 million of costs to manufacture CINVANTI were recorded to research and development expense in prior periods. By March 31, 2018, all CINVANTI units that were manufactured prior to FDA approval had been sold. We began capitalizing raw materials, labor and overhead related to the manufacturing of CINVANTI following FDA approval.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consisted of the following (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expense was $167.4 million, compared to $140.0 million for the same period in 2018. This increase was primarily due to an increase in costs related to HTX-011 and HTX-034 of $13.4 million and $5.7 million, respectively, as well as personnel costs and other expenses of $6.8 million and stock-based compensation expense of $5.5 million, partially offset by decreases in costs related to CINVANTI and SUSTOL of $2.7 million and $1.4 million, respectively.
General and Administrative Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative expense was $37.9 million, compared to $29.3 million for the same period in 2018. This increase was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs and other expenses to support our increased development and commercialization efforts and an increase in stock-based compensation expense.
Sales and Marketing Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2019, sales and marketing expense was $89.8 million, compared to $64.6 million for the same period in 2018. This increase was primarily due to costs to support the launch preparation activities for HTX-011. In addition, the increase was related to one-time costs associated with the retirement of our President in February 2019, including $8.4 million of stock-based compensation expense for stock option modifications.
Other Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2019, other income, net was $5.9 million, compared to $5.1 million for the same period in 2018. This increase was primarily due to interest income earned on our short-term investments, as well as a decrease in interest expense due to the repayment of the Promissory Note in August 2018, partially offset by other income resulting from the disgorgement of short-swing profits arising from the sales of our common stock by a beneficial owner pursuant to Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act in September 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $208.5 million, compared to $391.0 million as of December 31, 2019. Based on our current operating plan and projections, we believe that existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least one year from the date this Annual Report on Form 10-K is filed with the SEC.
Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $227.3 million, or $2.50 per share, compared to a net loss of $204.7 million, or $2.50 per share, for the same period in 2019.
Our net cash used for operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $184.8 million, compared to $124.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in net cash used for operating activities was primarily due to changes in working capital associated with the ongoing commercialization of CINVANTI and an increase in net loss.
Our net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $209.0 million, compared to net cash used for investing activities of $21.8 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to an increase in net maturities of short-term investments of $215.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net purchases of short-term investments of $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.1 million, compared to $186.4 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease in cash provided by financing activities was due primarily to net proceeds received from a public offering of our common stock of $162.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was also due to a decrease in proceeds received from stock option exercises of $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Historically, we have financed our operations, including technology and product research and development, primarily through sales of our common stock and debt financings.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had an operating lease for 73,328 square feet of laboratory and office space in San Diego, California, with a lease term that expires on December 31, 2025. We have one 5-year option to renew this lease on expiration. For the year ended December 31, 2020, rent expense was $3.9 million.
At December 31, 2020, capital expenditures consisted of non-cancellable commitments for equipment related to scale-up activities at our third-party manufacturers. Total capital expenditures of $3.1 million were not included in our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. We intend to use our current financial resources to fund our commitments under the capital expenditure obligations.
At December 31, 2020, purchase obligations primarily consisted of non-cancellable commitments with third-party manufacturers in connection with the manufacturing of HTX-011, CINVANTI and SUSTOL, as well as commitments with various vendors for sales and marketing support. Total purchase obligations of $43.9 million were not included in our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. We intend to use our current financial resources to fund our commitments under these purchase obligations.
The holders of the Convertible Notes may also require prepayment of such notes at any time at each holder’s option (see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). As of December 31, 2020, $7.6 million aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes were outstanding.
We enter into agreements with clinical sites and clinical research organizations for the conduct of our clinical trials and contract manufacturing organizations for the manufacture and supply of preclinical, clinical and commercial materials and drug product. We make payments to these clinical sites and clinical research organizations based in part on the number of eligible patients enrolled and the length of their participation in the clinical trials. In some of our agreements with contract manufacturing organizations, we are required to meet minimum purchase obligations. Under certain of these agreements, we may be subject to penalties in the event that we prematurely terminate these agreements. At this time, due to the variability associated with clinical site agreements, contract research organization agreements and contract manufacturing agreements, we are unable to estimate with certainty the future costs we will incur. We intend to use our current financial resources to fund our obligations under these commitments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not involved in any “off-balance sheet arrangements” within the meaning of the rules of the SEC.