Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements of Harsco Corporation ("we" or the "Company") provided under Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Amounts included in this Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K are rounded in millions and all percentages are calculated based on actual amounts. As a result, minor differences may exist due to rounding.
Forward-Looking Statements
The nature of the Company's business, together with the number of countries in which it operates, subject it to changing economic, competitive, regulatory and technological conditions, risks and uncertainties. In accordance with the "safe harbor" provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Company provides the following cautionary remarks regarding important factors that, among others, could cause future results to differ materially from the results contemplated by forward-looking statements, including the expectations and assumptions expressed or implied herein. Forward-looking statements contained herein could include, among other things, statements about management's confidence in and strategies for performance; expectations for new and existing products, technologies and opportunities; and expectations regarding growth, sales, cash flows, and earnings. Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of such terms as "may," "could," "expect," "anticipate," "intend," "believe," "likely," "estimate," "outlook," "plan" or other comparable terms.
Factors that could cause actual results to differ, perhaps materially, from those implied by forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: (1) changes in the worldwide business environment in which the Company operates, including changes in general economic conditions or changes due to COVID-19 and governmental and market reactions to COVID-19; (2) changes in currency exchange rates, interest rates, commodity and fuel costs and capital costs; (3) changes in the performance of equity and bond markets that could affect, among other things, the valuation of the assets in the Company's pension plans and the accounting for pension assets, liabilities and expenses; (4) changes in governmental laws and regulations, including environmental, occupational health and safety, tax and import tariff standards and amounts; (5) market and competitive changes, including pricing pressures, market demand and acceptance for new products, services and technologies; (6) the Company's inability or failure to protect its intellectual property rights from infringement in one or more of the many countries in which the Company operates; (7) failure to effectively prevent, detect or recover from breaches in the Company's cybersecurity infrastructure; (8) unforeseen business disruptions in one or more of the many countries in which the Company operates due to political instability, civil disobedience, armed hostilities, public health issues or other calamities; (9) disruptions associated with labor disputes and increased operating costs associated with union organization; (10) the seasonal nature of the Company's business; (11) the Company's ability to successfully enter into new contracts and complete new acquisitions or strategic ventures in the time-frame contemplated, or at all; (12) the integration of the Company's strategic acquisitions; (13) potential severe volatility in the capital markets; (14) failure to retain key management and employees; (15) the amount and timing of repurchases of the Company's common stock, if any; (16) the outcome of any disputes with customers, contractors and subcontractors; (17) the financial condition of the Company's customers, including the ability of customers (especially those that may be highly leveraged, have inadequate liquidity or whose business is significantly impacted by COVID-19) to maintain their credit availability; (18) implementation of environmental remediation matters; (19) risk and uncertainty associated with intangible assets and (20) other risk factors listed from time to time in the Company's SEC reports. A further discussion of these, along with other potential risk factors, can be found in Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company cautions that these factors may not be exhaustive and that many of these factors are beyond the Company's ability to control or predict. Accordingly, forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual results. The Company undertakes no duty to update forward-looking statements except as may be required by law.
Executive Overview
The Company is a market-leading, global provider of environmental solutions for industrial, retail and medical waste streams, and innovative equipment and technology for the rail sector. The Company's operations consist of three reportable segments: Harsco Environmental, Harsco Clean Earth and Harsco Rail. The Company is working towards transforming Harsco into a single-thesis environmental solutions company that is a global leader in the markets the Company serves. The Harsco Environmental Segment operates primarily under long-term contracts, providing critical environmental services and material processing to the global steel and metals industries, including zero waste solutions for manufacturing byproducts within the metals industry. The Harsco Clean Earth Segment provides waste management services including transportation, specialty waste processing, recycling and beneficial reuse solutions for hazardous waste, contaminated materials and dredged volumes. The Harsco Rail Segment is a provider of highly engineered maintenance equipment, after-market parts and safety and diagnostic systems which support railroad and transit customers worldwide. The Company has locations in approximately 30 countries, including the U.S. The Company was incorporated in 1956.
In April 2020 the Company completed the previously announced acquisition of ESOL, from Stericycle, Inc., for $429.0 million in cash, inclusive of post-closing adjustments. ESOL is an established waste transportation, processing and services provider with a comprehensive portfolio of disposal solutions for customers primarily across the industrial, retail and healthcare markets. ESOL's network includes thirteen permitted TSDF facilities and forty-eight 10-day transfer facilities serving more than ninety thousand customer locations utilizing a fleet of more than seven hundred vehicles. The acquisition of ESOL furthers Harsco’s transformation into a global, market-leading, single-thesis environmental solutions platform. The results of ESOL are included in the Harsco Clean Earth Segment.
In March 2020, the Company raised $280.0 million pursuant to the New Term Loan as a new tranche under its existing Senior Secured Credit Facilities. The New Term Loan was fully drawn on April 6, 2020 to partially fund the ESOL acquisition. Borrowings under the New Term Loan bear interest at a rate per annum ranging from 150 to 225 basis points over adjusted LIBOR (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The New Term Loan will mature on June 28, 2024. The Company capitalized $1.9 million of fees related to the issuance of the New Term Loan.
In both March 2020 and June 2020, the Company amended the Senior Secured Credit Facilities to increase the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant. As a result of these amendments, the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant has been increased to 5.75 through March 2021 and then decreasing quarterly until reaching 4.75 in December 2021. There is no change to the previously agreed interest rates as long as the Company's total leverage ratio does not equal or exceed 4.50 at which time it would increase by 25 basis points. During 2020, the Company recognized $1.9 million of fees and expenses related to the amended Senior Secured Credit Facilities in the caption Unused debt commitment and amendment fees on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
In January 2020 the Company sold IKG for $85.0 million, including a note receivable with a face value of $40.0 million (initial fair value $34.3 million) and recognized a gain on sale of $18.3 million pre-tax (or approximately $9 million after-tax). This disposal, along with the disposals of AXC and PK in 2019, accelerated the transformation of the Company into a global, market-leading, single-thesis environmental solutions platform.
Beginning in March 2020 overall global economic conditions were significantly impacted by COVID-19. Business conditions have slowly improved since the mid-point of the second quarter, with the ongoing COVID-19 impacts varying by end market as well as local conditions (including applicable government mandates). The ultimate duration and impact of COVID-19 on the Company and its customers' operations is presently unclear, though the Company expects impacts to continue for at least the next few quarters. The Company is operating as a provider of certain essential services, and it continues to take actions to protect all stakeholders and to minimize the operational and financial impacts of COVID-19 where possible. Work safety and flexibility measures have been implemented. In addition, the Company is also focused on actions to adjust its cost structure, reduce capital and operating expenditures, and to preserve its financial flexibility and liquidity position. Please refer to the below discussion of business outlook and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" for additional information related to the potential impacts of COVID-19 on the Company.
Highlights for 2020 include (refer to the discussion of segment and consolidated results included within Results of Operations below, as well as Liquidity and Capital Resources, for additional information pertaining to the key drivers impacting these highlights):
•Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased approximately 24% compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary drivers for this increase were the acquisitions of Clean Earth and ESOL as well as increased revenue related to maintenance-of-way equipment sales in the Harsco Rail Segment, partially offset by lower customer production in the Harsco Environmental Segment, inclusive of the impacts form COVID-19, and the impact of foreign currency translation.
•Operating income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased approximately 80% compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary drivers for these decreases were decreased customer production levels in the Harsco Environmental Segment, inclusive of the impacts of COVID-19; incremental acquisition and integration costs primarily related to the ESOL acquisition; the timing and mix of sales in the Harsco Rail Segment and severance costs of approximately $9 million in the Harsco Environmental Segment. These decreases were partially offset by the inclusion of operating results for ESOL and full year results of Clean Earth as well as lower selling, general and administrative expenses in the Harsco Environmental and Harsco Rail Segments, and in Corporate (exclusive of the aforementioned incremental acquisition and integration costs).
•Diluted losses per common share from continuing operations attributable to Harsco Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $0.41, a decrease compared with diluted earnings per common share from continuing operations of $0.35 for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition to the factors noted above for revenue and operating income from continuing operations, the primary driver of this decrease was increased interest expense partially offset by a decrease in debt-related transaction expenses, defined benefit pension income and the effect of income taxes.
•Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $53.8 million, an increase of $54.0 million compared with cash flows provided by operating activities the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary drivers for this increase were the $103 million tax payment on the sale of AXC in 2019 not repeated in 2020, favorable changes in net working capital, primarily due to improved collection of accounts receivable and timing of inventories, partially offset by timing of accounts payable. These were partially offset by lower net income (excluding the impacts of the gains on sales of discontinued operations and including the incremental acquisition and integration costs principally related to the ESOL acquisition) and the impact of taxes paid related to the sales of PK and IKG.
•Capital expenditures for purchases of property, plant and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $120.2 million, a decrease of $64.7 million or 35.0% compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was the result of the Company's goal of maintaining financial flexibility and strengthening cash flow during COVID-19.
The Company works diligently and safely to provide customers with services and products, and the Company maintains a positive outlook across all businesses supported by favorable underlying growth characteristics in its businesses and investments by the Company to further supplement growth. Financial results, however, continue to be negatively impacted by the global COVID-19 pandemic that began in 2020. These business pressures were most intense during the second and third quarters of 2020 and economic conditions in the majority of Harsco's businesses have improved meaningfully since. With that said, however, the scale and pace of the recovery varies and a slowdown in customer demand persists, with the ultimate extent and duration of such future impacts on the Company's businesses not presently known. The Company’s view for 2021 and beyond is supported by the below factors, which should be considered in the context of other risks, trends and strategies:
•The Harsco Environmental Segment operates throughout the world to support critical metal production. The Company has been impacted by an overall decline in global steel demand, with several customer mill locations temporarily idled during the second quarter of 2020, as a result of COVID-19. Nearly all of these locations have restarted production since, though overall output remains below normalized levels and will remain so until underlying demand fully recovers. Estimated customer mill utilization decreased by 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the same period in the prior year. Over the longer-term the Company expects that the Harsco Environmental Segment's return to growth will be driven by investments, innovation and economic growth that supports higher global steel consumption.
•The Harsco Clean Earth Segment locations operate throughout the U.S. as an essential services provider, by performing critical environmental services. The segment's hazardous waste line of business, including the 2020 ESOL acquisition, has proven to be economically resilient with overall business levels returning to near pre-COVID, reflecting the nature of its services as well as the diversity of customers in the retail, medical and industrial industries. Meanwhile, the segment's contaminated materials line of business has continued to be negatively impacted by the pandemic. This dynamic reflects a slowing in non-residential construction activity and governmental constraints on project spending, and this business pressure is likely to persist in the near term. Over the longer-term, the Company
expects this segment to benefit from growth opportunities, including from the acquired ESOL business, positive underlying market trends and operational synergy opportunities as well as from the less cyclical and recurring nature of this business that is expected to provide favorable returns on the Company's investments.
•The Harsco Rail Segment continues to fulfill orders critical to global transportation and increased capacity during 2020 through the implementation of its Supply Chain Operation Recovery program, allowing the business to deliver on its backlog in the coming years. In the near term, the Harsco Rail Segment has been impacted by a decrease in certain short-cycle equipment, aftermarket and technology sales as a result of COVID-19 which is likely to continue in the coming quarters. Overall, the Harsco Rail Segment is supported by a record backlog and the longer-term outlook for this business remains strong, supported by future infrastructure investments, economic development in emerging economies, rail electrification in certain geographies, safety awareness and automation.
•Additionally, the Company undertook significant actions to reduce corporate costs and capital spending in 2020 as a result of the pandemic. During this time, the Company developed a tiered approach to potential supplemental cost mitigation efforts should the impacts of COVID-19 become more severe or prolonged in nature. The Company's disciplined approach to overall costs and free cash flow will remain in place during 2021.
•Interest expense for 2021 is expected to increase due to higher average debt balances following the purchase of ESOL.
•Net periodic pension income will increase by approximately $8 million during 2021 which will primarily be reflected in the caption Defined benefit pension (income) expense on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The increase is primarily the result of higher plan asset values at December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Revenues by Segment
Revenues by Region
(a) Includes Mexico.
Operating Income (Loss) and Operating Margins by Segment
Harsco Environmental Segment:
Factors Positively Affecting Operating Income:
•Lower selling, general and administrative expenses, exclusive of provisions for doubtful accounts, improved operating income by $8.4 million during 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year.
•The Company recorded a provision for doubtful accounts of $6.2 million related to a U.K. customer that entered administration during 2019 that did not repeat in 2020.
Factors Negatively Impacting Operating Income:
•Overall steel production by customers under environmental services contracts, including the impact of new and exited contracts, decreased 10% during 2020 compared with the same period in the prior year. The decreased production was attributable to the global economic impact of COVID-19.
•Operating results for 2020 were impacted by decreased demand for applied products and by-products. The decreased demand was attributable to the global economic impact of COVID-19.
•Operating results for 2020 were also negatively impacted by $8.1 million of incremental employee termination benefit costs incurred to improve operational efficiency and support near-term financial performance.
•Foreign currency translation decreased operating income $3.6 million during 2020 compared with the same period in the prior year.
•Incremental costs directly related to COVID-19 of $1.5 million for 2020 decreased operating income compared with the same period in prior year.
•Operating income for 2020 was negatively impacted in comparison to the prior year by a $2.3 million gain during 2019 related to the recognition of a foreign currency cumulative translation adjustment resulting from the substantial liquidation of a subsidiary that did not repeat in 2020.
•Operating results for 2020 were negatively impacted by a $8.5 million net positive contingent consideration adjustment related to the Altek acquisition which occurred in 2019 and did not repeat in 2020.
Harsco Clean Earth Segment:
The Company acquired ESOL on April 6, 2020 and Clean Earth on June 28, 2019 and the operating results of both are reflected in the Harsco Clean Earth Segment.
(b) Includes net revenue of ESOL for the period of April 6, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and of Clean Earth from January 1, 2020 through June 30, 2020 as Revenues in 2019 only reflect the six months ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $16.1 million and $20.0 million, respectively, which included $22.8 million and $7.9 million of intangible asset amortization expense, respectively. In addition to the impacts of the ESOL and CE acquisitions, the following factors contributed to the changes in operating income in 2020.
Factors Positively Affecting Operating Income:
•Decrease in severance costs related to the Clean Earth acquisition that occurred in 2019 and did not repeat.
Factors Negatively Impacting Operating Income:
•Decrease in contaminated material and hazardous waste volume due principally to the impacts of COVID-19.
Harsco Rail Segment:
Factors Positively Affecting Operating Income:
•Increased railway contracting services, primarily related to the start of a new contract in the U.S., increased operating income during 2020 compared with the same period in the prior year.
•Results for 2019 included $5.6 million of costs associated with the consolidation of U.S. manufacturing and distribution into one facility that did not repeat during 2020.
•Lower selling, general and administrative expenses improved operating income by $3.9 million during 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year.
Factors Negatively Impacting Operating Income:
•The mix of maintenance-of-way equipment sales, as well as the timing and mix of after-market parts sales, decreased operating income during 2020 compared with the same period in the prior year as a result of lower end market demand.
•Incremental costs directly related to COVID-19 of $0.6 million during 2020 decreased operating income compared with the same period in the prior year.
Corporate Costs:
In addition to the factors highlighted above that positively affected or negatively impacted segment operating income, the Company's Corporate function was impacted by incremental acquisition related and integration costs of approximately $23.4 million in 2020, primarily related to the acquisition of ESOL, as well as an increase in the contingent consideration for the Clean Earth acquisition related to an increase in expected values of assumed net operating losses (offset by an income tax benefit). These increased costs were partially offset by decreases in other selling, general and administrative costs, including lower compensation expense and cost reduction actions due to COVID-19.
Consolidated Results
Comparative Analysis of Consolidated Results
Total Revenues
Revenues for 2020 increased $360.1 million or 24% from 2019. Revenues for 2019 increased $156.1 million or 12% from 2018. These increases were attributable to the following significant items:
Cost of Services and Products Sold
Cost of services and products sold for 2020 increased $356.5 million or 31% from 2019. Cost of services and products sold for 2019 increased $131.8 million or 13% from 2018. These increases were attributable to the following significant items:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2020 increased $75.0 million or 30% from 2019. This increase primarily relates to incremental acquisition related and integration costs of $24 million during 2020, primarily related to the acquisition of ESOL and the inclusion of selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the ESOL and Clean Earth acquisitions, which occurred in April 2020 and June 2019, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a provision for doubtful accounts related to a U.K. customer that entered administration during 2019 that did not repeat in 2020 and decreased travel and entertainment expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2019 increased $50.3 million or 25% from 2018. This increase was primarily related to approximately $25 million of strategic costs primarily related to the acquisitions of Clean Earth and ESOL, the provision for doubtful accounts related to the Harsco Environmental Segment customer in the U.K. entering administration and the inclusion of selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the Altek acquisition which occurred in May 2018 and the Clean Earth acquisition which occurred in June 2019.
Other (Income) Expenses, Net
The major components of this Statement of operations caption are detailed below. See Note 18, Other (Income) Expenses, Net, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Interest Expense
Interest expense in 2020 was $59.7 million, an increase of $23.1 million or 63% compared with 2019. This increase primarily relates to higher outstanding borrowings and weighted average interest rates related to the June 2019 issuance of the Notes and the April 2020 issuance of the New Term Loan.
Interest expense in 2019 was $36.6 million, an increase of $15.1 million or 70% compared with 2018. The increase primarily relates to higher outstanding borrowings and weighted average interest rates. The higher outstanding borrowings are a result of cash paid for the Clean Earth acquisition, net of the after-tax AXC sale proceeds, higher capital expenditures and share repurchases. The higher interest rates are a result of the June 2019 issuance of the Notes.
See Note 8, Debt and Credit Agreements, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Unused Debt Commitment and Amendment Fees
During 2020, the Company recognized $1.9 million of fees and expenses related to the amended Senior Secured Credit Facilities in the caption Unused debt commitment and amendment fees on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
During 2019, the Company recognized $6.7 million of expenses for fees and other costs related to the unused bridge financing commitment that the Company arranged in the event that the Notes were not issued prior to the acquisition of Clean Earth. Additionally, the Company recognized $1.0 million of expenses related to the amendment of the Term Loan Facility.
See Note 8, Debt and Credit Agreements, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Defined Benefit Pension Income (Expense)
Defined benefit pension income in 2020 was $7.2 million compared to defined benefit pension income of $5.5 million in 2019. This change is primarily the result of higher plan asset values at December 31, 2019.
Defined benefit pension expense in 2019 was $5.5 million compared to defined benefit pension income of $3.5 million in 2018. This change is primarily the result of lower plan asset values at December 31, 2018.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense) from Continuing Operations
Income tax benefit from continuing operations in 2020 was $2.8 million, compared with tax expense from continuing operations of $20.2 million in 2019. The effective income tax rate relating to continuing operations for 2020 was 8.9% versus 35.8% for 2019. The decrease in income tax expense and the effective tax rate related to continuing operations was primarily due to increased acquisition and integration costs, decreased operating income due to impacts of COVID-19 and a $2.7 million favorable income tax adjustment in connection with an increase in estimated usage of assumed net operating losses related to the Clean Earth acquisition.
Income tax expense from continuing operations in 2019 was $20.2 million, an increase of $14.7 million compared with 2018. The effective income tax rate relating to continued operations for 2019 was 35.8% versus 4.8% for 2018. The increase in income tax expense and the effective income tax rate related to continuing operations was primarily due to a $11.7 million tax benefit as a result of the Tax Act and an $8.3 million tax benefit as a result of the Altek acquisition in 2018 not recurring in 2019, a change in the mix of international income and withholding taxes on remitted earnings, partially offset by decreased income from U.S. continuing operations.
See Note 11, Income Taxes, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Gain on Sale of Discontinued Businesses
In January 2020, the Company sold IKG and recognized a gain on sale of $18.3 million pre-tax (or approximately $9 million after-tax).
In July 2019, the Company completed the sale of AXC for $600 million in cash and recognized a gain on sale of $527.9 million pre-tax (approximately $421 million after tax). In November 2019, the Company completed the previously announced sale of PK for $60 million cash and recognized a gain on sale of $41.2 million pre-tax (or approximately $33 million after-tax).
These transactions have been recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Businesses
The operating results of the former Harsco Industrial Segment, costs directly related to these disposals, an allocation of interest expense associated with mandatory debt repayments required as a result of the disposals and the write-off of deferred financing costs resulting from the mandatory repayment have been reflected as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for all periods presented. In addition, this caption includes costs directly attributable to retained contingent liabilities of the Harsco Industrial Segment. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Total Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Total other comprehensive loss was $55.3 million in 2020, compared with total other comprehensive loss of $0.1 million in 2019. The primary driver of the decrease is due to lower discount rates for the U.S. and U.K. pension plans.
Total other comprehensive loss was $0.1 million in 2019, compared with total other comprehensive loss of $21.5 million in 2018. The primary driver of the decrease is due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against certain currencies, including foreign currency translation of cumulative unrecognized actuarial losses on the Company's pension obligations, being less than the strengthening of the U.S. dollar for the corresponding period in 2018, partially offset by unrealized cash flow hedge losses in 2019 compared to unrealized cash flow hedge gains for the same period in 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
The global economy continues to be impacted by COVID-19, the ultimate extent and duration of which is not presently known,
and the Company expects its liquidity to continue to be negatively impacted in the near term. As a result, the Company has
taken significant proactive actions to minimize the operational and financial impacts.
The Company currently expects to have sufficient financial liquidity and borrowing capacity to support the strategies within each of its businesses. The Company currently expects operational and business needs to be met by cash provided by operations supplemented with borrowings from time to time principally under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, due to historical patterns of seasonal cash flow, the funding of various projects and the impact of COVID-19. The Company regularly assesses capital needs in the context of operational trends and strategic initiatives.
The Company's cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, are summarized in the following table:
Cash provided (used) by operating activities - Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $53.8 million, an increase of $54.0 million from 2019. The primary drivers for this increase were the $103 million tax payment on the sale of AXC in 2019 not repeated in 2020, favorable changes in net working capital, primarily due to improved collection of accounts receivable and timing of inventories, partially offset by timing of accounts payable. These were partially offset by lower net
income (excluding the impacts of the gains on sales of discontinued operations and including the incremental acquisition and integration costs principally related to the ESOL acquisition) and the impact of taxes paid related to the sales of PK and IKG.
Also included in the Cash flows from operating activities section of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows is the caption, Other assets and liabilities. A summary of the major components of this caption for the periods presented is as follows:
(a) Other relates primarily to other accruals that are individually not significant.
Cash used by investing activities - Net cash used by investing activities in 2020 was $520.6 million, a decrease of $388.5 million from 2019. The decrease reflects reduced proceeds from the sale of businesses (AXC and PK in 2019 compared with IKG in 2020), partially offset by decreased cash paid for businesses acquired (Clean Earth in 2019 compared with ESOL in 2020) and reduced capital expenditures, primarily in the Harsco Environmental Segment.
Cash provided (used) by financing activities - Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $487.0 million, an increase of $361.2 million from 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher net cash borrowings of $500.4 million in 2020 compared with net cash borrowings of $181.3 million in 2019 resulting from the investing activities; decreases in the payments of deferred financing costs, decreases in acquisition of treasury shares and decreases in payments of employee taxes related to stock-based compensation vesting.
Cash Requirements
The following summarizes the Company's expected future payments related to contractual obligations and commercial commitments at December 31, 2020:
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments at December 31, 2020 (b)
(b) See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions; Note 8, Debt and Credit Agreements; Note 9, Leases; Note 10, Employee Benefit Plans; Note 11, Income Taxes; and Note 15, Financial Instruments, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information on short-term borrowings and long-term debt (including finance leases); operating leases; employee benefit plans; income taxes; interest rate swaps and foreign currency exchange forward contracts, respectively.
(c) The total projected interest payments on long-term debt are based upon borrowings, interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates at
December 31, 2020, including interest rate swaps currently in effect. The interest rates on variable-rate debt and the foreign currency exchange rates are subject to changes beyond the Company's control and may result in actual interest expense and payments differing from the amounts projected above.
(d) Purchase obligations represent legally binding obligations to purchase property, plant and equipment, inventory and other commitments made in the normal course of business to meet operations requirements.
(e) Amounts represent expected employer contributions to defined benefit pension plans for the next year.
(f) Amounts represent the fair value of the foreign currency exchange contracts outstanding at December 31, 2020. Due to the nature of these contracts, based on fair values at December 31, 2020 there will be a net cash payable of $1.4 million comprised of cash receipts of $460.5 million and cash payments of $461.9 million. The foreign currency exchange contracts are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value.
(g) The Company acquired Clean Earth on June 28, 2019 and included in the liabilities acquired was a contingent consideration liability resulting from a prior Clean Earth acquisition. Also included is a liability payable to Compass Diversified Holdings related to reimbursements related to future utilization of net operating losses by the Company.
(h) At December 31, 2020, in addition to the above contractual obligations, the Company had $4.3 million of potential long-term tax liabilities, including interest and penalties, related to uncertain tax positions. Because of the high degree of uncertainty regarding the future cash flows associated with these potential long-term tax liabilities, the Company is unable to estimate the years in which settlement will occur with the respective taxing authorities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table summarizes the Company's contingent commercial commitments at December 31, 2020. These amounts are not included on the Consolidated Balance Sheets since there are no current circumstances known to management indicating that the Company will be required to make payments on these contingent commercial commitments.
Commercial Commitments at December 31, 2020
Certain commercial commitments that are of a continuous nature do not have an expiration date and are therefore considered to be indefinite in nature. See Note 15, Financial Instruments, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The Company’s principal sources of liquidity are cash provided by operations and borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, augmented by cash proceeds from asset sales. In addition, the Company has other bank credit facilities available throughout the world. The Company expects to continue to utilize all of these sources to meet future cash requirements for operations and growth initiatives.
In March 2020 the Company raised $280 million pursuant to the New Term Loan as a new tranche under the existing Senior Secured Credit Facilities. The New Term Loan was fully drawn on April 6, 2020 to partially fund the acquisition of ESOL. See Note 3, Acquisition and Dispositions, for additional information related to the ESOL acquisition. Borrowings under the New Term Loan bear interest at a rate per annum ranging from 150 to 250 basis points over adjusted LIBOR as defined in the Credit Agreement. The New Term Loan will mature on June 28, 2024. The Company capitalized $1.9 million of fees related to the issuance of the New Term Loan.
In both March 2020 and June 2020, the Company amended the Senior Secured Credit Facilities to increase the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant as defined in the Credit Agreement. As a result of these amendments, the net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant has been increased to 5.75 through March 2021 and then decreases quarterly until reaching 4.75 in December 2021. There is no change to the previously agreed interest rates as long as the Company's total leverage ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement, does not equal or exceed 4.50, at which time it would increase by 25 basis points for the New Term Loan and the Revolving Credit Facility. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with these and all other covenants. During 2020, the Company recognized $1.9 million of fees and expenses related to the amended Senior Secured Credit Facilities in the caption Unused debt commitment and amendment fees on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
In July 2019, the Company made a prepayment of $320.9 million on the Original Term Loan, using proceeds from the sale of AXC. The remainder of the proceeds from the sale were used to pay down the Revolving Credit Facility. As a result of this prepayment, the Company expensed $5.3 million of previously recorded deferred financing costs on the Consolidated Statement of Operations as discontinued operations in 2019. The prepayment satisfied all future quarterly principal payment requirements under the Original Term Loan; the remaining principal is due at maturity.
During June 2019, the Company completed a private placement of $500.0 million principal amount of Notes. The Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.75%, which is payable on January 31 and July 31 of each year, beginning on January 31, 2020. The Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by all of the wholly owned domestic subsidiaries of the Company that guarantee the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. The indenture governing the Notes contains provisions that (i) allow the Company to redeem some or all of the Notes prior to maturity; (ii) require the Company to offer to repurchase all of the Notes upon a change in control; and (iii) require adherence to certain covenants which are generally less restrictive than those included in the Company's Credit Agreement. The Notes were used, together with borrowings under the Company's Revolving Credit Facility, to fund the acquisition of Clean Earth in 2019. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, for additional information. The Company capitalized $9.0 million of fees related to the issuance of the Notes.
In June 2019, the Company amended the Credit Agreement to, among other things, increase the borrowing capacity of the Revolving Credit Facility by $200 million to a total of $700 million and extend the maturity date of the Revolving Credit Facility until June 2024. Total expenses of $1.0 million were recognized in 2019 related to the amended Credit Agreement in the caption Unused debt commitment and amendment fees on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The Company capitalized $11.6 million of fees related to the issuance of the Notes and the amendment of the Revolving Credit Facility.
In addition, during 2019, the Company recognized $6.7 million of expenses for fees and other costs related to bridge financing commitments that the Company arranged in the event that the Notes were not issued prior to the acquisition of Clean Earth. Because the Notes were issued prior to completion of the Clean Earth acquisition, the bridge financing commitments were not utilized.
In 2018 the Company announced that the Board authorized a share repurchase program pursuant to which the Company could repurchase shares in an amount up to $75 million. The extent to which the Company repurchases shares, and the timing of such repurchases, will depend upon a variety of factors including market conditions and other corporate considerations as determined by the Company’s management. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. No purchases of shares were made by the Company during 2020. During 2019, the Company purchased 1.8 million shares of common stock under this program at an average price of $18.02 per share or a total of approximately $32 million. During 2018, the Company purchased 1.3 million shares of common stock under this program at an average price of $22.72 per share or a total of approximately $30 million.
Certainty of Cash Flows
The majority of the Company's cash flows provided by operations has historically been generated in the second half of the year. The certainty of the Company's future cash flows is underpinned by the long-term nature of the Company's metals services contracts, the recurring nature of revenues within the Clean Earth segment, the order backlog for the Company's
railway track maintenance services and equipment and overall discretionary cash flows (operating cash flows plus cash from asset sales in excess of the amounts necessary for capital expenditures to maintain current revenue levels) generated by the Company. Historically, the Company has utilized these discretionary cash flows for growth-related capital expenditures, strategic acquisitions, and debt repayment.
The types of products and services that the Company provides are not subject to rapid technological change, which increases the stability of related cash flows. Additionally, the Company believes each business in its portfolio is a leader in the industries and major markets the Company serves. Due to these factors, the Company is confident in the Company's future ability to generate positive cash flows from operations.
Debt Covenants
The Senior Secured Credit Facility contains a consolidated net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio covenant, which is not to exceed 5.75 through March 2021 and then decreasing quarterly until reaching 4.75 in December 2021 and 4.00 in March 2022, and a minimum consolidated adjusted EBITDA to consolidated interest charges ratio covenant, which is not to be less than 3.0. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with these covenants as the net leverage ratio was 4.6 to 1.0 and interest coverage ratio was 4.5 to 1.0. Based on balances and covenants in effect at December 31, 2020, the Company could increase net debt by $301.7 million and still be in compliance with these debt covenants. Alternatively, adjusted EBITDA could decrease by $52.5 million, and the Company would remain in compliance with these covenants. The Company has estimated the negative impact of COVID-19 on its financial position, results of operations and cash flows, and believes it will continue to maintain compliance with these covenants. However, due to the inherent uncertainty of COVID-19 on the Company’s businesses, the Company’s estimates of compliance with these covenants could change in the future.
Cash Management
The Company has various cash management systems throughout the world that centralize cash in various bank accounts where it is economically justifiable and legally permissible to do so. These centralized cash balances are then redeployed to other operations to reduce short-term borrowings and to finance working capital needs or capital expenditures. Due to the transitory nature of cash balances, they are normally invested in bank deposits that can be withdrawn at will or in very liquid short-term bank time deposits and government obligations. The Company's policy is to use the largest banks in the various countries in which the Company operates. The Company monitors the creditworthiness of banks and, when appropriate, will adjust banking operations to reduce or eliminate exposure to less creditworthy banks.
At December 31, 2020, the Company's consolidated cash and cash equivalents included $74.9 million held by non-U.S. subsidiaries. At December 31, 2020, approximately 4% of the Company's consolidated cash and cash equivalents had regulatory restrictions that would preclude the transfer of funds with and among subsidiaries. Non-U.S. subsidiaries also held $21.6 million of cash and cash equivalents in consolidated strategic ventures. The strategic venture agreements may require strategic venture partner approval to transfer funds with and among subsidiaries. While the Company's remaining non-U.S. cash and cash equivalents can be transferred with and among subsidiaries, the majority of these non-U.S. cash balances will be used to support the ongoing working capital needs and continued growth of the Company's non-U.S. operations.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
The Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates the estimates, including those related to defined benefit pension benefits, notes and accounts receivable, fair value estimates for business combinations and goodwill, long-lived asset impairment, inventories, revenue recognition - cost-to-cost method, insurance reserves and income taxes. The impact of changes in these estimates, as necessary, is reflected in the respective segment's results of operations in the period of the change. The Company bases estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different outcomes, assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies are affected by the Company's more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. Management has discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates described below with the Audit Committee of the Board and they have reviewed the Company's disclosures relating to these estimates in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition. These items should be read in conjunction with Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Defined Benefit Pension Benefits
The Company has defined benefit pension plans in several countries. The largest of these plans are in the U.K. and the U.S. The Company's funding policy for these plans is to contribute amounts sufficient to meet the minimum funding pursuant to U.K. and U.S. statutory requirements, plus any additional amounts that the Company may determine to be appropriate.
Changes in the discount rate assumption and the actual performance of plan assets compared with the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are the primary drivers in the change in funded status of the Company's defined benefit pension plans. These factors are components of actuarial loss (gain) and impact the amount recognized in Other comprehensive income (loss), as such actuarial changes are not reflected directly on the Consolidated Statements of Operations but amortized over time in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Critical Estimate-Defined Benefit Pension Benefits
Accounting for defined benefit pension plans requires the use of actuarial assumptions. The principal assumptions used include the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Each assumption is reviewed annually and represents management's best estimate at that time. The assumptions are selected to represent the average expected experience over time and may differ, in any one year, from actual experience due to changes in capital markets and the overall economy. These differences will impact the amount of unfunded benefit obligation and the expense recognized.
The discount rates used in calculating the Company's projected benefit obligations at the December 31, 2020 measurement date for the U.K. and U.S. defined benefit pension plans were 1.4% and 2.4%, respectively, and the global weighted-average discount rate was 1.6%. The discount rates selected represent level-equivalent rates using the yield curve spot rates on a year-by-year expected cash flow basis, using yield curves of high-quality corporate bonds. Annual NPPC is determined using the discount rates at the beginning of the year. The discount rates for 2020 expense were 2.1% for the U.K. plan, 3.2% for the U.S. plans and 2.4% for the global weighted-average of plans.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by evaluating the asset return expectations with the Company's advisors as well as actual, long-term, historical results of asset returns for the pension plans. Generally, the NPPC increases as the expected long-term rate of return on assets decreases. For 2021 and 2020, the global weighted-average expected long-term rate of return on asset assumption is 5.1% and 5.6%, respectively. This rate was determined based on a model of expected asset returns for an actively managed portfolio.
Changes in NPPC may occur in the future due to changes in actuarial assumptions and due to changes in returns on plan assets resulting from financial market conditions. Holding all other assumptions constant, using December 31, 2020 plan data, a one-quarter percent increase or decrease in the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would increase or decrease annual 2021 pre-tax defined benefit NPPC as follows:
Increases or decreases to net pension obligations may be required should circumstances that affect these estimates change. Additionally, certain events could result in the pension obligation changing at a time other than the annual measurement date. This would occur when a benefit plan is amended or when plan curtailments or settlements occur.
See Note 10, Employee Benefit Plans, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Notes and Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at net realizable value, which represents the face value of the receivable less an allowance for expected credit losses. The allowance for expected credit losses is maintained for expected lifetime losses resulting from the inability or unwillingness of customers to make required payments.
The Company’s expected credit loss allowance methodology for accounts receivable is developed using historical collection experience, current and future economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of customers' trade accounts receivables. When required, the Company adjusts the loss-rate methodology to account for current conditions and reasonable and supportable expectations of future economic and market conditions. The Company generally assesses future economic
conditions for a period which corresponds with the contractual life of its accounts receivable. Additionally, specific allowance amounts are established to record the appropriate provision for customers that have a higher probability of default.
Prior to the adoption of the expected credit loss allowance methodology on January 1, 2020, the Company established an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon a specific-identification method, as well as historical collection experience, as appropriate. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, trade accounts receivable of $407.4 million and $310.0 million, respectively, were net of reserves of $7.5 million and $13.5 million, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Notes and Accounts Receivable
A considerable amount of judgment is required to assess the realizability of receivables, including the current creditworthiness of each customer, related aging of past due balances and the facts and circumstances surrounding any non-payment. The Company's provisions for expected credit losses and doubtful accounts during 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $2.0 million, $7.5 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
On at least a quarterly basis, customer accounts are analyzed for collectability. Reserves are established based upon the expected credit loss allowance methodology noted above. Reserves are based on the facts available to the Company and are re-evaluated and adjusted as additional information becomes available. Specific issues are discussed with corporate management and any significant changes in reserve amounts or the write-off of balances must be approved by specifically designated corporate personnel. All approved items are monitored to ensure they are recorded in the proper period. Additionally, any significant changes in reserve balances are reviewed to ensure the proper corporate approval has occurred.
If the financial condition of the Company's customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Conversely, an improvement in a customer's ability to make payments could result in a decrease of the allowance for doubtful accounts. Changes in the allowance for doubtful accounts related to both of these situations would be recorded through Operating income from continuing operations in the period the change was determined. The increase in the provision for doubtful accounts in 2019 primarily resulted from a provision for doubtful accounts in the Harsco Environmental Segment related to a customer in the U.K. entering administration which was subsequently written off in 2020.
See Note 4, Accounts Receivable and Note Receivable, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Fair Value Estimates for Business Combinations and Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests, be recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. During 2020, the Company acquired 100% of ESOL, an established waste transportation, processing and services provider with a comprehensive portfolio of disposal solutions for customers primarily across the industrial, retail and healthcare markets. During 2019, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of Clean Earth, one of the largest U.S. providers of specialty waste processing and beneficial reuse solutions for hazardous wastes, contaminated materials and dredged volumes. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information.
The Company's goodwill balances were $902.1 million and $738.4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company performs its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1. Almost all of the Company's goodwill is allocated to the Harsco Environmental Segment and the Harsco Clean Earth Segment.
Critical Estimate-Business Combinations and Goodwill
The acquisition method of accounting requires the excess of purchase price over the fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities to be recorded as goodwill. The determination of fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires numerous estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of cash flow projections, revenue growth rates, customer attrition rates, discount rates and useful lives. Such estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable and, when appropriate, include assistance from independent third-party valuation firms. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with corresponding offsets to goodwill. See Note 3, Acquisitions and Dispositions, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information regarding the purchase price allocation related to acquisitions.
In accordance with U.S. GAAP, goodwill is not amortized and is tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist or if a decision is made to dispose of a business. Goodwill is allocated among and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include declining cash flows or operating losses at the reporting unit level, a
significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, a loss of key personnel or a more likely than not expectation that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise disposed of, among others.
In applying the goodwill impairment test, the Company has the option to perform a qualitative test or a quantitative test. Under the qualitative test, the Company assesses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors may include, but are not limited to, economic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance of the reporting unit, and other entity and reporting unit specific events. If after assessing these qualitative factors, the Company determines it is “more-likely-than-not” that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, the Company would perform a quantitative test.
The quantitative approach of testing for goodwill impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to the net book value, including goodwill. The Company uses a discounted cash flow model (“DCF model”) to estimate the current fair value of reporting units, as management believes forecasted operating cash flows are the best indicator of current fair value. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the preparation of DCF models including future revenues and operating margin growth, the weighted-average cost of capital (“WACC”), tax rates, capital spending, pension funding, the impact of business initiatives and working capital projections. These assumptions and estimates may vary significantly among reporting units. DCF models are based on approved long-range plans for the early years and historical relationships and projections for later years. WACC rates are derived from internal and external factors including, but not limited to, the average market price of the Company's stock, shares outstanding, book value of the Company's debt, the long-term risk-free interest rate, and both market and size-specific risk premiums. Due to the many variables noted above and the relative size of the Company's goodwill, differences in assumptions may have a material impact on the results of the Company's annual goodwill impairment testing. If the net book value of a reporting unit were to exceed the current fair value, then an impairment charge would be recognized as the difference between the fair value and the net book value.
The performance of the Company’s 2020 annual impairment tests did not result in any impairment of the Company’s goodwill.
See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 7, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional information.
Long-lived Asset Impairment (Other than Goodwill)
Long-lived assets (or asset groups) are reviewed for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that the book value of an asset (or asset group) may be impaired. The amounts charged against pre-tax income from continuing operations related to impaired long-lived assets (or asset groups) included in Other (income) expenses, net on the Consolidated Statements of Operations were $0.8 million, $0.8 million and $0.1 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Asset Impairment
The determination of a long-lived asset (or asset group) impairment involves significant judgments based upon short-term and long-term projections of future asset (or asset group) performance. If the undiscounted cash flows associated with an asset (or asset group) do not exceed the asset's book value, impairment loss estimates would be based upon the difference between the book value and fair value of the asset (or asset group). The fair value is generally based upon the Company's estimate of the amount that the assets (or asset group) could be bought or sold for in a transaction between willing parties. If quoted market prices for the asset (or asset group) or similar assets are unavailable, the fair value estimate is generally calculated using a DCF model. Should circumstances change that affect these estimates, additional impairment charges may be required and would be recorded through income in the period the change was determined.
The Company has not materially changed its methodology for calculating long-lived asset impairments for the years presented. U.S. GAAP requires consideration of all valuation techniques for which market participant inputs can be obtained without undue cost and effort. The use of a DCF model continues to be an appropriate method for determining fair value; however, methodologies such as quoted market prices must also be evaluated.
Because of the lower-than-expected results for the Altek Group of the Harsco Environmental Segment for 2020, the Company tested Altek’s asset groups' recoverability in the fourth quarter of 2020. The asset group primarily consists of intangible assets which had a carrying value of $42.6 million at the measurement date. Recoverability of the carrying value of the asset groups was based upon estimated future cash flows while taking into consideration various assumptions and estimates, including future use of the assets, remaining useful life of the assets, and eventual disposition of the assets. Undiscounted estimated cash flows of the Altek asset group exceeded the carrying value, therefore, no impairment was recorded. If actual results prove inconsistent with the Company’s assumptions and judgments, it could result in impairment of the Altek intangible assets in future periods.
In the third quarter of 2020, a customer of the Harsco Environmental Segment in China ceased steel making operations at its steel mill site in order to relocate the operations to a new site, as a result of a government mandate to improve environmental
conditions of the area. The Company will continue to provide services to the same customer at the new site. The net book value of the idled equipment associated with the previous location is approximately $19 million. The customer has entered into an agreement with the government where it will receive compensation for the losses the customer has incurred as a result of the forced shutdown. The Company has continued discussions with the customer regarding compensation, which are expected to be protracted. While the customer has initially indicated that they will not provide us compensation, we disagree with their interpretation and are evaluating our legal position in response. In addition, there may be other avenues of pursuing recovery, including seeking relief directly from the local government. At this point, considering the ongoing discussions with the customer, and other avenues, we believe we will recover the book value of the equipment thus do not believe we have an asset impairment as of December 31, 2020. However, the Company will continue to evaluate changes in facts and circumstances and record any impairment charge when and if indicated.
See Note 18, Other (Income) Expenses, Net in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Inventories
Inventory balances are adjusted for estimated obsolete or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and its net realizable value or estimated market value, as applicable. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, inventories of $173.0 million and $157.0 million, respectively, are net of reserves of $15.1 million and $12.5 million, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Inventories
In assessing the realization of inventory balances, the Company is required to make judgments as to future demand and compare these with current or committed inventory levels. If actual market conditions are determined to be less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required and would be recorded through Operating income from continuing operations in the period the determination is made. Additionally, the Company records reserves to adjust a substantial portion of its U.S. inventory balances to the LIFO method of inventory valuation. In adjusting these reserves throughout the year, the Company estimates its year-end inventory costs and quantities. At December 31 of each year, the reserves are adjusted to reflect actual year-end inventory costs and quantities. During periods of inflation, LIFO expense usually increases and during periods of deflation it decreases. These year-end adjustments resulted in pre-tax income of $0.6 million in 2020, pre-tax income of $1.6 million in 2019 and pre-tax expense of $0.6 million in 2018.
The Company has not materially changed its methodology for calculating inventory reserves for the years presented. See Note 5, Inventories, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Revenue Recognition - Cost-to-Cost Method
For certain contracts with customers, which meet specific criteria established in U.S. GAAP, the Company recognizes revenue on an over time basis utilizing an input method based on costs incurred (“cost-to-cost method”) to measure progress, which requires the Company to make estimates regarding the revenues and costs associated with design, manufacturing and delivery of products.
Critical Estimate-Revenue Recognition - Cost-to-Cost Method
The Company uses the cost-to-cost method to measure progress because it is the measure that best depicts the transfer of control to the customer, which occurs as the Company incurs costs under the contracts. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of progress towards completion is based on the ratio of costs incurred to total estimated costs at completion which includes both actual costs already incurred and the estimated costs to complete. Accounting for contracts with customers using the cost-to-cost method requires significant judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating contract revenues (including estimates of variable consideration, if applicable, as well as estimating any liquidating damages or penalties related to performance); estimating contract costs (including estimating engineering costs to design the machine and the material, labor and overhead manufacturing costs to build the machine); making assumptions for schedule and technical items; properly executing the engineering and design phases consistent with customer expectations; the availability and costs of labor and material resources; productivity; and evaluating whether a significant financing component is present. Due to the number of years it may take to complete certain contracts and the scope and nature of the work required to be performed on those contracts, primarily in the Harsco Rail Segment, estimating total revenues and costs at completion is inherently complicated and subject to many variables. Accordingly, estimates are subject to change as experience is gained and as more information is obtained, even though the scope of the work under the contract may not have changed. When adjustments in estimated total contract sales or estimated total costs are required, any changes from prior estimates are recognized in current period earnings for the inception-to-date effect of such changes. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract using the cost-to-cost method exceed estimates of total sales to be earned, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in current period earnings when the loss is determined. Railway track maintenance equipment revenue of approximately $142 million was recognized using the cost-to-cost method method in 2020.
The Company recognized an estimated forward loss provision related to the contracts with the federal railway system of Switzerland. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the entire remaining estimated forward loss provision of $4.4 million and $6.4 million is included in the caption Other current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The estimated forward loss provision represents the Company's best estimate based on currently available information. It is possible that the Company's overall estimate of costs to complete these contracts may increase, which would result in an additional estimated forward loss provision at such time. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has substantially completed the first SBB contract and the second SBB contract is approximately 70% complete. Based on all information currently available, the Company is unable to estimate any further possible loss or range of loss at this time. The finalization of prototype, as well as the handover and commissioning of vehicles are planned to occur in 2021 and could affect the cost estimates. The Company is currently manufacturing seven multipurpose Stoneblower machines for the U.K.-based customer Network Rail under a long-term contract. Delivery of these machines have been delayed due to several factors, including customer expectations and requirements and COVID-19, and the Company's estimated delivery schedule would trigger liquidated damages. However, based on the nature of these delays and negotiations with the customer, the Company expects that it will get relief from the customer for most of these liquidated damages, and as such the Company's current estimate of contract revenues has not been reduced. However, if the Company is not granted relief, any adjustment to the estimate of these liquidated damages in the future could have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations in that period.
Insurance Reserves
The Company retains a significant portion of the risk for U.S. workers' compensation, U.K. employers' liability, automobile, general and product liability losses. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded liabilities of $28.3 million and $28.7 million, respectively, related to both asserted and unasserted insurance claims. At December 31, 2020 and 2019,
$5.2 million and $3.7 million, respectively, was included in insurance liabilities related to claims covered by insurance carriers for which a corresponding receivable has been recorded.
Critical Estimate-Insurance Reserves
Insurance reserves have been recorded based upon actuarial calculations that reflect the undiscounted estimated liabilities for ultimate losses, including claims incurred but not reported. Inherent in these estimates are assumptions that are based on the Company's history of claims and losses, a detailed analysis of existing claims with respect to potential value and current legal and legislative trends. If actual claims differ from those projected by management, increases or decreases to insurance reserves may be required and would be recorded through Operating income from continuing operations in the period the change was determined. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company recorded insurance reserve adjustments that decreased pre-tax insurance expense from continuing operations for self-insured programs by $2.1 million, $1.5 million and $2.0 million, respectively. The Company has programs in place to improve claims experience, such as disciplined claim and insurance litigation management and a focused approach to workplace safety.
The Company has not materially changed its methodology for calculating insurance reserves for the years presented. There are currently no known trends, demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that are reasonably likely to occur that would materially affect the methodology or assumptions described above. See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Income Taxes
The Company's income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for uncertain tax positions reflect management's best estimate of taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to various international, federal, state and local income taxes in jurisdictions where the Company operates. In determining income tax expense, the Company makes its best estimate of the annual effective income tax rate at the end of each quarter and applies that rate to year-to-date income (loss) before income taxes to arrive at the year-to-date income tax provision (exclusive of loss jurisdictions for which no tax benefit is realizable with any discrete tax items recorded separately). At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company's annual effective income tax rate on income from continuing operations was 8.9%, 35.8% and 4.8%, respectively.
Critical Estimate-Income Taxes
Annual effective income tax rates are estimated by giving recognition to currently enacted tax rates, tax holidays, tax credits, capital losses and tax deductions as well as certain exempt income and non-deductible expenses for all jurisdictions where the Company operates. Quarterly income tax provisions incorporate any change in the year-to-date provision from the previous quarterly periods.
The Company records deferred tax assets to the extent the Company believes these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such determinations, the Company considers all available evidence, including future reversals of existing deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, feasible and prudent tax planning strategies and recent financial operating results. In the event the Company was to determine that it would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of
their net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be made that would reduce the provision for income taxes.
Valuation allowances of $140.6 million, $127.1 million and $137.5 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related principally to deferred tax assets for pension liabilities, NOLs, foreign tax credit carryforwards, capital loss carryforwards and foreign currency translation that are uncertain as to realizability. In 2020, the Company recorded a valuation allowance reduction of $15.5 million related to foreign tax credit carryforwards due to statutory limitation expiration. The Company recorded a valuation allowance increase of $13.0 million related to pension liabilities, a net valuation allowance increase of $9.8 million related to losses in certain jurisdictions where the Company determined that it is more likely than not that these assets will not be realized, and a valuation allowance increase of $3.3 million from the effects of foreign currency translation adjustments. In 2019, the Company recorded a valuation allowance reduction of $12.5 million related to capital loss carryforwards, foreign tax credit carryforwards and state NOLs due to the losses and foreign tax credit carryforwards being utilized to reduce the tax liabilities on the capital gain realized as a result of the sale of AXC and PK. In addition, the Company recorded a valuation allowance reduction (and corresponding reduction to deferred tax assets) of $5.6 million due to the merger and liquidation of certain foreign dormant entities resulting in the loss of certain tax attributes, offset by a net increase of $7.9 million related to losses in certain jurisdictions where the Company determined it is more likely than not that these assets will not be realized.
An income tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on its technical merits. The unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $2.9 and $3.1 million, respectively, excluding accrued interest and penalties. The unrecognized income tax benefit may decrease as a result of the lapse of statute of limitations or as a result of final settlement and resolution of outstanding tax matters in various state and international jurisdictions.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Act was signed into law. The Tax Act significantly changed U.S. tax law by, among other things, lowering corporate income tax rates, implementing a territorial tax system and imposing a repatriation tax on deemed repatriated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The Tax Act permanently reduced the U.S. corporate income tax rate from a maximum of 35% to a 21% rate, effective January 1, 2018. The SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 ("SAB 118") to address the application of U.S. GAAP in situations when a registrant did not have the necessary information available, prepared, or analyzed (including computations) in reasonable detail to complete the accounting for certain income tax effects of the Tax Act. The Company recognized provisional tax impacts related to the deemed repatriated earnings and the revaluation of deferred tax assets and liabilities in its consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2017. Based on an analysis of the earnings and profits ("E&P") for the Company's foreign subsidiaries, no toll charge was recorded in 2017 related to the Tax Act. The Company finalized its E&P analysis in 2018 and confirmed there is no toll charge related to the Tax Act. Adjustments made to the provisional amounts allowed under SAB 118 were identified and recorded as discrete adjustments during the year ended December 31, 2018. The accounting was completed in the fourth quarter of 2018.
The Company has not materially changed the methodology for calculating income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for uncertain tax positions for the years presented or for quarterly periods. See Note 11, Income Taxes, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data," for additional information.
Research and Development
Internal funding for research and development was as follows:
The amounts shown exclude technology development and engineering costs classified in cost of services sold; cost of products sold; or selling, general and administrative expenses.
Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Information on recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards is included in Note 2, Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Standards, in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."