ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Further, you should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. See also “Forward-Looking Statements”. All information is stated in U.S. dollars unless otherwise specified.
Overview
We are a neurotechnology company focused on neurological wellness. Our purpose is to develop, license or acquire non-invasive technologies targeted at reducing symptoms of neurological disease or trauma.
Our first product, known as the PoNSTM device, is authorized for sale in Canada as a class II, non-implantable medical device intended for use as a short term treatment (14 weeks) of gait deficit due to symptoms from MS and balance deficit due to mmTBI and is to be used in conjunction with supervised therapeutic exercise. It is an investigational medical device in the United States, the European Union, and Australia. The device is currently under review for de novo classification and clearance by the FDA as a potential treatment for gait deficit due to symptoms of MS. It is also under premarket review by the AUS Therapeutic Goods Administration. PoNS Treatment™ is not currently commercially available in the United States, the European Union or Australia.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net loss was $14.1 million and $9.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $118.9 million. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to advance the PoNS Treatment and seek regulatory clearance and pursue its commercialization. There are a number of conditions that we must satisfy before we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to fund our operations, including but not limited to the recruitment of patients for treatment in Canada, manufacturing of a commercially viable version of the PoNS device and demonstration of effectiveness sufficient to generate commercial orders by customers for our product. Moreover, because we expect that the revenue opportunity in the United States is significantly greater than in Canada, we believe our ability to generate significant revenue in the future will be dependent upon the receipt of FDA marketing authorization of the PoNS device. Further, we may incur expenses in connection with the in-license or acquisition of other potential products. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for additional information.
Business Update
Canadian Regulatory Status: mmTBI and MS
On October 17, 2018, we received our Canadian marketing authorization from Health Canada allowing us to commercialize the PoNS device in Canada for use as a short-term treatment (14 weeks) of balance deficit due to mmTBI.
On March 18, 2020, we received our Canadian marketing authorization from Health Canada allowing us to commercialize the PoNS device for the treatment of gait deficit in patients with MS symptoms, when used in conjunction with physical therapy. Our MS market authorization application comprised objective statistical evidence as well as independently reviewed clinical research analysis. We believe this label expansion will significantly expand our addressable market opportunity in Canada to include a patient population that is motivated to pursue treatment options which may resolve or delay the progression of MS gait deficit symptoms.
US Regulatory Status: MS
In March 2020, we announced that based on the quality of the data included in our MS submission package to Health Canada and the significant unmet needs of those afflicted with MS, we are prioritizing the MS indication as the pathway to pursue our first U.S. clearance of the PoNS device. We believe the existing published data and real-world evidence with use of the PoNS for the treatment of gait disorder in patients with MS are sufficient to demonstrate a favorable risk/benefit profile, as required for de novo classification and clearance to enable US marketability. Novel treatments for MS are highlighted as a specific target of the FDA as a high unmet medical need disease.
On May 7, 2020 we received Breakthrough Designation for the PoNS™ device as a potential treatment for gait deficit due to symptoms of Multiple Sclerosis (“MS”), to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program. The goal of the Breakthrough Devices Program is to provide patients and health care providers with timely access to these medical devices by speeding up their development, assessment, and review, while preserving the statutory standards for premarket approval, 510(k) clearance, and de novo classification and clearance, consistent with FDA’s mission to protect and promote public health.
The Breakthrough Devices Program replaces the Expedited Access Pathway and Priority Review for medical devices. The FDA considers devices granted designation under the Expedited Access Pathway to be part of the Breakthrough Devices Program.
The Breakthrough Devices Program offers manufacturers an opportunity to interact with the FDA's experts through several different program options to efficiently address topics as they arise during the premarket review phase, which can help manufacturers receive feedback from the FDA and identify areas of agreement in a timely way. Manufacturers can also expect prioritized review of their submission.
Breakthrough Device Designation does not change the requirements for approval of an application for a marketing authorization under section 510(k) of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
On August 4, 2020, we submitted our request to the FDA for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device for the treatment of gait deficit due to symptoms from MS, to be used as an adjunct to a supervised therapeutic exercise program in patients over 18 years of age.
On October 19, 2020, we announced that we received a request for additional information from the FDA related to the Company’s request for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device. During the substantive review phase of a request for de novo classification and clearance, FDA may request additional information in order to obtain information necessary for the FDA to continue or complete its review and, in such instances, places its review on hold until the requested information is submitted. The FDA’s request for additional information was received approximately 75 days from the submission date, which is consistent with FDA’s expected timing for review of a Breakthrough Designated product in the de novo pathway, such as the PoNS device. The FDA’s request for additional information included requests for additional analysis of clinical data and proposed certain labeling modifications. On January 11, 2021, we announced that we submitted our formal response to the FDA’s request for additional information.
On January 14, 2021, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, or CMS, issued the final rule (CMS-3372-F), 42 C.F.R. § 405.603 on the new Medicare coverage pathway referred to as Medicare Coverage of Innovative Technology, or MCIT, for FDA-designated breakthrough medical devices. The MCIT rule will provide national Medicare coverage as early as the same day as FDA market authorization for breakthrough devices and coverage would last for four years. To be eligible for coverage through MCIT, the breakthrough device must be used for the FDA approved or cleared indication(s) for use. Manufacturers will be able to opt in to MCIT and choose a start date for coverage anytime within two years from the date of FDA market authorization, but coverage will only be valid for four years from market authorization regardless of opt in date. At the end of the four year period, manufacturers are expected to have obtained coding for the specific product which can then be used as the reimbursement pathway for commercial payers. We are working to understand current Medicare requirements and policies for coverage, coding, and payment of durable medical equipment and assesses how the PoNS device may be treated with respect to coding, coverage, and reimbursement under the Medicare program.
US Regulatory Status: mmTBI
Our U.S. regulatory strategy initially focused on pursuing de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device from the FDA for the treatment of balance deficit due to mmTBI.
We submitted a request for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device to the FDA for this indication in August 2018. This request was supported by data from two of our clinical trials in mmTBI, including our registrational trial, TBI-001.
In April 2019, we announced the FDA had completed its review and had denied our request for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device for the treatment of balance deficit due to mmTBI. In reaching its conclusion, the FDA noted, via a denial letter, that although the safety profile of the PoNS device is acceptable, the FDA did not have sufficient information to discern the relative independent contributions of the PoNS device and physical therapy on the improvements from baseline. The FDA noted that we could generate additional data to address its concerns and resubmit our application.
In October 2019, we had a pre-submission meeting where the FDA provided feedback needed to help complete the design of a new clinical trial intended to address the FDA’s request for a trial that demonstrates the benefit of the PoNS Treatment compared to physical therapy alone. In January 2020, we received the FDA’s feedback on the minutes from the October 2019 pre-submission meeting. In its feedback, the FDA provided post-meeting notes with specific recommendations regarding the trial design that were not discussed in the October 2019 pre-submission meeting.
Based on the receipt of the FDA’s final minutes from the pre-submission meeting, we finalized our clinical protocol for a new trial, TBI-002, intended to support a request for de novo classification and clearance of the PoNS device. TBI-002 will be a multi-center, randomized trial in the U.S. and Canada consisting of 103 subjects with balance deficit due to mmTBI. Although TBI-002 will take longer and be more costly than the design that we had discussed at our October 2019 pre-submission meeting, we believe that the
chances of obtaining FDA de novo classification and clearance will be significantly increased if we incorporate the FDA’s pre-submission feedback into this next trial design.
TBI-002 will proceed in two phases: a run-in phase, followed by a treatment phase. During the run-in phase, all subjects will receive 5 weeks of physical therapy alone. Subjects will then be randomized and assigned to one of two groups in the treatment phase where subjects will either receive up to 10 weeks of physical therapy with the PoNS device or 10 weeks of physical therapy without the PoNS device. The primary effectiveness endpoint of TBI-002 will be a responder analysis.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our expectation was that we would move forward with the revised protocol and estimated that enrollment would begin in April 2020 with the completion of the trial and submission to the FDA in the second quarter of 2021. However, the launch of the TBI-002 trial has been temporarily suspended, and we are evaluating our options for funding and timing to commence the trial or potentially look at other indications.
European Regulatory Status
In December 2018, we submitted an application for a CE Mark, which, if approved, would allow us to market the PoNS device in the EU. During the second quarter of 2019, we engaged with regulators in Europe to answer questions that we received from them as part of their review of our PoNS device for CE marking. In August 2019 we withdrew our application from the EU marketing process due to uncertainty in Europe caused by the switch from the Medical Device Directive, or MDD, to the Medical Device Regulation, or MDR, Brexit, and the withdrawal of Lloyd’s Register Quality Assurance, our notified body, from the EU notified body business. We have engaged G-MED NA (North America) as our new ISO registrar and new notified body and will reconsider submitting to the EU when conditions stabilize.
Australian Regulatory Status
In the third quarter of 2019 we initiated the submission of our application to the Therapeutic Goods Administration, or TGA. We supplemented our submission with additional data based on questions supplied to date and provided responses to additional questions during the third quarter of 2020. We are currently awaiting additional feedback from TGA on our application.
Share Purchase Agreement and Co-Promotion Agreement
During the third quarter of 2019, we engaged with HTC through the joint steering committee in discussions regarding the future development of the commercialization of the PoNS device and PoNS Treatment in Canada. As we worked with Heuro to expand the commercial infrastructure, the complexity and feasibility of using a franchise model to build a market for PoNS including the physical therapy component became challenging. By acquiring Heuro, as noted below, we were able to streamline the decision-making process and increase our ability to react to evolving market factors as the market for the PoNS Treatment is being developed.
On October 30, 2019, we and HTC entered into a Share Purchase Agreement, or the SPA, whereby we, through our wholly owned subsidiary, acquired Heuro from HTC. Under the terms of the SPA, total consideration of approximately $1.6 million was transferred to HTC, which included (1) the repayment to HTC for their investment in the set-up of Heuro’s initial commercial infrastructure including, the establishment of five authorized PoNS clinics across Canada, (2) the current market value of 55 PoNS devices which we also provided to HTC under the SPA, (3) the forgiveness of the CAD$750 thousand receivable from the September 2018 strategic alliance agreement and (4) the exclusivity rights granted to HTC in the Co-Promotion Agreement, as defined below, to provide PoNS Treatment in the Fraser Valley and Vancouver metro regions of British Columbia.
In connection with the Share Purchase Agreement, on October 30, 2019, we entered into a Clinical Research and Co-Promotion Agreement with HTC, or the Co-Promotion Agreement, whereby each company will promote the sales of the PoNS Treatment and the NeuroCatchTM device throughout Canada. The co-promotion arrangement terminated on December 31, 2020. Also, subject to certain terms and conditions, we granted to HTC the exclusive right to provide the PoNS Treatment in the Fraser Valley and Vancouver metro regions of British Columbia, where HTC has operated a PoNS authorized clinic since February 2019. HTC will purchase the PoNS devices for use in these regions exclusively from us and on terms no less favorable than the then-current standard terms and conditions. This exclusivity right has an initial term of ten years, renewable by HTC for one additional ten year term upon sixty days’ written notice to us.
Canadian Commercialization Efforts
From a real-world results perspective, in Canada thus far, the collective experience of our patients that have completed the 14-week PoNS Treatment have been encouraging. Consistent with what we saw in our two clinical trials, one for 5 weeks and the other for 14 weeks, commercial MS and TBI patients are demonstrating improvements in balance and gait within the first two weeks followed by
continued improvement over the following twelve weeks. The majority of patients have a mean patient adherence to treatment of over 90% and showed significant improvement in their balance and gait with a meaningful clinical difference at the end of their treatment. The consistency of the patient results from our initial commercial experience supports our plans to expand access PoNS Treatment in Canada.
March 2019 marked the commercialization of our PoNS Treatment in Canada, where PoNS became the first and only device authorized by Health Canada for the treatment of balance deficit due to mmTBI. Throughout 2019 we made important progress in advancing and refining our commercialization strategy in Canada building access, awareness and credibility for the PoNS Treatment. These efforts, which were led by our local Canadian commercial team, included the establishment of our authorized clinic network throughout Canada, launching digital marketing campaigns, and building key opinion leader and advocacy networks.
During the third quarter of 2019, we made the strategic decision to change our business model in Canada in order to accelerate the adoption of our novel technology. On October 30, 2019, we acquired the Heuro Canada operating entity from HTC which allowed us to streamline the decision-making process and increase our ability to react to evolving market factors as the market for the PoNS Treatment is being developed.
On March 18, 2020, the Company received notification that its Canadian Class II license amendment application for the treatment of gait deficit in patients with symptoms from MS, when used in conjunction with physical therapy, was successful and received marketing authorization for PoNS from Health Canada.
Following in-depth market analysis and field intelligence, our Canadian commercial team began an expansion plan to increase the number of authorized PoNS clinics. In the first two months of 2020, we authorized 7 new clinic locations for a total of 14 clinic locations to provide PoNS Treatment across Canada. As of June 30, 2020, we had 20 clinic locations which we increased to 22 clinic locations as of September 30, 2020 and to 31 clinic locations as of December 31, 2020. Beginning in 2021, in addition to continuing to increase the number of clinic locations, we have shifted our focus to driving patient throughput to these 31 clinics. Sales performance in Canada continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic due to space restrictions that the provincial governments have imposed as well as the risk tolerance of patients and therapists.
In collaboration with the Toronto Rehabilitation Institute (part of University Health Network), we are continuing our clinical experience program, the results of which we look to publish in 2021.
We continue to refine our go-to-market pricing model based on market feedback. Our modified pricing approach is focused on reducing the need for clinics and patients to pay large, upfront costs at the start of treatment. We have also experimented with various promotional pricing programs resulting in lower unit prices for both PoNS system purchases and mouthpieces in order to increase access to the PoNS treatment and drive market awareness which we expect to result in an increase in the volume of units sold, which was seen in the second half of 2020 when compared to the second half of 2019. We intend to keep the promotional pricing in place at least through the first half of 2021.
The value dossiers for mmTBI and MS that were created in mid-2020 to fully demonstrate in both scientific and financial terms, the merits of PoNS Treatment for claimants are now being implemented along with submissions from clinics on behalf of their patients. The dossiers are provided to our clinics across Canada to submit as part of treatment plans with reimbursement applications to the payer community. Our reimbursement strategy for mmTBI continues to focus on the auto collision insurance and workers’ compensation market as well as long-term disability cases. Our reimbursement strategy for MS is focused on commercial insurers/extended health benefits. Moreover, we are currently considering the development of the PoNS device for other potential indications, including stroke, as well as label expansion for our existing indications.
As part of our overall PoNS Treatment strategy, we are also gathering comprehensive health economic assessments of treatment outcomes. These data will, in-turn, be used to support our applications for workers compensation, auto insurance and commercial insurance reimbursement initiatives in Canada, the United States and other markets around the world. The Canadian commercial experience will be extremely valuable to prepare us for our launches in the United States and internationally.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States and around the world. The Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition have been adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and global economic conditions. The outbreak and spread of COVID-19 has significantly increased economic uncertainty. Authorities implemented numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place orders, and business shutdowns. The COVID-19 pandemic initially led to the closure of PoNS authorized clinic locations across Canada from March until June 2020. Patients who completed their initial training in the clinics prior to the closures have been able to continue working independently in the at-home portion of the treatment, with
remote check-ins with their certified therapists. While all clinics have re-opened, they are all currently operating at reduced capacity within provincial guidelines, which limited operations to 50% capacity during the second half of 2020. Some patients have begun to return to these clinics for treatment, but patients have been and may continue to be less willing to return to the clinics due to COVID-19, impacting our commercial activities and our customer engagement efforts. We have expanded our services to include remote training and treatment, but the long-term viability of these remote programs is still being assessed. In addition, the resurgence of COVID-19 cases across Canada in the fourth quarter of 2020 has led to further restrictions on clinic activities.
Additionally, while we do not currently have any clinical trials underway, we are running clinical experience programs in Canada and have experienced delays in the programs as trial participant attendance has generally decreased as a result of the pandemic, and clinics and clinical research sites have experienced delays and difficulties in recruiting and re-hiring clinical site staff, leading to further delays in the development and approval of the Company’s product candidate. As noted above, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our expectation was that we would move forward with the launch of our TBI-002 trial and we had estimated that enrollment would begin in April 2020 with the completion of the trial and submission to the FDA in the second quarter of 2021. However, the launch of the TBI-002 trial has been temporarily suspended and we are evaluating our options for funding and timing to commence the trial or potentially look at other indications.
The COVID-19 pandemic and other outbreaks may cause delays in or the suspension of our business partners manufacturing operations, our research and product development activities, our regulatory workstreams, our research and development activities and other important commercial functions. We are also dependent upon our suppliers for the manufacture of our PoNS device, and in the second quarter of 2020, two of our business partners diverted resources towards other activities related to COVID-19, resulting in delays in the development and manufacturing of our product. Such diversion of suppliers’ resources may occur again in the future, and the pandemic could limit our suppliers’ ability to travel or ship materials or force temporary closure of facilities that we rely upon. Disruptions in business operations or governmental operations due to COVID-19 may delay the timing for the submission and approval of the Company’s marketing applications with regulatory agencies. Further, the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could affect our ability to access the public markets and obtain necessary capital in order to properly capitalize and continue our operations.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. We do not know yet the full extent of the impact of COVID-19 on its business, operations or the global economy as a whole.
Nasdaq Delisting
On March 23, 2020, we received a Notice from the Staff of Nasdaq indicating that, based on the closing bid price of our common stock for the 30 consecutive business days preceding the Notice, we no longer meet the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. The Notice does not result in the immediate delisting of our common stock from Nasdaq. In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we were provided a period of 180 calendar days in which to regain compliance. In order to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement, the closing bid price of our common stock must be at least $1.00 for a minimum of ten consecutive business days.
On April 17, 2020, we received the Second Notice from Staff of Nasdaq stating that the 180-day period to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement has been extended due to the global market impact caused by COVID-19. More specifically, Nasdaq stated that compliance periods were suspended from April 16, 2020 until June 30, 2020. On July 1, 2020, companies received the balance of any pending compliance period to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. As a result of this extension, we were given to until December 3, 2020 to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement.
On December 4, 2020, we received notice from the Staff indicating that we were not eligible for an additional 180 day extension to meet the Minimum Bid Price Rule. As a result, the Staff determined that our securities would be subject to delisting unless we timely requested a hearing before the Panel. We timely submitted a request for a hearing before the Panel, which request stayed any suspension or delisting action by Nasdaq at least until the hearing process concluded and any extension granted by the Panel expired. On January 15, 2021, we received notice from the Staff that our bid price deficiency had been cured, and that we were in compliance with all applicable listing standards, and so the scheduled hearing before the Panel was cancelled.
Reverse Stock Split
At a special meeting of our stockholders on December 28, 2020, our stockholders approved a reverse split of our outstanding common stock at a ratio in the range of 1-for-5 to 1-for-35 to be determined at the discretion of our board of directors, whereby each outstanding 5 to 35 shares would be combined, converted and changed into 1 share of our common stock, to enable us to comply with Nasdaq’s continued listing requirements.
Following such meeting, our board of directors approved a final reverse stock split ratio of 1-for-35, and we filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware a Certificate of Amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation to effect the reverse stock split. The reverse stock split was effective as of 5:00 pm Eastern Time on December 31, 2020, and our common stock began trading on a split-adjusted basis on The Nasdaq Capital Market on January 4, 2021. The reverse stock split did not change the par value of our stock or the authorized number of common or preferred shares. All share and per share amounts for all periods presented in this Annual Report have been retroactively adjusted for the reverse stock split effected on December 31, 2020.
Financings
See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for information regarding our financing activities in 2020 and subsequent to year-end.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have three categories of revenue: Product Sales, net; Fee Revenue and License Revenue. Product Sales, net is derived from the sale of the PoNS device. Prior to October 30, 2019, it also contained certain support services as explained further below. Fee Revenue was derived from franchise fees from new neuroplasticity clinics engaged in providing the PoNS Treatment. This practice ended during the first quarter of 2020. License Revenue is recognized ratably over the ten-year term as the performance obligation is met in connection with the Co-Promotion Agreement as a result of the Heuro acquisition.
Cost of Sales
Cost of product sales includes the cost to manufacture the PoNS device, royalty expense, freight charges, customs duties as well as wages and salaries of employees involved in the management of the supply chain and logistics of fulfilling sales orders. Prior to the completion of the Heuro acquisition on October 30, 2019, it also included certain support services provided by Heuro on our behalf.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consists of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We expense R&D costs as incurred. These expenses include:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
•
outsourced professional scientific development services;
•
employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•
expenses relating to product development and manufacturing of clinical trial devices;
•
expenses relating to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies; and
•
laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities.
R&D activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage registrational clinical trials. We expect our R&D expenses to increase over the next several years as we increase personnel costs, conduct feasibility and pilot studies and registrational clinical trials for additional indications, invest in our product development and manufacturing capabilities and prepare regulatory filings for our product candidate. Our expenditures are subject to certain uncertainties, including those described in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, commercial operations, finance and legal functions, including stock-based compensation, and travel expenses. Other G&A expenses include facility related costs, professional fees for legal, auditing and tax services, consulting, professional services and insurance costs.
We anticipate that our SG&A expenses will increase as a result of increased personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting services related to our commercial operations, legal and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and TSX listing and SEC requirements, accounting and investor relations costs, and director and officer insurance premiums associated with being a public company.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense consists of the periodic amortization of intangible assets, including customer relationships and proprietary software recognized in connection with the acquisition of Heuro on October 30, 2019 and internally developed software. The customer relationships, proprietary software and reacquired rights recognized in connection with the acquisition of Heuro had remaining useful lives at acquisition of 1.25 years, 5 years and 3.87 years, respectively. They are amortized using the straight-line method. The internally developed software has a useful life of 3 years and is amortized using the straight-line method.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This preparation requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. U.S. GAAP provides the framework from which to make these estimates, assumption and disclosures. We choose accounting policies within U.S. GAAP that management believes are appropriate to accurately and fairly report our operating results and financial position in a consistent manner. Management regularly assesses these policies in light of current and forecasted economic conditions. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management. While there are a number of significant accounting policies affecting our financial statements, we believe the critical accounting policies involving the most complex, difficult and subjective estimates and judgments are: revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, derivative financial instruments, accounting for warrants and goodwill and other intangible assets.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with FASB’s ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, (“ASC 606”), we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)
identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We apply the five-step model to contracts when we determine that it is probable we will collect substantially all of the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price, after consideration of variability and constraints, if any, that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Sales, net
During the first half of 2019, product sales were derived from the sale of the PoNS device and certain support services including services from the use of the NeuroCatchTM device, which is owned by HTC and assesses electroencephalogram brain waves related to cognition of patients participating in the PoNS Treatment at neuroplasticity clinics in Canada. We acted in an agency capacity for services performed using the NeuroCatch device and remitted CAD$600 for each patient assessed with the NeuroCatch device. According to the supply agreement with each of these clinics, our performance obligation was met when we delivered the PoNS device to the clinic’s facility and the clinic assumed title of the PoNS device upon acceptance. As such, revenue is recognized at a point in time. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight before control of a product has been transferred to a customer are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of sales. Further, according to our arrangement with HTC and Heuro, we shared 50/50 with Heuro in fees from support services excluding the CAD$600 payment for an assessment using the NeuroCatch device. Subsequent to July 1, 2019, product sales were derived from the sale of the PoNS device alone as the NeuroCatch is sold directly to the neuroplasticity clinics in Canada by HTC. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $1.45 million in product sales net of $11 thousand for HTC’s portion related to assessments using the NeuroCatch device. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $0.63 million in product sales. As of December 31, 2020, the control of 21 of the 55 PoNS devices included as consideration in the Heuro acquisition had been transferred resulting in revenue of $0.1 million being recognized which is included in the aforementioned $0.63 million in product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the remaining 34 devices is recorded as deferred revenue of $0.3 million on the consolidated balance sheet. Revenue will be recognized for these
devices as control is transferred. The only returns during 2020 were the result of warranty returns for defective products. These returns were insignificant during the year and any future replacements are expected to be insignificant.
Fee Revenue
During the first half of 2019, our agreement with HTC and Heuro also entitled us to 50% of the franchise fees collected by Heuro from each franchise agreement Heuro executed with neuroplasticity clinics engaged in providing the PoNS Treatment. There were 3 franchise agreements entered into for the year ended December 31, 2019, all of which occurred in the first half of the year. This arrangement ended upon the acquisition of Heuro in October 2019. During the first half of 2020, we earned fee revenue for engaging new neuroplasticity clinics to provide the PoNS Treatment, before terminating these agreements in the second quarter of 2020.
License Revenue
As described above, we modified our arrangement with HTC on October 30, 2019. License revenue will be recognized ratably over the ten year term as the performance obligation is met in connection with the Co-Promotion Agreement.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based payments and awards under the fair value-based method. We recognize our stock-based compensation expense using the straight-line method.
We account for the granting of stock options to employees and non-employees using the fair value method whereby all awards are measured at fair value on the date of the grant. The fair value of all employee-related stock options is expensed over the requisite service period with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in capital. Upon exercise of stock options, the consideration paid by the option holder, together with the amount previously recognized in additional paid-in capital is recorded as an increase to common stock. Stock options granted to employees are accounted for as liabilities when they contain conditions or other features that are indexed to other than a market, performance or service conditions.
Stock-based payments to non-employees are measured based on the fair value of the equity instrument issued. Compensation expense for non-employee stock awards are recognized over the requisite service period following the measurement of the fair value on the grant date over the vesting period of the award.
We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to calculate the fair value of stock options. The use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected term of the option, risk-free interest rates, the value of the common stock and expected dividend yield of the common stock. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments and other contracts to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market at each balance sheet date and recorded as a liability and the change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Upon conversion or exercise of a derivative financial instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the conversion date and then that fair value is reclassified to equity.
The classification of derivative financial instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as a liability or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative financial instruments that become subject to reclassification are reclassified at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative financial instrument liabilities are classified in the consolidated balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not the right to exercise or settle the derivative financial instrument lies with the holder.
We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value derivative financial instrument liabilities. This model uses Level 3 inputs in the fair value hierarchy established by ASC 820 - Fair Value Measurement.
Accounting for Warrants
We have issued and may continue to issue warrants to purchase shares of common stock through our public and private offerings. We account for such warrants in accordance with ASC 480 Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, which identifies three categories of freestanding financial instruments that are required to be accounted for as a liability. If determined to be classified as a liability, we
will remeasure the fair value of the warrants at each balance sheet date. If determined to be classified as equity, the fair value of the warrants will be measured as of the date of issuance and will not be subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date.
The fair value of the warrants is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, based on the market value of the underlying common stock at the measurement dates, the contractual terms of the warrants, risk-free interest rates and expected volatility of the price of the underlying common stock. There are no expected dividends.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair values underlying net assets acquired in an acquisition. All of our goodwill as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 is the result of the Heuro acquisition. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather will be tested annually for impairment or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We will test goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter of each year using data as of October 1 of that year.
Goodwill is allocated to, and evaluated for impairment at our one identified reporting unit. Goodwill is tested for impairment by either performing a qualitative evaluation or a quantitative test. The qualitative evaluation is an assessment of factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. We may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment for our reporting unit and perform the quantitative impairment test. The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires us to compare the carrying value of the reporting unit’s net assets to the estimated fair value of the reporting unit.
If the estimated fair value exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is required, and no impairment loss is recognized. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds the estimated fair value, the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value is recorded as an impairment loss, the amount of which is not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Our methodology for estimating the fair value of our reporting unit utilizes the income approach. The income approach is based on the Discounted Cash Flow, or DCF, method, which is based on the present value of future cash flows. The principal assumptions utilized in the DCF methodology include long-term growth rates, operating margins, discount rates and future economic and market conditions. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions regarding forecasted cash flow, long-term growth rates and operating margins made for purposes of the annual goodwill impairment test will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. We believe the current assumptions and estimates utilized are both reasonable and appropriate.
Definite-lived intangibles consist principally of acquired customer relationships, reacquired rights and proprietary software as well as internally developed software. All are amortized straight-line over their estimated useful lives.
Going Concern
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have generated over $2.0 million in revenue from the commercial sale of products or services. Because we have generated limited revenues from commercialization, our operations to date have been principally financed through public and private offerings of our common stock and convertible debt and exercises of options and warrants. There are a number of conditions that we must satisfy before we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to fund our operations, including but not limited to the recruitment of patients for treatment in Canada, manufacturing of a commercially viable version of the PoNS device and demonstration of effectiveness sufficient to generate commercial orders by customers for our product. Moreover, because we expect that the revenue opportunity in the United States is significantly greater than in Canada, we believe our ability to generate significant revenue in the future will be dependent upon the receipt of FDA marketing authorization of the PoNS device.
These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report. While we had $3.3 million of cash as of December 31, 2020 and received net proceeds of $10.9 million in the aggregate from the exercise of outstanding warrants and the issuance and sale of common stock and warrants in a public offering subsequent to December 31, 2020, we do not currently have sufficient resources to accomplish all of the above conditions necessary for us to generate sufficient revenues to achieve profitability, and we will require additional financing to fund our operations beyond the beginning of the first quarter of 2022. There is no guarantee that such funding will be available at all or in sufficient amounts to satisfy our required expenditures. In reviewing this filing, you should carefully consider this uncertainty, the risks described in the section entitled “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and other risks described throughout this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized revenue of $0.7 million, of which $0.63 million was generated through product sales of our PoNS device in Canada pursuant to our executed supply agreements with neuroplasticity clinics in Canada, $9 thousand was generated from fee revenue related to engaging new PoNS authorized clinics, and $27 thousand was generated from license fee revenue related to our co-promotion agreement with HTC. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized revenue of $1.5 million, of which $1.45 million was generated through product sales of our PoNS device in Canada pursuant to our executed supply agreements with neuroplasticity clinics in Canada, $37 thousand was generated in fee revenue from franchise agreements Heuro executed with neuroplasticity clinics engaging in providing the PoNS Treatment and $5 thousand was generated from license fee revenue related to or co-promotion agreement with HTC. The decrease year-over-year in revenue generated through product sales of our PoNS device in Canada is primarily due to pent up demand positively impacting our product sales for the first six months of 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacting our product sales beginning in March 2020 and, to a lesser extent, the impact of price changes, focused on reducing the need for clinics and patients to pay large, upfront costs at the start of treatment, that we began implementing in September 2019.
Cost of Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $0.4 million in our costs of sales, compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $0.5 million. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in sales during 2020 compared to 2019, offset partially by an increase in inventory reserve of $0.2 million. Cost of sales included the costs to manufacture the PoNS device, royalty expense, freight charges, customs duties as well as wages and salaries of employees involved in the management of the supply chain and logistics of fulfilling our sales orders. Prior to the completion of the Heuro acquisition on October 30, 2019, it also included certain support services provided by Heuro on our behalf.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses were $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $3.5 million. The decrease was primarily driven by a $1.1 million reduction in product development costs due to the completion of the PoNS device development in 2019 and a $0.6 million reduction in
wages and salaries. Medical affairs expenses also decreased $1.0 million due to the effort in 2019 to create awareness of the PoNS device by delivery of clinical and scientific data to key opinion leaders, professional societies and practitioners which was significantly decreased during 2020. Further, professional services fees decreased by $0.6 million.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses were $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $6.8 million. The decrease was primarily due to lower stock-based compensation expense of $2.2 million, a $2.1 million decrease in wages and salaries due to higher headcount in 2019, a $2.0 million reduction in commercial operations expense due to our investments in marketing and distribution capabilities in 2019 in support of a potential U.S. launch prior to receiving denial for clearance from the FDA and a $0.7 million reduction in legal expenses. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.2 million impairment loss related to intangible assets in 2020 (related to the customer relationships from the Heuro acquisition), all of which was incurred during the first quarter of 2020 and a $0.1 million loss as the result of the disposal of furniture and fixtures and leasehold improvements.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense were $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.3 million. The increase was attributable to the intangibles assets being held and amortized for the full year in 2020 compared to two months in 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Financial Instruments
The change in fair value of derivative financial instruments was a gain of $4 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a gain of $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The change in fair value of derivative financial instruments was primarily attributable a change in our stock price, volatility and the number of derivative financial instruments being measured during the period (see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The change in the fair value of derivative financial instruments is a non-cash item.
Foreign Exchange Gain
Foreign exchange gain was $189 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a gain of $7 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to fluctuations in the foreign exchange rate as it relates to the amount of Canadian dollars held at the end of each reporting period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We currently have limited working capital and liquid assets. The following table summarizes our cash and working capital (which we define as current assets less current liabilities excluding derivative financial instruments) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $10.9 million in the aggregate from the exercise of outstanding warrants and the issuance and sale of common stock and warrants in the Public Offering described below.
From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have generated over $2.0 million in revenue from the commercial sale of products or services. Because we have generated limited revenues from commercialization, our operations to date have been principally financed through public and private offerings of our common stock and convertible debt and exercises of options and warrants. There are a number of conditions that we must satisfy before we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to fund our operations, including but not limited to the recruitment of patients for treatment in Canada, manufacturing of a commercially viable version of the PoNS device and demonstration of effectiveness sufficient to generate commercial orders by customers for our product. Moreover, because we expect that the revenue opportunity in the United States is significantly greater than in Canada, we believe our ability to generate significant revenue in the future will be dependent upon the receipt of FDA marketing authorization of the PoNS device.
To date, our major sources of cash have been proceeds from various public and private offerings of our common stock and exercises of options and warrants. From June 2014 through December 31, 2020, we raised approximately $106.6 million in gross proceeds from various public and private offerings of our securities as well as the exercise of options and warrants, including during 2020, $9.8 million in aggregate net proceeds from our use of our former At-the-Market program, one registered direct offering and one private placement. In 2021 to date, as described below, we received approximately $10.9 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants and the issuance and sale of common stock and warrants in the Public Offering.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, under our former At-the-Market program, we sold and issued 232,526 shares of our common stock with an average price of $21.68 per share. Net proceeds from the At-the-Market program after deducting underwriter’s commissions was $4.8 million.
In March 2020, in a registered direct offering, we issued 178,776 shares of our common stock at a price of $12.25 per share and, in a concurrent private placement, unregistered warrants to purchase up to 178,776 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $16.10 per share. Net proceeds from the offering after deducting underwriter’s discounts and commissions and offering expenses paid by us was $1.9 million.
In October 2020, in a private placement, we issued 187,646 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 93,817 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $18.20 per unit, consisting of one share and one warrant to purchase 0.50 shares of common stock. The warrants have an initial exercise price of $15.82 per share and are exercisable for a period of three years from the date of issuance. We also issued warrants to the placement agent to purchase 961 shares of common stock, with an exercise price of $19.775 per share. One of our officers and affiliates of another one of our officers and directors participated in the private placement on the same terms and conditions as all other purchasers, except they paid $18.354 per unit and their warrants have an exercise price of $16.1664 per share. Net proceeds from the private placement after underwriter’s discounts and commissions and offering expenses paid by us were approximately $3.1 million. Pursuant to the securities purchase agreement for the October 2020 private placement, if we issue any of common stock or common stock equivalents for cash consideration, indebtedness or a combination thereof, with certain exceptions, within twelve months of the closing of the private placement, each purchaser who subscribed for at least $250,000 in the private placement has the right to participate in up to such purchaser’s pro rata portion of 30% of the such subsequent financing on the same terms, conditions and price provided for in the subsequent financing.
In January 2021, 81,633 warrants issued in conjunction with the March 2020 registered direct offering were exercised at an exercise price of $16.10 for proceeds of $1.3 million.
On February 1, 2021, in an underwritten public offering (the “Public Offering”), we issued 744,936 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 372,468 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $14.82 per unit, consisting of one share and a warrant to purchase 0.50 shares of common stock. The warrants have an initial exercise price of $16.302 per share and are exercisable for five years from the date of issuance. We also issued warrants to the underwriter to purchase 25,910 shares of common stock, with an exercise price of $18.525 per share. Net proceeds from the Public Offering after underwriter’s discounts and commissions and offering expenses paid by us were approximately $9.6 million. Affiliates of one of our officers and directors participated in the Public Offering on the same terms and conditions as all other purchasers.
We intend to use our available capital resources primarily to fund manufacturing activities for the PoNS device, activities related to our submissions for marketing authorization of the PoNS device to the FDA and other regulatory authorities, commercial launch preparations, and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
We believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to fund our operations into the first quarter of 2022, but we expect that we will be required to seek additional funding through the sale of equity or debt financing to continue to fund our operations thereafter. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional capital or that such capital, if available, will be on terms that are acceptable to us. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional capital, we may be compelled to reduce the scope of our operations and planned capital expenditure or sell certain assets, including intellectual property, and we may be forced to cease or wind down operations, seek protection under the provisions of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, or liquidate and dissolve our company.
Statements of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.7 million. This was comprised of a net loss of $14.1 million, unrealized foreign exchange gains of $0.2 million, gain on lease modification of $0.1 million, change in the fair value of our derivative liabilities of $4 thousand and $1 million net cash used resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by certain adjustments for non-cash items comprised of stock-based compensation expense of $2.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.5 million, provision for inventory reserve of $0.2 million, impairment loss on intangible assets of $0.2 million (related to the customer relationships from the Heuro acquisition), provision for doubtful accounts of $0.1 million and loss on disposal of office furniture of $0.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $21.0 million. This was comprised of a net loss of $9.8 million, the change in the fair value of our derivative liabilities of $14.1 million and $2.3 million net cash used resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by certain adjustments for non-cash items comprised of stock-based compensation expense of $4.7 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million, provision for doubtful accounts of $0.2 million, provision for inventory reserve of $0.1 million and unrealized foreign exchange loss of $0.1 million.
Net Cash used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9 thousand, which was primarily due to $63 thousand for the purchase of equipment and $7 thousand for internally developed software, offset by $61 thousand in proceeds received from the sale of office furniture.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.8 million, which was primarily comprised of $0.4 million for the acquisition of Heuro, and $0.3 million for property and equipment consisting of $0.1 million for computer equipment, $0.1 million for furniture and fixtures at our headquarters location and $0.1 million for equipment that is used in the commercial production of the PoNS device.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.6 million, which was primarily comprised of $2.2 million in gross proceeds received from the March 2020 registered direct offering, $5.0 million in gross proceeds from the sale of common stock under our former At-the-Market program and $3.4 million in gross proceeds received from the October 2020 private placement. These proceeds were partially offset by $1.0 million in issuance costs primarily related to the aforementioned offerings.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.7 million, which was primarily comprised of $1.7 million in gross proceeds received from the November 2019 public offering from the sale of 137,571 shares of our common stock and $0.2 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants. These proceeds were partially offset by $0.2 million in issuance costs primarily related to our public offering.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held and requires enhanced disclosures regarding significant estimates and judgments used in estimating credit losses. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) and Leases (Topic
842): Effective Dates, which amends the effective date of ASU 2016-13. Public business entities that meeting the definition of an SEC filer, excluding entities eligible to be a Small Reporting Company (“SRC”) as defined by the SEC, are required to adopt the standard for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. All other entities are required to adopt the standard for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We meet the definition of an SRC and therefore the standard will not be effective until the beginning of 2023. We are evaluating the effect that ASU 2016-13 will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which adds disclosure requirements to Topic 820 for the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. This ASU is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019. We adopted this standard as of January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In November 2018, FASB issued ASU 2018-18, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808): Clarifying the Interaction Between Topic 808 and Topic 606, which, among other things, provides guidance on how to assess whether certain collaborative arrangement transactions should be accounted for under Topic 606. The amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this standard on January 1, 2020 and the adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The guidance is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. FASB has specified that an entity should adopt the guidance as of the beginning of its annual fiscal year. The guidance is to be applied using either a full retrospective or modified retrospective method. In applying the full retrospective method, the cumulative effect of the accounting change should be recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the first comparative period presented. In applying the modified retrospective method, the cumulative effect of the accounting change should be recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings at the date of adoption. We early adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 under the modified retrospective approach. We anticipate that the adoption of this guidance will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or JOBS Act, was enacted in the United States. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth public companies. We were an “emerging growth company” until December 31, 2020.