ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Unless otherwise indicated, references to the “Company,” “us” or “we” refer to Hestia Insight Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Special Note Regarding Forward-looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the risk factors and business sections in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Hestia Insight Inc. (“Hestia”, “Hestia Insight”, or the “Company”) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on November 19, 2003 under the name Luxshmi Investments, Inc. (“Luxshmi Investments”) until it changed its name on March 27, 2019. Luxshmi Investments ceased its operations in 2015. On November 9, 2018, the Eighth Judicial District Court of Nevada appointed Custodian Ventures, LLC (“Custodian Ventures”) as custodian for the Company, with proper notice having been given to the officers and directors of the Company, to which there was no opposition. On November 13, 2018, the Company filed a Certificate of Reinstatement with the State of Nevada, and Custodian Ventures appointed David Lazar the Company’s sole officer and director. On December 07, 2018, the Company created 5,000,000 shares of Series B common stock, par value $0.001 per share, out of the Company’s then 200,000,000 authorized shares of common stock, which such Series B Common Stock had the same powers, designation, preferences and relative participating, optional and other special rights, qualifications, limitations and restrictions as the Company’s authorized shares of common stock, except that the holder of each share of Series B Common Stock had the right to forty-one (41) votes for each share of Series B common Stock. On December 12, 2018, the Company issued 5,000,000 shares of Series B common stock (the “Series B Common Stock”) to Custodian Ventures LLC in exchange for the settlement of a portion of related party debt owed to Custodian Ventures. On February 26, 2019, the Company filed a Certificate of Designation with the State of Nevada to create Series A Preferred Stock consisting of 10,000,000 shares (the “Series A Preferred Shares”), which such Series A Preferred Shares were concurrently issued to Custodian Ventures. On March 6, 2019, Custodian Ventures transferred its Series B Common Stock and Series A Preferred Shares to Hestia Investments Inc., a Wyoming corporation (“Hestia Investments”), resulting in a change of control of the Company, concurrently upon which David Lazar resigned as the Company’s sole officer and director and Edward Lee was appointed as the sole officer and director of the Company. On March 12, 2019, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation authorizing 300,000,000 shares of capital stock, comprised of 290,000,000 shares of common stock, par value per share (the “Common Stock”) and 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.00001 per share (the “Preferred Stock”). On March 27, 2019, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation (i) effecting a name change from Luxshmi Investments, Inc. to Hestia Insight Inc., and (ii) effecting a 50-to-1 reverse stock split of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock (the “Reverse Stock Split”). The Reverse Stock Split did not impact the Company’s authorized shares of common stock or preferred stock, or its par value. On May 16, 2019 the Company entered into a Share Exchange Agreement with Hestia Investments to exchange, on a 1-for-1 basis, 27,614,200 shares of the Company’s common stock in exchange for 27,614,200 shares of Hestia Investments which were owned by 100% of the then-shareholders of Hestia Investments. As a result of the Share Exchange Transaction, Hestia Investments became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. On November 21, 2019, Hestia Investments returned to the Company for cancellation 4,500,000 of its 5,000,000 shares of Series B Common Stock and, accordingly, the Company cancelled the 4,500,000 shares of Series B Common Stock. On March 1, 2021, Hestia Investments returned to the Company for cancellation its remaining 500,000 shares of Series B Common Stock and, accordingly, the Company cancelled the remaining outstanding 500,000 shares of Series B Common Stock. As of March 15, 2021: (i) there are no authorized or outstanding shares of Series B common Stock, and (ii) there are 300,000,000 authorized shares of capital stock, comprised of 290,000,000 shares of Common Stock and 10,000,000 shares of Preferred Stock.
The Company currently conducts all of its operations through its two wholly owned operating subsidiaries, Hestia Investments, and HSTA HEALTH INC., a Nevada corporation (“HSTA HEALTH”). Hestia Investments provides strategic consulting, medical supply sales support, management, and capital market advisory services for selective companies in the healthcare and biotech sectors. HSTA HEALTH provides healthcare management and patient services and develops new healthcare technologies and analysis for neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Our Markets and Services
The Company’s wholly owned operating subsidiary, Hestia Investments, provides strategic consulting, medical supply sales support, management, and capital market advisory services for select micro, small and medium sized companies in the healthcare and biotech sectors. The Company’s wholly owned operating subsidiary, HSTA HEALTH, provides healthcare management and patient services and develops new healthcare technologies and analysis for neurological and psychiatric disorders. The Company is positioned to make strategic acquisitions of and enter joint ventures with emerging growth companies with unique sciences and technologies. The Company also provides sales and marketing guidance and services and capital markets advisory services to its clients.
Sales and Marketing
We seek to develop new business through relationships driven by our senior management, which have extensive contacts throughout the healthcare system. Our senior management is seeking opportunities for joint ventures, strategic relationships and acquisitions in the healthcare and biotech sectors.
Business Model
The Company intends to pursue the acquisition and development of healthcare related technologies in the healthcare and biotech sectors through acquisition, licensing or joint ventures. We will also consider a third avenue of investing in certain technologies. The Company entered the healthcare sector to explore emerging healthcare technologies, especially growth companies that own and develop unique sciences and technologies.
Competitive Advantages
The Company focuses on small and micro-cap companies in the healthcare and biotech sectors with limited access to growth capital. We provide specialized consulting services to assist companies with their operations in the public markets. Our management team is experienced in risk management and exit planning. The Company’s competitive advantages include a global business network of healthcare, investment and financial professionals who are integrated into the technology licensing and commercialization departments of universities and institutions. Through our offered services and access to investment, we intend to accelerate the development and commercialization of the healthcare businesses that we engage with.
Strategic Relationships
Noether Sciences and Technologies, Inc. On November 18, 2020, the Company entered into a non-binding Supplemental Agreement of Memorandum of Understanding (the “Noether MOU”) with Noether Science and Technologies, Inc. (“NSAT”) pursuant to which the parties will seek to enter into a definitive agreement to (i) establish an exclusive partnership that will focus on research and treatment of neurological and psychiatric disorders, (ii) commercialize existing NSAT technologies for the healthcare market, (iii) provide the Company with an exclusive license to use and develop the existing and ready to use depression and anxiety therapy protocols in the United States, and (iv) establish a neurotherapy center in the metropolitan New York City area and another 3-4 clinics in other strategic areas yet to be determined.
Immudyne Nutritional. On June 21, 2020, the Company entered into a sales agency agreement with Immudyne Nutritional LLC (“Immudyne”), pursuant to which the Company acts as sales agent for certain of Immudyne’s medical products. Immudyne is located in Jacksonville, Florida.
We are in negotiation in our areas of focus with respect to potential acquisitions and strategic partnerships. There is no guarantee that we will be able to successfully sign a definitive agreement, close or implement such business arrangement.
Going Concern
We have a limited operating history and our continued growth is dependent upon the continuation of providing medical consulting services to our clients, generating revenue, and obtaining additional financing to fund future obligations, and pay liabilities arising from normal business operations. We had an accumulated earnings of $11,224,215 at November 30, 2020. The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on our financial statements for the year ended November 30, 2020 contained an explanatory paragraph regarding our ability to continue as a going concern based upon cash used in operating activities and the current cash balance cannot be projected to cover the operating expenses for the next twelve months from the release date of this report. These factors, among others, raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. There are no assurances we will be successful in our efforts to generate significant revenues or report profitable operations or to continue as a going concern, in which event investors would lose their entire investment in our company. The financial statements contained herein do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to carry out our business plan, achieve profitable operations, obtain additional working capital funds from our significant shareholders, and or through debt and equity financings. However, there can be no assurance that any additional financings will be available to us on satisfactory terms and conditions, if any.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to bad debts, recovery of long-lived assets, income taxes and the valuation of equity transactions.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any future changes to these estimates and assumptions could cause a material change to our reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or products have been sold, the purchase price is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured.
We provide medical related consulting services to our clients. We are paid fees for our services by our clients under written consulting agreements. Each contract calls for a fixed payment in a fixed period of time. We recognize revenue by providing medical related consulting services under written service contracts with our customers. Revenue related to our service offerings is recognized as the services are performed and amounts are earned, using the straight-line method over the term of the related services agreement. Prepayments, if any, received from customers prior to the services being performed are recorded as advance from customers. In these cases, when the services are performed, the amount recorded as advance from customers is recognized as revenue.
Income Taxes
We are governed by the income tax laws of the United States. Income taxes are accounted for pursuant to ASC 740 “Accounting for Income Taxes,” which is an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. The charge for taxes is based on the results for the period as adjusted for items, which are non-assessable or disallowed. It is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method in respect of temporary differences arising from differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax basis used in the computation of assessable tax profit. In principle, deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable temporary differences, and deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent that it is probably that taxable profit will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilized.
Deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realized or the liability is settled. Deferred tax is charged or credited in the income statement, except when it is related to items credited or charged directly to equity, in which case the deferred tax is changed to equity. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when they related to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and we intend to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of the Share-Based Payment topic of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718 which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award. The Accounting Standards Codification also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Pursuant to ASC Topic 505-50, for share-based payments to consultants and other third-parties, compensation expense is determined at the “measurement date.” The expense is recognized over the period of services or the vesting period, whichever is applicable. Until the measurement date is reached, the total amount of compensation expense remains uncertain. We record compensation expense based on the fair value of the award at the reporting date. The awards to consultants and other third-parties are then revalued, or the total compensation is recalculated based on the then current fair value, at each subsequent reporting date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-15, Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230): Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments. This ASU addresses the classification of certain specific cash flow issues including debt prepayment or extinguishment costs, settlement of certain debt instruments, contingent consideration payments made after a business combination, proceeds from the settlement of certain insurance claims and distributions received from equity method investees. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. An entity that elects early adoption must adopt all of the amendments in the same period. We are currently evaluating the impact it may have on our consolidated financial statements.
Other accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by FASB that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements upon adoption. We do not discuss recent pronouncements that are not anticipated to have an impact on or are unrelated to our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Year Ended November 30, 2020 and the Year Ended November 30, 2019
Revenue
During the year ended November 30, 2020, total revenues amounted to $142,850, which consisted of $111,500 consulting revenue and $31,350 origination fees. For the year ended November 30, 2019, revenue was $120,000. The increase of revenue was due to increased origination fee revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes the cost of internal labor and related benefits, travel expenses related to consulting services, subcontractor costs, other related consulting costs, and other overhead costs.
For the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, operating expenses were $149,254 and $285,707, respectively, representing a decrease of $136,453. The decrease of cost of revenue was mainly driven by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Operating Expenses
For the years ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019, operating expenses consisted of the following:
● Our selling expense mainly includes our marketing and sales staff’s salaries and related benefits, and travel and entertainment costs incurred by our sales department. Selling expense totaled $0 for the year ended November 30, 2020, and $0 for the year ended November 30, 2019. Selling expense as a percentage of revenue for the year ended November 30, 2020 was 0%.
● Professional fees primarily consisted of accounting fees, legal service fees, consulting fees, investor relations service charges and other fees incurred for service related to becoming and being a public company. For the years ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019, professional fees amounted to $115,902 and $189,749, respectively, a decrease of $73,847 or 39%. The decrease was mainly attributable to a decrease in professional consulting fees paid to our former CEO, David Lazar of $168,228 combined with an increase in accounting fees of approximately $12,660 incurred for services performed by our financial consultant, an increase in audit fees incurred of approximately $28,000, a decrease in legal services fees of approximately $6,882. We expect professional fees to increase as we incur significant costs associated with our public company reporting requirements, and costs associated with newly applicable corporate governance requirements, including requirements under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and other rules implemented by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
● Other general and administrative expenses mainly consisted of officer compensation, travel and entertainment, office supplies, rent, OTC markets application and listing fees, bank service charges and other miscellaneous items. Other general and administrative expenses totaled $33,352 for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to $95,958 for the period year ended November 30, 2019, a decrease of $62,606 or 65.2%. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in officer compensation of approximately $40,000, a decrease in travel and entertainment of approximately $18,268, an increase in OTC markets application and listing fee of approximately $1,000, a decrease in corporate filing fees of $8,150 and an increase in automobile lease expense of $4,657.
Income (Loss) from Operations
As a result of the foregoing, for the year ended November 30, 2020, loss from operations amounted to $6,404, as compared to loss from operations of $165,707 for the year ended November 30, 2019.
Other Income
Other income includes interest income from bank deposits interest income from loans receivable and dividend income from our investments in equities, all of which amounted to $5,844 and $1,737, for the year ended November 30, 2020 and for the year ended November 30, 2019, respectively.
The Company had realized losses on equity investments of $9,820 for the year ended November 30, 2020 and $1,244 in realized gains for the year ended November 30, 2019.
The Company had unrealized gains on equity investments of $11,538,061 for the year ended November 30, 2020 and $49,561 in unrealized losses for the year ended November 30, 2019.
Other expense
The Company incurred interest expense of $3,219 for the year ended November 30, 2020 and $3,314 for the year ended November 30, 2019.
Income Taxes
We did not have any income taxes expense for the years ended November 30, 2020 and November 30, 2019.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income/(loss) for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019 were $11,524,462 and $215,601, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. At November 30, 2020 and 2019, we had cash balance of approximately $598,765 and $559,929, respectively. These funds are kept in financial institutions located in United States. We had total liabilities of $39,156, for the year ended November 30, 2020, of which $0 is a loan payable to a related party, and $106,411 for the year ended November 30, 2019 of which $103,314 is a loan payable to a related party. The note was due October 31, 2020 and is unsecured and bears a simple interest rate of 3.5% on the unpaid principal balance. As of November 30, 2020, and 2019, the Company had accumulated earnings/(deficit) of $11,224,215 and $(300,247), respectively.
We currently have no agreements and arrangements with any person to obtain funds through bank loans, lines of credit or any other sources. Since the Company has no such arrangements or plans currently in effect, its inability to raise funds for the above purposes will have a severe negative impact on its ability to remain a viable company.
Cash flows from Operating Activities
Operating activities provided $26,264 in cash the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared with using $(22,964) for the year ended November 30, 2019 resulting mainly from a net loss of $(215,601) for the year ended November 30, 2019.
Cash flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended November 30, 2019, the Company’s cash flow in investing activities provided $112,573, and for the year ended November 30, 2019, the Company used $81,222 of cash flow in investing activities.
Cash flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended November 30, 2020, the Company used $100,000 of cash flow in financing activities, and for the year ended November 30, 2019, the Company’s financing activities provided $543,000 in cash flows which are mainly attributable to the issuance of common stock in the amount of $603,000.
Our capital requirements for the next twelve months primarily relate to cash to pay salaries, consulting fees and fees related to third parties’ professional services. All funds received have been expended in the furtherance of growing the business. The following trends are reasonably likely to result in a material decrease in our liquidity over the near to long term:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance our current business;
● Addition of administrative and sales personnel as the business grows; and
● The cost of being a public company.
We will need to raise additional funds, particularly if we are unable to generate positive cash flow as a result of our operations. We estimate that based on current plans and assumptions, that our available cash will be insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements under our present operating expectations. Other than working capital and advance received from related parties and funds received pursuant to securities purchase agreements, we presently have no other significant alternative source of working capital. We have used these funds to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations and grow our company. We will need to raise significant additional capital to fund our operations and to provide working capital for our ongoing operations and obligations. Therefore, our future operation is dependent on our ability to secure additional financing. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. However, the trading price of our common stock and a downturn in the U.S. equity and debt markets could make it more difficult to obtain financing through the issuance of equity or debt securities. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital may restrict our ability to grow and may reduce our ability to continue to conduct business operations. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we will be required to cease our operations. To date, we have not considered this alternative, nor do we view it as a likely occurrence.
Going Concern.
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The Company incurred a net profit of $11,524,462 for the year ended November 30, 2020 and a net loss of $215,601 for the year ended November 30, 2019. The Company had accumulated earnings of $11,224,215 as of November 30, 2020, and an accumulated deficit of $(300,247) as of November 30, 2019. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Since inception, our principal sources of operating funds have been proceeds from equity financing including the sale of our Common Stock to initial investors known to management and principal shareholders of the Company. We do not expect that our current cash on hand will fund our existing operations. We will need to raise additional capital in order execute our business plan and growth goals for at least the next twelve-month period thereafter. If the Company is unable to raise sufficient additional funds, it will have to execute a slower than planned growth path, reduce overhead and scale back its business plan until sufficient additional capital is raised to support further operational expansion and growth. There can be no assurance that such a plan will be successful.