Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2020. As further described in Note 1 - Description of Business and Note 6 - Merger in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, Private Histogen was determined to be the accounting acquirer in the Merger. Accordingly, the pre-Merger historical financial information presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K reflects the standalone consolidated financial statements of Private Histogen and, therefore, period-over-period comparisons may not be meaningful. In addition, references to the Company’s operating results prior to the Merger will refer to the operating results of Private Histogen. Except as otherwise indicated herein or as the context otherwise requires, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “Histogen” “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Histogen Inc., a Delaware corporation, on a post-Merger basis, and the term “Private Histogen” refers to the business of privately-held Histogen Inc. prior to completion of the Merger.
Overview
Histogen is a clinical-stage therapeutics company focused on developing potential first-in-class restorative therapeutics that ignite the body’s natural process to repair and maintain healthy biological function.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenues to date have been generated primarily from the sale of cosmetic ingredient products (“CCM”), license fees, professional services revenue, and a National Science Foundation grant award.
License, Product and Professional Services Revenue
Our license, product and professional services revenue to date has been generated primarily from payments received under the Allergan Agreements.
Grant Revenue
In March 2017, the National Science Foundation (“NSF”), a government agency, awarded us a research and development grant to develop a novel wound dressing for infection control and tissue regeneration.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Cost of product revenue represents direct and indirect costs incurred to bring the product to saleable condition, including write-offs of inventory.
Cost of professional services revenue represents costs for full-time employee equivalents and actual out-of-pocket costs.
In-Process Research and Development
In-process research and development expenses represent costs incurred for acquisitions of technologies for which regulatory approval had not yet been obtained.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, which include:
•
expenses under agreements with third-party contract organizations, investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf, and consultants;
•
costs related to develop and manufacture preclinical study and clinical trial material;
•
salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation;
•
costs incurred and reimbursed under our grant awarded by the U.S. Department of Defense (“DoD”) to partially fund our planned Phase 1/2 clinical trial of HST-003 for regeneration of cartilage in the knee;
•
costs incurred under our collaboration and third-party licensing agreements; and
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical and clinical trials.
We accrue all research and development costs in the period for which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators and third-party service providers. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and then expensed as the related goods are delivered and as services are performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we: (i) invest in additional operational personnel to support our planned product development efforts, and (ii) continue to invest in developing our product candidates as our product candidates advance into later stages of development, and as we begin to conduct larger clinical trials. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked by product candidate and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid under third-party license agreements and to outside consultants, contract research organizations (“CROs”), contract manufacturing organizations and research laboratories in connection with our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. We do not allocate employee costs and costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources primarily to conduct our research as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. These employees work across multiple programs and, therefore, we do not track our costs by product candidate unless such costs are includable as subaward costs. The following table shows our research and development expenses by type of activity (in thousands):
We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, including any potential expanded dosing beyond the original protocols based in part on ongoing clinical success. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing
assessments of each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, insurance costs, facility costs and professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. Personnel-related costs consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially as we: (i) incur additional costs associated with being a public company, including audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs, (ii) hire additional personnel, and (iii) protect our intellectual property.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents, which consist of money market funds. Our interest income has not been significant due to low interest earned on invested balances.
Other Income
Other income consists of proceeds received from the sublease of office space previously occupied by Conatus, both the lease and sublease terminated in September 2020.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our selected statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized license revenues of $0.9 million and $7.5 million, respectively. The $7.5 million recognized in the year ended December 31, 2019 related to an upfront payment received in the same period in connection with the execution of the 2019 Allergan Agreement. We received a $1.0 million upfront payment in connection with an amendment to the 2019 Allergan Agreement executed in the year ended December 31, 2020, of which approximately $28,000 was deferred at December 31, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized product revenues of $0.8 million and $3.4 million, respectively. The decrease of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a decrease of supply orders of CCM to Allergan and one additional customer in 2019 as compared to 2020.
Grant revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0 and $0.2 million, respectively, all of which was related to an NSF research grant awarded to us in 2017 and resulted from the acceptance of milestone reports in 2019.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized professional services revenue of $0.3 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
Total Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized cost of product revenue of $0.7 million and $1.9 million, respectively. The decrease of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was commensurate with the decrease in product sales, coupled with a $0.2 million write-off of inventory.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized costs of professional services of $0.3 million.
In-process Research and Development Expenses
In-process research and development expenses increased $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $7.1 million for in-process research and development acquired in connection with the Merger and in the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $2.3 million for in-process research and development related to the acquisition of HST-003 and HST-004 from PUR.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $6.2 million and $4.1 million, respectively. The increase of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to expanded development costs of our product candidates HST-001 and HST-003.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $6.6 million and $6.2 million, respectively. This increase of $0.4 million was primarily due to increases in insurance and other professional fees in the year ended December 31, 2020, offset by a decrease in success-based fees related to license revenue received in the year ended December 31, 2020 of approximately $0.8 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have accumulated losses of $62.7 million and expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $6.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. In January 2021, we closed a public offering (described below) with gross proceeds from this offering totaling $14.0 million and as of March 8, 2021, we received gross proceeds of $6.8 million from the exercise of outstanding warrants issued in connection with the January 2021 Public Offering.
We have not yet established ongoing sources of revenues sufficient to cover our ongoing operating costs and will need to continue to raise additional capital to support our future operating activities, including progression of our development programs, preparation for commercialization, and other operating costs. Our plans with regard to these matters include entering into a combination of additional debt or equity financing arrangements, government funding, strategic partnerships, collaboration and licensing arrangements, or other similar arrangements. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis or at all.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park
In July 2020, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement (the 2020 Purchase Agreement) with Lincoln Park which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations in the 2020 Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park, is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $10.0 million of shares of our common stock at our request from time to time during a 24 month period that began in July 2020 and at prices based on the market price of our common stock at the time of each sale. Upon execution of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, we sold 328,516 shares of common stock at $3.04399 per share to Lincoln Park for gross proceeds of $1.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the 2020 Purchase Agreement, we sold an additional 300,000 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park for gross proceeds of approximately $0.5 million and as of December 31, 2020, $8.5 million of common stock remained available to be sold, subject to certain limitations on the number of securities the Company may sell under its effective registration statement on Form S-3 within any 12-month period and NASDAQ rules. In consideration for entering into the 2020 Purchase Agreement and concurrently with the execution of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, we issued 66,964 shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park.
November 2020 Registered Direct Offering
In November 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional and accredited investors for the sale by us of 2,522,784 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $1.78375 per share, in a registered direct offering, with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC acting as placement agent. Concurrently with the sale of the shares, we also sold unregistered warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,892,088 shares of common stock. The gross proceeds from this offering were $4.5 million and placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses incurred totaled approximately $0.9 million.
January 2021 Public Offering
In December 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional and accredited investors for the aggregate of 11,600,000 shares of common stock, prefunded warrants to purchase up to 2,400,000 shares of its common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 14,000,000 shares of common stock in a public offering, with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC acting as placement agent. The combined purchase price of one share of common stock and the accompanying warrant was $1.00, and the combined purchase price of one pre-funded warrant and accompanying warrant was $0.9999. Placement agent warrants were issued to purchase up to 700,000 shares of common stock, are immediately exercisable for an exercise price of $1.25, and are exercisable for five years from the date of the Purchase Agreement, On January 5, 2021, the Company completed the January 2021 Public Offering of an aggregate of 11,600,000 shares of common stock, prefunded warrants to purchase up to 2,400,000 shares of its common stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 14,000,000 shares of common stock. The Company received gross proceeds of $14.0 million and incurred placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses of approximately $2.4 million. As of March 8, 2021, a total of 6,676,200 warrants issued in the January 2021 Offering to purchase shares of common stock have been exercised, for which the Company received gross proceeds of $6.8 million.
At Market Issuance Agreement with Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated
Effective July 20, 2020, in connection with the execution of the 2020 Purchase Agreement, we elected to terminate the At Market Issuance Sales Agreement, dated August 2, 2018, between us and Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, which provided for the sale of up to $35.0 million of our common stock, before deducting the placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any from the exercise of the warrants.
Cash Flow Summary for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from our net loss of $18.8 million, which included non-cash charges of $8.1 million primarily related to the acquired in-process research and development in connection with the Merger and stock-based compensation, and a $1.3 million net increase in our net operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting from our net loss of $3.0 million, which included non-cash charges of $2.3 million primarily related to the issuance of shares of our convertible preferred stock for the settlement with PUR and stock-based compensation, and a $0.5 million increase in our net operating assets and liabilities.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of cash of $12.8 million received in connection with the Merger, offset by payments for acquisition related costs and purchases of property and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, all of which was for purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting primarily from sales of our common stock in a registered direct offering and to Lincoln Park under the 2020 Purchase Agreement and the proceeds of the PPP Loan. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting primarily from proceeds received from the sale of shares of our convertible preferred stock.
Funding Requirements
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements into the second quarter of 2022. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could
use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress, potential dose expansions beyond our planned study protocols based in part on our clinical progress, and expenses in these trials is uncertain.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results, costs and timing of, our preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•
the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates, including commercial manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•
our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•
the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our preclinical and clinical activities increase;
•
the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities if any product candidate is approved;
•
our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, adequate coverage and reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•
the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•
the impact of any natural disasters or public health crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•
costs associated with any products or technologies that it may in-license or acquire.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, we expect to finance our losses from operations and capital funding needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding and other sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. To the extent we raise additional capital through the sale of convertible debt or equity securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through debt or equity financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates by ourselves. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any sources of financing on acceptable terms, or at all.
We may be unable to raise additional funds on acceptable terms or at all. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have recently experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. If we are unable to raise additional funds, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
PUR
PUR was formed to develop and market applications along with products in the surgical/orthopedic and device markets. In April 2019, Histogen entered into a Settlement, Release and Termination Agreement with PUR and its members (“PUR Settlement”) which terminated the License, Supply and Operating Agreements between Histogen and PUR, eliminated Histogen’s membership interest in PUR and returned all in-process research and development assets to Histogen (the “Development Assets”). The agreement also provided indemnifications and complete releases by and among the parties. The acquisition of the Development Assets was accounted for as an asset acquisition in accordance with ASC 805-50-50, Acquisition of Assets Rather than a Business.
As consideration for the reacquisition of the Development Assets, Histogen compensated PUR with both equity and cash components, including 1,166,667 shares of Series D convertible preferred stock with a fair value of $1.75 million and a potential cash payout of up to $6.25 million (the “Cap Amount”). Histogen paid PUR $0.5 million in upfront cash, forgave approximately $22,000 of accounts receivable owed by PUR to Histogen, and settled an outstanding payable of PUR of approximately $23,000 owed to a third-party. Histogen is also obligated to make milestone and royalty payments, including (a) $0.4 million upon the unconditional acceptance and approval of a New Drug Application or Pre-Market Approval Application by the US FDA related to the Development Assets, (b) a $0.4 million commercialization milestone upon reaching gross sales (by Histogen or licensee) of the $0.5 million of products incorporating the Development Assets, and (c) a five percent (5%) royalty on net revenues collected by Histogen from commercial sales (by Histogen or licensee) of products incorporating the Development Assets. The aforementioned cash payments, along with any future milestone and royalty payments, are all applied against the Cap Amount. In accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies, amounts for the milestone and royalty payments will be recognized when it is probable that the related contingent liability has been incurred and the amount owed is reasonably estimated. No amounts for the milestone and royalty payments have been recorded through December 31, 2020 under this agreement.
Allergan License and Supply Agreements
In July 2017, Histogen and Allergan entered into a letter agreement to transfer Suneva Medical, Inc.’s Amended and Restated License and Supply Agreements (collectively the “Allergan Agreements”) to Allergan, which grants exclusive rights including the right to sublicense to third parties, to use and commercialize our CCM skin care ingredient in the medical aesthetics market on a worldwide basis, excluding South Korea, China and India, in exchange for royalty payments to us based on Allergan’s sales of product including the licensed ingredient. Through December 31, 2020, we entered into several amendments to the Allergan Agreements to, among other things, expand Allergan’s license rights to certain sales channels where it’s products containing the CCM ingredient can be sold, identify exclusive and non-exclusive fields of use and clarify responsibilities with response to regulatory filings. For these amendments to the License Agreements, Histogen received cash payments of $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2017 and cash payments of $7.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Allergan Agreements also include a potential future milestone payment of $5.5 million if Allergan’s net sales of products containing Histogen’s CCM skin care ingredient exceeds $60 million in any calendar year through December 31, 2027.
From time to time, Histogen may improve its CCM skin care ingredient, and to the extent that these are within the field of use in the Allergan Agreements, Histogen will provide the improvements to Allergan. The remaining performance obligations related to the Allergan Agreements from 2017 were Histogen’s obligations to supply CCM and provide potential future improvements to Allergan, for which $0.2 million of deferred revenue was recorded as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Histogen satisfied its obligation to supply CCM under the 2017 Allergan Agreement during the fourth quarter of 2019.
On January 17, 2020, Histogen and Allergan amended the Allergan Agreements, further clarifying the fields of use, the product definition and rights to certain improvements, as well as Histogen agreeing to supply additional CCM in 2020 and provide further technical assistance to Allergan (the cost of which shall be reimbursed to Histogen), for a one-time payment of $1.0 million to Histogen. As of January 2021, Histogen has satisfied its obligations to supply CCM and provide further technical assistance.
Allergan may terminate the agreement for convenience upon one business days’ notice to Histogen. Under the Amended and Restated License Agreement, Allergan will indemnify Histogen for third party claims arising from Allergan’s breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct, or the exploitation of products by Allergan or its sublicensees. Histogen will indemnify Allergan for third party claims arising from Histogen’s breach of the agreement, negligence or willful misconduct, or the exploitation of products by Histogen prior to the effective date.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Our estimates are based on historical trends and other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We consider our critical accounting policies and estimates to be related to research and development expenses and accruals and revenue recognition. Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.