Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements due to various factors, including those set forth under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report are based on information available to us as of the time we file this Annual Report and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements. In addition, statements that “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based upon information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain.
In November 2020, we completed a reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock pursuant to which every fifteen (15) shares of issued and outstanding common stock were exchanged for one share of common stock. All share and per share amounts within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations has been adjusted to reflect the reverse stock split for all periods and dates presented.
Overview
We are a commercial stage RNA platform-based life sciences company focused on advancing the promise of precision medicine. Our product and service solutions are based on our proprietary next-generation HTG EdgeSeq technology that enables targeted RNA profiling using a small amount of biological sample, in liquid or solid forms. Our menu of HTG EdgeSeq assays is automated on our HTG EdgeSeq platform, which applies genomic sequencing tools that generate gene expression data in a timely manner utilizing a simplified workflow for customers. We seek to leverage key business drivers in molecular profiling for biomarker analysis and diagnostics, including the acceleration of precision medicine, the migration of molecular testing to NGS-based applications, the movement to smaller and less invasive biopsies, the need for greater diagnostic sensitivity, the need to conform to challenging healthcare economics and the need for automation and an easily deployable workflow, including simplified bioinformatics. For example, these capabilities enable customers to extend the use of limited biological samples for retrospective analysis, gaining further understanding of the molecular drivers of disease with the goal of developing biomarker-driven targeted therapies. We also believe our HTG EdgeSeq technology can be used as a platform technology in clinical applications that will simplify, consolidate and reduce the cost of NGS-based diagnostic workflows and in commercialized CDx tests.
Our products include instruments, consumables, including assay kits, and software that, as an integrated platform, automate sample processing and can quickly, robustly and simultaneously profile tens, hundreds or thousands of molecular targets from samples a fraction of the size required by many prevailing technologies. Our objective is to establish our solutions as the standard in molecular profiling, companion diagnostic development and molecular diagnostics, and to make their benefits accessible to all molecular labs from research to the clinic. We believe that our target customers desire high quality molecular profiling information in a multiplexed panel format from increasingly smaller and less invasive samples, with the ability to test and the option to analyze such information locally to minimize turnaround time and cost.
Our HTG EdgeSeq technology, which generates a molecular profiling library for gene expression profiling using NGS. Our HTG EdgeSeq assays are automated on our HTG EdgeSeq platform. Our innovative platform and menu of molecular profiling panels are being utilized in two complementary ways in advancing precision health. Biopharmaceutical companies and other translational research centers utilize our technology to discover and validate biomarkers to develop an understanding of the mechanism of action of disease and to characterize molecular subtypes which can identify patient populations most likely to respond to certain therapies. In addition to purchasing our technology for use in customer facilities, customers can also obtain the advantages of our proprietary technology through our service offerings. Pre-clinical services, including custom assay design and sample processing services provided by our Tucson-based VERI/O laboratory, allow customers the ability to more efficiently identify and validate biomarker signatures across their drug portfolios or patient cohorts. Our ISO 13485- 2016 certified quality system and diagnostic development teams, in partnership with biopharmaceutical company customers, develop, manufacture and support clinical trials with investigation use only assays for potential companion diagnostics. Although our initial focus has been oncology, we have diversified into other disease areas including immune response, transplant and diabetes. Using NGS as our method of detection provides our customers with the benefits of our highly multiplexed and extraction-free chemistry and the sensitivity and dynamic range of the sequencers, providing a powerful value proposition and complete workflow.
We believe RNA-based applications represent a large and growing market with significant, unmet needs where our HTG EdgeSeq platform has allowed us to demonstrate competitive advantages and can enable gene expression profiling growth to accelerate as we make NGS-based gene expression analysis easier and more sample sparing.
Factors Affecting our Performance
We believe that our future results of operations are dependent on several additional factors discussed below. While each of these areas present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must successfully address. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of these risks.
Biopharmaceutical Biomarker and Companion Diagnostic Solutions
Biopharmaceutical companies are continually working to improve the efficacy of their drug development process and the safety and efficacy of their drugs. We believe that our technology can support these initiatives by providing a seamless solution from biomarker discovery to a commercialized companion diagnostic test that can be used to assist clinicians in confidently prescribing these drugs to their patients. Our products and service solutions allow us to partner with our biopharmaceutical company customers to identify molecular biomarkers that can help determine which patients are most likely to benefit from a particular drug, validate these biomarkers in clinical trials and partner to commercialize the validated CDx assay. Customers can access our technology by purchasing our platform and assays for their internal use or by engaging us to perform certain services, including molecular profiling of respective cohorts in our VERI/O laboratory and development of custom RUO panels to support early-stage clinical programs, investigational-use-only assays for clinical trials or companion diagnostic assays for approved drugs. Our product and service solutions have provided us with a number of early-stage biomarker discovery programs and new opportunities to collaborate with biopharmaceutical companies in their drug development programs. Our business model is structured to allow us to capture revenue at each stage of the drug development lifecycle with the highest value in the form of a drug linked companion diagnostic as the ultimate objective.
Customer Adoption of HTG Technology
Today we believe the primary measures of adoption for our technology are the number of total active customers, the number of active programs in our biopharmaceutical company customer pipeline, the number of instruments actively producing revenue in our installed base and revenue growth relating to new and existing customers.
Our ability to increase instrument and consumable revenue depends on several factors, including (i) adoption of our HTG EdgeSeq platform by our expanding customer base, including increasing market share for our proprietary panels for the research market; (ii) the efforts of our sales and marketing teams to demonstrate the utility of our products and technology; (iii) our ability to develop and market novel molecular profiling panels designed to meet customer needs, including unmet medical needs; (iv) our ability to demonstrate the benefits of our products to key opinion leaders so they publish information supporting those benefits; (v) pricing and reimbursement; (vi) our ability to expand the addressable market of our HTG EdgeSeq platform through the development of new applications; (vii) our product capabilities compared with competition; and (viii) successful outcomes to our companion diagnostic collaborations. Given the length of the sales cycle we have experienced historically, we expect fluctuations in our instrument and consumables sales on a period-to-period basis.
In the future, we expect to grow our active installed base and drive larger consumable annuities as we add new proprietary panels to our product menu, add to the utility of existing panels by expanding applications on our HTG EdgeSeq Reveal software and as European customers implement our existing or custom assays for use in clinical diagnostic testing as LDT’s under CLIA regulations. We remain focused on high quality instrument placements and consumable pull through at the primary indicators of future commercial adoption and success in our business.
Timing and effectiveness of research and development expenses
Our spending on collaboration-based research and development may vary substantially from period to period due to the nature and timing of biopharmaceutical company drug development processes and the development effort involved in reaching key milestones under our companion diagnostic development agreements. Costs from our collaborative development services programs, including but not limited to the quantity of HTG EdgeSeq assay kits and instruments, third-party sequencing equipment and third-party or internal labor required to complete development milestones, all of which are expensed to research and development expense in our consolidated statements of operations, can vary significantly from one development stage to the next. Expenses associated with our ongoing proprietary product research and development efforts are carefully managed and are standardized under our stage-gate-based new product development methodology. Program progress and priorities are assessed by time, quality and adherence to budgetary metrics at each phase of the product development.
2020 Highlights and Recent Developments
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, liquidity and future results of operations remains fluid and uncertain as of the date of this report. We have experienced a significant slowing of product and product-related services revenue generation since March 2020 and we believe this period of reduced revenue will continue through at least the first half of 2021 due to continued disruptions to our customers’ businesses from the pandemic and, in many instances, their prioritization of projects in areas focus related to COVID-19. We have also experienced limited delays in our development efforts as a result of stay-at-home orders and our efforts to prioritize the safety of our employees during this pandemic. However, all 2020 key development milestones were met and high priority development efforts continued, including extensive experiment study planning and analysis, despite the numerous operational challenges we have faced. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our productivity, supply chains, distribution networks and other areas of our operation as the pandemic continues to disrupt our business and the businesses of our vendors, partners and customers.
Our 2020 development efforts were aimed at expansion of our capabilities in translational medicine with our RUO molecular profiling products, including adding to the utility of our targeted oncology, immuno-oncology, autoimmune and microRNA panels with the addition of new applications and analytical capabilities released in our HTG EdgeSeq Reveal software. This web-based biostatistical analysis software is designed to accelerate customer research by streamlining their statistical analysis of samples processed with our HTG EdgeSeq RUO profiling assays. In addition, we continued to reach key milestones in the development of our transcriptome product toward a planned initial RUO launch in the third quarter of 2021. This panel is expected to measure approximately 20,000 biomarkers and we believe that it will be a foundational product not only for RUO profiling, but also for potential companion diagnostic and proprietary diagnostic products. We also expect this product to expedite the expansion of our product offerings outside of oncology and autoimmune and into additional markets such as organ transplant and diabetes.
We announced an Early Adopter Program for our planned transcriptome product in December 2020 and expect to expand this program as we near the initial product launch. An initial white paper demonstrating technical feasibility for the product was produced in October 2020 and a second white paper demonstrating concordance to RNASeq and outlining the key elements of the product’s expected value proposition was produced in February 2021.
Financial Operations Overview and Consolidated Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total Revenue
We have two primary sources of revenue: product and product-related services revenue from the sale of RUO and CE/IVD marked profiling products, sample processing services and custom assay design services to biopharmaceutical companies, academic research centers and molecular testing laboratories; and revenue from collaborative development services for companion diagnostic development programs for biopharmaceutical companies.
Profiling product and product-related services revenue includes customer purchases of our HTG EdgeSeq instrument and related assay kits, design of custom RUO assay kits for customers and the use of our HTG EdgeSeq instrument to process samples on the customer’s behalf in our VERI/O laboratory. Customers can purchase our HTG EdgeSeq instrument and associated RUO and C/IVD
marked assays from a diverse portfolio of targeted RNA gene expression profiling panels based on our proprietary chemistry. This category of customer revenue includes sample processing services performed for additional customers by one of our certified service providers or Preferred Academic Centers of Excellence partners. Customers can also access our technology through contracted sample processing services performed by our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and RUO consumables to process samples in our VERI/O laboratory. Our proprietary technology is also used to develop custom RUO panels which are expected to generate future sample processing or RUO consumable product revenue.
Collaborative development revenue relates to services performed using our HTG EdgeSeq proprietary technology to develop, seek regulatory approval for and commercialize companion diagnostic assays for biopharmaceutical drug candidates and corresponding therapeutics. Collaborative development services revenue recognized to date has been generated primarily pursuant to the Master Assay Development, Commercialization and Manufacturing Agreement between us and QIAGEN Manchester Limited (“QML”) dated November 2016 (the “Governing Agreement”). In November 2019, we terminated the Governing Agreement. Our termination of the Governing Agreement did not terminate active statements of work under the Governing Agreement. On a going-forward basis, we expect to enter into additional collaborative development services arrangements directly with biopharmaceutical company customers, which we believe will result in improved economics from these arrangements and not limit the sequencing platform that must be used for development. In August 2020, we entered into a Commercialization and Distribution Agreement with QML that we believe will provide our customers distribution and commercialization options with QML in the event that a companion diagnostic assay is developed under one of these development services arrangements in the future.
Collaborative development services and product-related services revenue are generated through a service-oriented model. However, we anticipate that these services will be a catalyst toward a product-based strategy as an increase in our menu of proprietary panels is expected to continue to result in increased demand for our instrument and consumables products in individual laboratories and customer locations.
Total revenue decreased by 55% to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with total revenue of $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our ability to generate direct and collaborative development services revenue since March 2020 as numerous academic and biopharmaceutical company customers’ facilities have been closed or partially closed due to the pandemic. These closures have limited our ability to ship instruments and consumables to customer facilities and have limited their ability to prepare and ship samples to our VERI/O laboratory. In addition, our customers have experienced significant delays in ongoing and planned clinical trials due to the demands the pandemic has placed on hospitals and clinicians.
In some geographies, especially at our global academic medical center customers’ sites, we saw a growing number of these operations returning to work, at least on a limited capacity, in the second half of 2020. In other areas, such as our large biopharmaceutical customers, the reopening process was slower, especially on the east and west coasts of the United States where the rates of COVID-19 infection were highest and where closures for additional waves of infection continued throughout the year. In addition, many of these customers have continued operating with limited resources and have prioritized COVID-related programs, impacting our ability to resume non-COVID-related studies planned with these customers prior to the pandemic.
While we cannot be certain of the ultimate impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business and that of our customers, we anticipate the generation of our product and product-related services revenue will resume in future periods as our and our customers’ operations are able to return to pre-COVID-19 levels. Though we continue to seek potential, new customer collaborations, in which we would contract directly with customers, we do not anticipate additional revenue from our existing collaborative development services programs at this time and did not enter into any new collaborative development services agreements in 2020.
Product and product-related services revenue
Product and product-related services revenue, which includes revenue generated through the sale of our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and consumables and from services performed for customers using our proprietary RUO technology, decreased $6.7 million to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and was comprised of the following:
Product revenue generated from the sale of our HTG EdgeSeq instruments and RUO and CE/IVD marked assay kits decreased 12% to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in product revenue in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily reflects the impact of COVID-19 on our business and on our customers’ businesses. Since March 2020, we experienced a limited ability to ship instruments and consumables to customers’ facilities due to COVID-19-related shutdowns, and a slower than anticipated return to pre-COVID purchasing patterns in the later part of the year. Product revenue represented 46% and 23% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in product revenue as a percentage of total revenue reflects a growing European customer base, which has historically accessed our technology through instrument and consumables purchases rather than through our service business. European customers generally began their return to work in the second and third quarters of 2020 to a greater extent than our domestic customer base. We continue to discuss opportunities for future studies with both new and existing customers and expect demand for our products to continue to increase as our customers are able to return to pre-COVID operating levels.
Product-related services revenue, consisting of sample processing using HTG EdgeSeq instruments and consumables in our VERI/O laboratory and custom RUO assay development services, decreased $6.2 million to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019 primarily reflects a reduction in RUO sample processing services revenue due to COVID-19-related cancellations or delays in sample receipt for anticipated customer programs and planned customer study reprioritization. This decrease also reflects high levels of subcontracted laboratory services in 2019 which did not recur in 2020. Product-related services revenue represented 47% and 53% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Although a number of our customers began to return to pre-COVID-19 operating levels during the second half of 2020, our larger biopharmaceutical company customers, who have historically represented the largest portion of our services business, have generally been slower to resume onsite operations or reprioritized current year projects due to COVID-19 impacts on their overall operations. It remains uncertain if our larger biopharmaceutical customers will resume previously planned studies in the future as their activities return to pre-COVID levels.
Collaborative development services revenue
Collaborative development services revenue includes services performed on biopharmaceutical company companion diagnostic development programs using our HTG EdgeSeq proprietary technology to develop, validate in clinical trials, seek regulatory approvals for and commercialize CDx assays for biopharmaceutical company therapeutics. To date, collaborative development services revenue has reflected revenue generated from precision diagnostic program services performed for biopharmaceutical companies pursuant to our Governing Agreement with QML. Collaborative development services revenue decreased $3.9 million to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and represented 8% and 24% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Collaborative development services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $0.5 million of monthly development fees and $0.2 million of profit-sharing payments. Collaborative development services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $3.2 million of monthly development fees and $1.4 million of profit-sharing payments. These decreases reflect the completion of remaining contracted development tasks on our existing programs. No additional collaborative development services programs were entered into during 2020. Though we continue to seek potential, new customer collaborations, we do not anticipate additional revenue from our existing collaborative development services programs at this time.
Cost of product and product-related services revenue
Cost of product and product-related services revenue includes product-related and services-related costs. Product-related costs include the aggregate costs incurred in manufacturing, delivering, installing and servicing instruments and consumables. The components of our product-related costs of revenue include consumables and lab supplies, subcomponent and servicing costs, manufacturing costs incurred internally (which include direct labor costs), and equipment and infrastructure expenses associated with the manufacturing and distribution of our products. Due to the fixed nature of certain of these expenses, such as overhead, equipment and infrastructure, associated with our regulated industry and our expectations for further growth in customer demand, we expect our cost of product and product-related services revenue as a percentage to decrease over time as our product and product-related services revenue increases, further absorbing these fixed costs.
Cost of product and product-related services revenue decreased by 55% to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This overall decrease reflects the decrease in product and product-related services revenue in 2020 compared with 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our sales and marketing, regulatory, legal, executive management, finance and accounting functions. The expenses also include third-party professional and consulting fees incurred by these functions, promotional expenses and facility and overhead costs for our administrative offices. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by 3% to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease primarily reflects a decrease in tradeshow attendance and travel expenses, due to travel restrictions and curtailment of in-person tradeshow activities in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, costs incurred to conduct a strategic market study did not recur in 2020.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses represent amounts incurred to perform collaborative development services, costs to develop new proprietary panels and costs to continue to develop and improve upon our HTG EdgeSeq technology. These expenses include payroll and related expenses, consulting fees, laboratory supplies, facilities and equipment. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses decreased by 42% to $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is related to a reduction in collaborative development services costs, which are included in research and development expense in our consolidated statements of operations, and a related decrease in research and development headcount from 2019 to 2020 in response to this reduced collaborative development services demand. Research and development costs relating to our collaborative development services revenue were $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest income (expense)
As of December 31, 2020, we had an obligation due to NuvoGen in the amount of $5.0 million under an asset purchase agreement and a SVB Term Loan obligation of $9.7 million, net of discount and deferred financing costs. As of December 31, 2019, in addition to our obligation to NuvoGen, we had an obligation of $6.9 million under the MidCap Credit Facility and $3.0 million under the QNAH Convertible Note. Interest expense and non-cash interest expense recognized for discount, deferred financing fee amortization and final fee premium amounts relating to these obligations was $1.0 million for both the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. Interest income related to our available-for-sale debt securities investments included in interest income (expense) decreased by 59% to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the market impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 2% to $16.3 million compared with $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected (i) the net loss of $20.9 million and (ii) net non-cash items of $4.7 million, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation of $1.6 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.3 million, non-cash operating lease expense of $0.6 million and loss on extinguishment of the Midcap Credit Facility and QNAH Convertible Note of $0.5 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $16.7 million and reflected (i) the net loss of $19.3 million and (ii) net non-cash items of $3.1 million, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation of $1.2 million and depreciation and amortization of $1.3 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 635% to $18.7 million compared with net cash used in investing activities of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of purchases of available-for-sale securities of $12.5 million, partially offset by the maturity of $31.7 million of the available-for-sale securities and the purchase of $0.5 million of laboratory equipment and other fixed assets during the year.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $3.5 million and consisted primarily of purchases of available-for-sale securities of $34.6 million, partially offset by the maturity of $32.2 million of the available-for-sale securities and the purchase of $1.1 million of laboratory equipment for our California-based technology center and other fixed assets during the year.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 53% to $9.0 million compared with $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $7.5 million in net proceeds from our underwritten public and private offerings, $1.7 million in proceeds from our PPP Loan and $0.6 million in payments on our NuvoGen obligation.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $19.4 million. This activity for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of $20.8 million in net proceeds from our 2019 underwritten public and private offerings and $1.3 million in payments on our NuvoGen obligation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have primarily been financed through the issuance of our common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock, the incurrence of debt and cash received from product sales, services revenue and other income. As of December 31, 2020, we had $28.7 million in cash, cash equivalents and investments in short-term available-for-sale securities, and $20.7 million of liabilities outstanding primarily relating to our SVB Term Loan, NuvoGen and PPP Loan obligations and our financing and operating leases.
In September 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 1,953,235 shares of our common stock at a price of $9.75 per share, including 254,769 shares sold pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares. The shares of common stock described above were offered pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-229045) previously filed with the SEC and declared effective by the SEC on February 11, 2019, and a prospectus supplement thereafter. In addition, we concurrently entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional accredited investors for the sale of pre-funded warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 360,779 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price of $9.60 per pre-funded warrant. The aggregate net proceeds from these offerings for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $20.8 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Additional proceeds of $31,768 were received in the first quarter of 2020 as a result of the exercise of a portion of the pre-funded warrants for 211,784 shares of our common stock.
In November 2019, we entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement (the “Cantor Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald and Co. (“Cantor”) as sales agent, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Cantor, shares of our common stock by any method deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined by rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act (the “ATM Offering”). The shares will be offered and sold pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-229045). We have offered and sold 955,240 shares of our common stock under the ATM Offering through December 31, 2020 for net proceeds of $7.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, we were permitted to sell up to $7.4 million worth of additional shares of our common stock under the current prospectus supplement for the ATM Offering of which we have sold $6.9 million from January 1 through March 15, 2021 for net proceeds of approximately $6.7 million after sales commissions.
In February 2020, we issued 41,100 shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock (“Series A Preferred”) to accredited investors, in exchange for the investors surrendering to us for cancellation an aggregate of 274,000 shares of our common stock. In addition, we sold an aggregate of 10,170 additional shares of our Series A Preferred to the accredited investors for aggregate gross proceeds of $0.6 million, and transaction costs of approximately $37,000. Each share of Series A Preferred is convertible into 6.67 shares of our common stock, subject to proportional adjustment and beneficial ownership limitations. In June 2020, the investors elected to convert 27,500 shares of Series A Preferred to common stock, resulting in the issuance of 183,333 shares of the Company’s common stock. The remaining 23,770 shares of Series A Preferred remain outstanding as of December 31, 2020. In the event of our liquidation, dissolution or winding up, holders of Series A Preferred will participate pari passu with any distribution of proceeds to holders of our common stock. Holders of Series A Preferred are entitled to receive dividends on shares of Series A Preferred equal (on an as converted to common stock basis) to and in the same form as dividends actually paid on our common stock. Shares of Series A Preferred generally have no voting rights, except as required by law.
In March 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (“LP Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) pursuant to which, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to $20.0 million of shares of our common stock (“Purchase Shares”) from time to time over the 36-month term of the LP Purchase Agreement. The purchase price of the Purchase Shares will be based on recent closing prices of our common stock at the time of sale. We issued Lincoln Park an aggregate of 41,026 shares of our common stock as consideration for their purchase commitment pursuant to the LP Purchase Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, 197,632 shares of our common stock have been sold to Lincoln Park under the LP Purchase Agreement.
In April 2020, we received the proceeds from the PPP Loan in the amount of $1,717,000 from SVB, as lender, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act. The PPP Loan matures on April 21, 2022 and bears interest at an annual rate of 1%. We applied for full PPP Loan forgiveness in October 2020. However, there can be no assurance given that we will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part. Beginning in September 2021, we are required to make 8 equal monthly payments of principal and interest for all amounts that are not forgiven through the SBA’s application and documentation process. We may prepay the PPP Loan at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties.
On June 24, 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement in the principal amount of $10.0 million with SVB. The proceeds from the SVB Term Loan were fully funded on the June 25, 2020. The proceeds from the SVB Term Loan, together with cash on hand, were used to repay in full all outstanding amounts and fees due under the MidCap Credit Facility and the QNAH Convertible Note. Our SVB Term Loan bears interest at a floating rate equal to the greater of 2.50% above the Prime Rate (as defined in the Loan Agreement) and 5.75% and requires interest-only payments payable monthly in arrears through June 30, 2021. This interest-only period may be extended for an additional six months upon achievement of an equity milestone defined in the Loan Agreement. The ultimate interest-only period will be followed by equal monthly payments of principal and interest through the maturity date of December 1, 2023. In addition, we must comply with a financial covenant requiring that we maintain a certain amount of unrestricted cash under the Loan Agreement (see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report). If sufficient additional capital is not available as and when needed, we may have to delay, scale back or discontinue one or more product development programs, curtail our commercialization activities, significantly reduce expenses, sell assets (potentially at a discount to their fair value or carrying value), enter into relationships with third parties to develop or commercialize products or technologies that we otherwise would have sought to develop or commercialize independently, cease operations altogether, pursue a sale of the Company at a price that may result in a significant loss on investment for our stockholders, file for bankruptcy or seek other protection
from creditors, or liquidate all assets. In addition, if we default under the Loan Agreement, SVB could accelerate the payment of the SVB Term Loan and ultimately foreclose on our assets.
Funding Requirements
We have had recurring operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and have an accumulated deficit of $191.2 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments in short-term available-for-sale securities of $28.7 million and had current liabilities of $7.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, we also had $13.5 million in long-term liabilities primarily attributable to our SVB Term Loan, PPP Loan, and NuvoGen obligations. While we believe that our existing resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations and expenditures for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements, potential changing circumstances, especially those related to the COVID-19 pandemic, may result in the depletion of our capital resources more rapidly than we currently anticipate, resulting in our inability to fund our planned operations and expenditures for at least the next 12 months. These circumstances raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Until our revenue reaches a level sufficient to support self-sustaining cash flows, if ever, we will need to raise additional capital to fund our continued operations, including our product development and commercialization activities related to our current and future products. Future funding requirements will depend on a number of factors, including our ability to generate significant revenue, our ability to repay our debt obligations as they become due, the cost and timing of establishing additional sales, marketing and distribution capabilities, the ongoing cost of research and development activities, the cost and timing of regulatory clearances and approvals, the effect of competing technology and market developments, the nature and timing of companion diagnostic development collaborations we may establish and the successful commercialization of clinical diagnostic products developed and approved as a result of such collaborations and the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies.
Additional capital may not be available at such times or in amounts needed by us. Even if sufficient capital is available to us, it might be available only on unfavorable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital in the future when required or are only able to raise insufficient amounts or funds on terms acceptable to us, we may have to delay, scale back or discontinue one or more product development programs, curtail our commercialization activities, significantly reduce expenses, sell assets (potentially at a discount to their fair value or carrying value), enter into relationships with third parties to develop or commercialize products or technologies that we otherwise would have sought to develop or commercialize independently, cease operations altogether, pursue an acquisition of our company at a price that may result in a significant loss on investment to our stockholders, file for bankruptcy, seek other protection from creditors, or liquidate all of our assets. In addition, if we default under the Loan Agreement, SVB could accelerate the payment of the SVB Term Loan and ultimately foreclose on our assets.
Contractual Obligations
We are a “smaller reporting company” as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information otherwise required under this item.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements, see “Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Items subject to estimates based on judgments include, but are not limited to: revenue recognition, stock-based compensation expense, the resolution of uncertain tax positions, income tax valuation allowances, recovery of long-lived assets, inventory obsolescence and valuation of inventory, accounts receivable and available-for-sale securities. Actual results could materially differ from these estimates and such differences could affect the results of operations in future periods.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized when, or as, we satisfy our performance obligations by delivering the promised goods or service deliverables to our customers. A good or service deliverable is transferred to a customer when, or as, the customer obtains control of that good or service deliverable. A performance obligation may be satisfied over time or at a point in time. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied over time is recognized by measuring our progress in satisfying the performance obligation in a manner that depicts the transfer of the goods or services to the customer. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time is recognized at the point in time that we determine the customer obtains control over the promised good or service deliverable. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those promised goods or services (i.e., the “transaction price”). In determining the transaction price, we consider multiple factors, including the effects of variable consideration. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainties with respect to the amount are resolved. In determining when to include variable consideration in the transaction price, we consider the range of possible outcomes, the predictive value of our past experiences, the time period of when uncertainties expect to be resolved and the amount of consideration that is susceptible to factors outside of our influence, such as the judgment and actions of third parties.
For contracts where the period between when we transfer a promised good or service to the customer and when the customer pays is one year or less, we have elected the practical expedient to not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component.
We have made a policy election to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes assessed by a government authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue producing transaction and collected from a customer. Such taxes may include but are not limited to sales, use, value added and certain excise taxes.
Product and Product-related Services Revenue
Sale of instruments and consumables
The delivery of each instrument and related installation and calibration are considered to be a single performance obligation, as the HTG EdgeSeq instrument must be professionally installed and calibrated prior to use. Instrument product revenue is generally recognized upon installation and calibration of the instrument by field service engineers, which represents the point at which the customer has the ability to use the instrument and has accepted the asset. Installation generally occurs within one month of instrument shipment.
The delivery of each consumable is a separate performance obligation. Consumables revenue is recognized upon transfer of control, which represents the point when the customer has legal title and the significant risks of ownership of the asset. Our standard terms and conditions provide that no right of return exists for instruments and consumables, unless replacement is necessary due to delivery of defective or damaged product. Customer payment terms vary but are typically between 30 and 90 days of revenue being earned from shipment or delivery, as applicable.
Shipping and handling fees charged to customers for instruments shipped are included in the consolidated statements of operations as part of product and product-related services revenue. Shipping and handling costs for products shipped to customers are included in the consolidated statements of operations as part of cost of product and product-related services revenue.
For sales of consumables in the United States, standard delivery terms are FOB shipping point, unless otherwise specified in the customer contract, reflecting transfer of control to the customer upon shipment. Standard delivery terms for sales to customers outside of the United States are FOB delivery point, unless otherwise specified in the customer contract. We have elected the practical expedient to account for shipping and handling as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the consumables.
We provide instruments to certain customers under reagent rental agreements. Under these agreements, an instrument is installed in the customer’s facility without a fee and the customer agrees to purchase consumable products at a stated price over the term of the agreement; in some instances, the agreements do not contain a minimum purchase requirement. Terms range from several months to multiple years and may automatically renew in several month or multiple year increments unless either party notifies the other in advance that the agreement will not renew. We measure progress toward complete satisfaction of this performance obligation to provide the instrument and deliver the consumables using an output method based on the number of consumables delivered in relation to the total consumables to be provided under the reagent rental agreement. This is considered to be representative of the delivery of outputs under the arrangement and the best measure of progress because the customer benefits from the instrument only in conjunction with the consumables. We expect to recover the cost of the instrument under the agreement through the fees charged for consumables, to the extent sold, over the term of the agreement.
In reagent rental agreements, we retain title to the instrument and title is transferred to the customer at no additional charge at the conclusion of the initial arrangement. The cost of the instrument is amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the arrangement, unless there is no minimum consumable product purchase, in which case the instrument would be expensed as cost of product and product-related services revenue upon installation. Cost to maintain the instrument while we hold title is charged to selling, general and administrative expense as incurred.
Service revenue
Sample Processing Services
We also provide sample preparation and processing services and molecular profiling of retrospective cohorts for our customers through our VERI/O laboratory, whereby the customer provides samples to be processed using HTG EdgeSeq technology specified in the order. Customers are charged a per sample fee for sample processing services which is recognized as revenue upon delivery of a data file to the customer showing the results of testing and completing delivery of the agreed upon service. This is when the customer can use and benefit from the results of testing and we have the present right to payment.
Custom RUO Assay Development
We enter into custom RUO assay design agreements that may generate up-front fees and subsequent payments that might be earned upon completion of design process phases. Progress is measured toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation to perform custom RUO assay design using an output method based on the costs incurred to date compared with total expected costs, as this is representative of the delivery of outputs under the arrangements and the best measure of progress. However, because in most instances the assay development fees are contingent upon completion of each phase of the design project and the decision of the customer to proceed to the next phase, the amount to be included in the transaction price and recognized as revenue is limited to that which the customer is contractually obligated to pay upon completion of that phase, which is when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Changes in estimates of total expected costs are accounted for prospectively as a change in estimate. From period to period, custom RUO assay design service revenue can fluctuate substantially based on the completion of design-related phases.
Collaborative Development Services
We follow ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements to determine the appropriate recognition of revenue under our collaborative research, development and commercialization agreements. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, collaborative development services revenue was generated from our Governing Agreement with QML. We have determined that the statements of work signed under the Governing Agreement are collaborative arrangements and that QML meets the definition of a customer under ASC 606. Additionally, each SOW is a separate contract with a single performance obligation to provide development services. Under each SOW, QML pays a monthly fee for development work performed by us and our subcontractors. The monthly fee is based on the employee and materials costs incurred during the month, which is subject to significant variability from period to period and unknown until the costs are incurred. Therefore, the monthly fee, which is based on use of hours and costs as a measure of progress, is included in the transaction price and recognized as revenue over time when the costs are incurred and the monthly fee is billed to QML. As we have the right to consideration from the customer in an amount that corresponds directly to the value to the customer of our performance completed to date, we recognize revenue in the amount to which we have the right to invoice. It is at this time that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. We also share any net profits resulting from performance of the development work with QML as determined pursuant to the Governing Agreement. Such profit-sharing payment(s) is deemed to be variable consideration using the expected value method and is included in the transaction price upon completion of the respective SOW deliverables, acceptance of corresponding deliverables, and the mutual agreement by both parties on the calculation of net profit, which is when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
Because each SOW has an expected duration of one year or less, we have elected the practical expedient in ASC 606-10-50-14(a) to not disclose information about its remaining performance obligations for each SOW.
Fair Value Measurements
We establish the fair value of all of our financial assets and liabilities, which are recognized and disclosed at fair value in the consolidated financial statements, using the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a financial liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. A fair value hierarchy is used to measure fair value. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
Level 2 - Pricing inputs are based on quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets.
Level 3 - Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable and include situations where there is little, if any, market activity for the investment.
Our portfolio of securities comprises U.S. Treasuries and high credit quality corporate debt securities classified as available-for-sale securities.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory consists of raw materials and finished goods which are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. We reserve or write down inventory for estimated obsolescence, inventory in excess of reasonably expected near term sales or unmarketable inventory, in an amount equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value, based upon assumption about future demand and market conditions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional inventory adjustments may be required. Inventory impairment charges establish a new cost basis for inventory and charges are not reversed subsequently to income, even if circumstances later suggest that increased carrying amounts are recoverable.
Leases
We account for our leases under ASC 842, Leases (“ASC 842”). Under this guidance, arrangements meeting the definition of a lease are classified as operating or financing leases and are recorded on the consolidated balance sheets as both a right-of-use asset and lease liability, calculated by discounting fixed lease payments over the lease term at the rate implicit in the lease or our incremental borrowing rate. Lease liabilities are increased by interest and reduced by payments each period, and the right-of-use asset is amortized over the lease term. For operating leases, interest on the lease liability and the amortization of the right-of-use asset result in straight-line rent expense over the lease term. For financing leases, interest on the lease liability and the amortization of the right-of-use asset results in front-loaded expense over the lease term. Variable lease expenses are recorded to rent expense as incurred.
In calculating the right-of-use asset and lease liability, we have elected to combine lease and non-lease components for all classes of assets currently under lease, including facilities and computer equipment. We have also excluded short-term leases having initial terms of 12 months or less from the new guidance as an accounting policy election and recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term for these leases.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based payments to employees, including grants under our equity incentive plans of stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock purchase rights granted under our ESPP, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. The fair value of RSUs is based on the quoted market price of our common stock on the date of grant. We do not estimate the number of awards expected to be forfeited but instead we account for them as they occur. The fair value of ESPP rights and stock options granted pursuant to our equity incentive plans is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by the fair value of our common stock and several assumptions, including volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. Generally, these assumptions are based on historical information and judgment is required to determine if historical trends may be indicators of future outcomes. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties. Changes to the assumptions that we have used in the Black-Sholes option pricing model could significantly impact the compensation expense that has been recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different.