Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition and is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto commencing on page. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our results and the timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Unless the context otherwise indicates, all references in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, to the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our” or “ours” or similar words are to Hilltop Holdings Inc. and its direct and indirect wholly owned subsidiaries, references to “Hilltop” refer solely to Hilltop Holdings Inc., references to “PCC” refer to PlainsCapital Corporation (a wholly owned subsidiary of Hilltop), references to “Securities Holdings” refer to Hilltop Securities Holdings LLC (a wholly owned subsidiary of Hilltop), references to “Hilltop Securities” refer to Hilltop Securities Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Securities Holdings), references to “Momentum Independent Network” refer to Momentum Independent Network Inc., formerly Hilltop Securities Independent Network Inc. (a wholly owned subsidiary of Securities Holdings), Hilltop Securities and Momentum Independent Network are collectively referred to as the “Hilltop Broker-Dealers,” references to the “Bank” refer to PlainsCapital Bank (a wholly owned subsidiary of PCC), references to “FNB” refer to First National Bank, references to “SWS” refer to the former SWS Group, Inc., references to “PrimeLending” refer to PrimeLending, a PlainsCapital Company (a wholly owned subsidiary of the Bank) and its subsidiaries as a whole, references to “NLC” refer to National Lloyds Corporation (formerly a wholly owned subsidiary of Hilltop) and its wholly owned subsidiaries.
OVERVIEW
We are a financial holding company registered under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956. Our primary line of business is to provide business and consumer banking services from offices located throughout Texas through the Bank. We also provide an array of financial products and services through our broker-dealer and mortgage origination segments. The following includes additional details regarding the financial products and services provided by each of our primary business units.
PCC. PCC is a financial holding company that provides, through its subsidiaries, traditional banking and wealth, investment and treasury management services primarily in Texas and residential mortgage loans throughout the United States.
Securities Holdings. Securities Holdings is a holding company that provides, through its subsidiaries, investment banking and other related financial services, including municipal advisory, sales, trading and underwriting of taxable and tax-exempt fixed income securities, clearing, securities lending, structured finance and retail brokerage services throughout the United States.
On June 30, 2020, we completed the sale of all of the outstanding capital stock of NLC, which comprised the operations of our former insurance segment, for cash proceeds of $154.1 million. During 2020, Hilltop recognized an aggregate gain associated with this transaction of $36.8 million, net of $5.1 million in transaction costs and was subject to post-closing adjustments. The resulting book gain from this sale transaction was not recognized for tax purposes due to the excess tax basis over book basis being greater than the recorded book gain. Any tax loss related to this transaction is deemed disallowed pursuant to the rules under the Internal Revenue Code. We also entered into an agreement at closing to refrain for a specified period from certain activities that compete with the business of NLC. As a result, NLC’s results and its assets and liabilities have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements, and we no longer have an insurance segment. Unless otherwise noted, for purposes of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, “consolidated” refers to our consolidated financial position and consolidated results of operations, including discontinued operations and assets and liabilities of the discontinued operations.
During 2020, our income from continuing operations to common stockholders was $409.4 million, or $4.58 per diluted share. We declared and paid total common dividends of $0.36 per share, or $32.5 million, during 2020, which resulted in a dividend payout ratio of 7.18%. Dividend payout ratio is defined as cash dividends declared per common share divided by basic earnings per common share. We also paid an aggregate of $208.7 million to repurchase shares of our common stock during 2020, including shares purchased in the tender offer completed in November 2020.
We reported $564.4 million of income from continuing operations before income taxes during 2020, including the following contributions from our reportable business segments.
● The banking segment contributed $103.5 million of income before income taxes during 2020;
● The broker-dealer segment contributed $115.6 million of income before income taxes during 2020; and
● The mortgage origination segment contributed $408.0 million of income before income taxes during 2020.
Our insurance segment, the results of which have been presented within discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements, contributed $2.1 million of income before income taxes during 2020.
At December 31, 2020, on a consolidated basis, we had total assets of $16.9 billion, total deposits of $11.2 billion, total loans, including loans held for sale, of $10.3 billion and stockholders’ equity of $2.4 billion.
On January 28, 2021, our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.12 per common share, payable on February 26, 2021 to all common stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 15, 2021.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
COVID-19 has spread globally, including to every state in the United States, and has resulted in the WHO declaring COVID-19 to be a global pandemic. On March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency with respect to COVID-19. The U.S. federal government issued social distancing guidelines as a measure to reduce the escalation of the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. A majority of states and certain U.S. territories, including the District of Columbia, issued orders requiring the closure of non-essential businesses and/or requiring residents to stay at home. The effects of COVID-19 and the governmental and societal response to the virus have negatively impacted financial markets and overall economic conditions on an unprecedented scale, resulting in the shuttering of businesses across the country and significant job loss. Many of these businesses reopened but may be operating at limited capacity levels. We are following guidelines established by the Centers for Disease Control and WHO and orders issued by the state and local governments where we operate. We have taken a number of precautionary steps to safeguard our business and our employees from COVID-19, including, but not limited to, banking by appointment, implementing employee travel restrictions and telecommuting arrangements, while maintaining business continuity so that we can continue to deliver service to and meet the demands of our clients. On March 23, 2020, most of our employees began working remotely, with only certain operationally critical employees working on site at our principal business headquarters and business segment locations. In early September 2020, a majority of our employees began the process of returning to their respective office locations based on rotational team schedules to better ensure that appropriate social distancing measures are available. However, in November 2020, given the escalation of COVID-19 cases, most of our employees returned to working remotely, with only certain operationally critical employees working on site at our principal business headquarters and business segment locations. We are monitoring and assessing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on a daily basis to ensure that we continue to adhere to guidelines and orders issued by federal, state and local governments.
In March and April 2020, President Trump signed into law two relief bills, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act (the “PPP/HCE Act”), which are intended to provide emergency relief to several groups and individuals impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Among the numerous provisions contained in the CARES Act is the creation of a $349 billion Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) that provides federal government loan forgiveness for Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Section 7(a) loans for small businesses, which may include our customers, to pay up to eight weeks of employee compensation and other basic expenses such as electric and telephone bills. The PPP/HCE Act included an additional $310 billion for PPP funding. The CARES Act also provides for relief related to the adoption of certain accounting principles as well as tax provisions that may support the improvement of working capital levels. We will continue to evaluate the provisions of the CARES Act and the PPP/HCE Act and their impact on Hilltop and our employees as well as our customers and clients.
In light of the extreme volatility and disruptions in the capital and credit markets in March 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 crisis and its negative impact on the economy, including a significant decline in corporate debt and equity issuances and a deterioration in the mortgage servicing and commercial paper markets, we took a number of precautionary actions in March to enhance our financial flexibility by bolstering our cash position to ensure we have adequate cash readily available to meet both expected and unexpected funding needs without adversely affecting our daily operations. Additionally, as previously announced on April 30, 2020, in light of the uncertain outlook for 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Hilltop’s board of directors suspended its stock repurchase program. Hilltop’s board of directors has the ability to reinstate the stock repurchase program at its discretion as circumstances warrant.
The Federal Open Market Committee (“FOMC”) reduced the target range for short-term rates by 150 basis points to a range of 0% to 0.25% during March 2020 to support the economy and potentially reduce the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of these rate adjustments and the stressed economic outlook, mortgage rates fell to historically low levels. Given our exposure to the mortgage market, this precipitous decline in rates resulted in significant growth in mortgage originations at both PrimeLending and Hilltop Securities through its partnerships with certain housing finance authorities. To improve our already strong liquidity position, we raised brokered and other wholesale funding to support the enhanced mortgage activity. To meet increased liquidity demands, we raised brokered deposits that totaled $731 million at December 31, 2020, down from $1.4 billion at June 30, 2020. Further, beginning in March 2020, an additional $200 million of deposits was swept from Hilltop Securities into the Bank, bringing the total funds swept from Hilltop Securities to approximately $1.5 billion until June 2020 when the total funds swept was reduced back to $1.3 billion at June 30, 2020. During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, given the continued strong cash and liquidity levels at the
Bank, the total funds swept from Hilltop Securities into the Bank was reduced further to approximately $700 million as of December 31, 2020.
Further, during March 2020, we substantially reduced the trading portfolio inventory limits at Hilltop Securities in an effort to protect capital, minimize losses and ensure target liquidity levels throughout the crisis. During March 2020, the capital markets experienced significant friction and in certain portions of the market, liquidity was not prevalent. In particular for us, the market for municipal securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, mortgage derivatives and Government National Mortgage Association (“GNMA”) mortgage pools experienced significant liquidity stress at points during the month. The Federal Reserve, in partnership with the Treasury of the United States, stepped in to provide additional liquidity in each of these critical markets. We will continue to evaluate market conditions and determine the appropriateness of capital market inventory limits.
Asset Valuation
At each reporting date between annual impairment tests, the Company considers potential indicators of impairment. Given the current economic uncertainty and volatility surrounding COVID-19, the Company assessed whether the events and circumstances resulted in it being more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit and other intangible assets were less than their respective carrying value. Impairment indicators considered comprised the condition of the economy and banking industry; government intervention and regulatory updates; the impact of recent events to financial performance and cost factors of the reporting unit; performance of the Company’s stock and other relevant events. Specifically, our banking segment experienced lower-than-forecasted operating results during 2020, due to conditions discussed in detail within the discussion of banking segment results that follows.
Given the potential impacts as a result of COVID-19, actual results may differ materially from our current estimates as the scope of COVID-19 evolves or if the duration of business disruptions is longer than currently anticipated. The Company further considered the amount by which fair value exceeded book value in the most recent quantitative analysis and sensitivities performed. At the conclusion of the annual assessment, the Company determined that as of October 1, 2020 it was more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill and other intangible assets exceeded their respective carrying values.
While certain valuation assumptions and judgments will change to account for pandemic-related circumstances, we do not anticipate significant changes in methodology used to determine the fair value of our goodwill, intangible assets and other long-lived assets. We will continue to monitor developments regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and measures implemented in response to the pandemic, market capitalization, overall economic conditions and any other triggering events or circumstances that may indicate an impairment in the future.
In addition, the COVID-19 crisis could cause a further and sustained decline in our stock price or the occurrence of what management would deem to be a triggering event that could, under certain circumstances, cause us to perform impairment tests on our goodwill and other intangible assets, and result in an impairment charge being recorded for that period. In the event that we conclude that all or a portion of our goodwill and other intangible assets are impaired, a non-cash charge for the respective amount of such impairment would be recorded to earnings. Such a charge would have no impact on tangible capital or regulatory capital.
Loan Portfolio
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act was passed in March 2020, which among other things, allows the Bank to suspend the requirements for certain loan modifications to be categorized as a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”). Starting in March, the Bank implemented several actions to better support our impacted banking clients and allow for loan modifications such as principal and/or interest payment deferrals, participation in the PPP as an SBA preferred lender and personal banking assistance including waived fees, increased daily spending limits and suspension of residential foreclosure activities. The COVID-19 payment deferment programs allow for a deferral of principal and/or interest payments with such deferred principal payments due and payable on the maturity date of the existing loan. The Bank’s actions originally included approval of approximately $968 million in COVID-19 related loan modifications as of June 30, 2020.
As noted in the table below, during the third and fourth quarters of 2020, the Bank continued to support its impacted banking clients through the approval of COVID-19 related loan modifications, which resulted in an additional $75 million
of new COVID-19 related loan modifications since June 30, 2020. The portfolio of active deferrals that have not reached the end of their deferral period was approximately $240 million as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately $90 million had received an additional deferral. COVID-19 related loan modifications of approximately $714 million have returned to agreed-upon contractual terms and had made at least one required principal and/or interest payment since the end of their initial deferral period. Such loans represent elevated risk, therefore management continues to monitor these loans. The extent to which these measures will impact the Bank is uncertain, and any progression of loans, whether receiving COVID-19 payment deferrals or not, into non-performing assets, during future periods is uncertain and will depend on future developments that cannot be predicted.
While all industries could experience adverse impacts due to the COVID-19 pandemic, certain of our loan portfolio industry sectors and subsectors, including real estate collateralized by office buildings, have an increased level of risk. The following table provides information on those loans held for investment balances, by portfolio industry sector, including collectively evaluated allowance for credit losses, that include active COVID-19 payment deferrals (dollars in thousands).
In addition, the Bank’s loan portfolio includes collateralized loans extended to businesses that depend on the energy industry, including those within the exploration and production, field services, pipeline construction and transportation sectors. The sharp decline in crude oil prices coupled with the economic uncertainties associated with COVID-19 have increased pressures on this portfolio. The following table summarizes energy loan portfolio exposures by sector (dollars in thousands).
As noted above, the Bank’s actions during the second quarter of 2020 also included supporting our impacted banking clients through the PPP effort. These efforts included approval and funding of over 2,800 PPP loans ranging from approximately $1 thousand to $8.4 million, with approximately $487 million remaining outstanding at December 31, 2020. The PPP loans made by the Bank are guaranteed by the SBA and, if used by the borrower for authorized purposes, may be fully forgiven. On October 2, 2020, the SBA began approving PPP forgiveness applications and remitting forgiveness payments to PPP lenders for PPP borrowers. Through February 12, 2021, the SBA had approved approximately 1,500 PPP forgiveness applications totaling approximately $294 million, with PPP loans of approximately $171 million pending SBA review and approval. In addition, given recent updates from the SBA regarding the second round of the PPP effort, the Bank is accepting new applications from impacted banking clients. Through February 12, 2021, these efforts have included review of approximately $193 million in second round PPP loan application submissions, of which approximately $127 million have been approved.
Refer to the discussion in the “Financial Condition - Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans” section that follows for more details regarding the significant assumptions and estimates involved in estimating credit losses given the economic uncertainties associated with COVID-19.
Outlook for 2021
The spread of COVID-19 has had, and is expected to continue to have, adverse effects on our business and operations. The broader adverse implications of COVID-19 on the operations and overall financial performance of our clients is uncertain due to the currently unknowable duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance in 2021 is likewise currently uncertain and will depend on certain developments, including, among others, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our customers and clients, potential further disruption and deterioration in the global economy and the financial services industry, including the mortgage servicing and commercial paper markets, and additional, or extended, federal, state and local government orders and regulations that might be imposed in response to the pandemic, all of which are uncertain.
See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for additional discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Tender Offer
On September 23, 2020, we announced the commencement of a modified “Dutch auction” tender offer to purchase shares of our common stock for an aggregate cash purchase price of up to $350 million. On November 17, 2020, we completed our tender offer, repurchasing 8,058,947 shares of outstanding common stock at a price of $24.00 per share for a total of $193.4 million excluding fees and expenses. We funded the tender offer with cash on hand.
NLC Sale
As previously discussed, on June 30, 2020, we completed the sale of all of the outstanding capital stock of NLC, which comprised the operations of our insurance segment. Accordingly, NLC’s results and its assets and liabilities have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements.
Subordinated Notes due 2030 and 2035
On May 7, 2020, we completed a public offering of $50 million aggregate principal amount of 5.75% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due May 15, 2030 (the “2030 Subordinated Notes”) and $150 million aggregate principal amount of 6.125% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due May 15, 2035 (the “2035 Subordinated Notes”). We collectively refer to the 2030 Subordinated Notes and the 2035 Subordinated Notes as the “Subordinated Notes”. The price for the Subordinated Notes was 100% of the principal amount of the Subordinated Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and fees and expenses of $3.4 million, were $196.6 million. We intend to use the net proceeds of the offerings for general corporate purposes.
The 2030 Subordinated Notes and the 2035 Subordinated Notes will mature on May 15, 2030 and May 15, 2035, respectively. We may redeem the Subordinated Notes, in whole or in part, from time to time, subject to obtaining Federal Reserve approval, beginning with the interest payment date of May 15, 2025 for the 2030 Subordinated Notes and beginning with the interest payment date of May 15, 2030 for the 2035 Subordinated Notes, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Subordinated Notes being redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date of redemption.
The 2030 Subordinated Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.75% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears commencing on November 15, 2020. The interest rate for the 2030 Subordinated Notes will reset quarterly beginning May 15, 2025 to an interest rate, per year, equal to the then-current benchmark rate, which is expected to be three-month term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) rate, plus 5.68%, payable quarterly in arrears. The 2035 Subordinated Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.125% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears commencing on November 15, 2020. The interest rate for the 2035 Subordinated Notes will reset quarterly beginning May 15, 2030 to an interest rate, per year, equal to the then-current benchmark rate, which is expected to be three-month term SOFR rate, plus 5.80%, payable quarterly in arrears.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
As a financial institution providing products and services through our banking, broker-dealer and mortgage origination segments, we are directly affected by general economic and market conditions, many of which are beyond our control and unpredictable. A key factor impacting our results of operations includes changes in the level of interest rates in addition to twists in the shape of the yield curve with the magnitude and direction of the impact varying across the different lines of business. Other factors impacting our results of operations include, but are not limited to, fluctuations in volume and price levels of securities, inflation, political events, investor confidence, investor participation levels, legal, regulatory, and compliance requirements and competition. All of these factors have the potential to impact our financial position, operating results and liquidity. In addition, the recent economic and political environment has led to legislative and regulatory initiatives, both enacted and proposed, that could substantially change the regulation of the financial services industry and may significantly impact us.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Results of Operations
Changes in Management and Efficiency Initiative-Related Charges
In 2019, we successfully completed several leadership transitions through effective succession planning. During 2019, the broker-dealer segment’s results reflected aggregate pre-tax charges of $2.2 million within employees’ compensation and benefits noninterest expenses, all of which were recognized in the first quarter of 2019, related to the resignation of Hill A. Feinberg as President and Chief Executive Officer of Hilltop Securities and the appointment of his successor, M. Bradley Winges. Also, corporate recognized a pre-tax charge of $5.8 million within employees’ compensation and benefits noninterest expenses in the first quarter of 2019 related to the retirement of Alan B. White, our former Vice Chairman and Co-Chief Executive Officer. Lastly, the mortgage origination segment recognized a pre-tax charge of $1.25 million within employees’ compensation and benefits noninterest expenses in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to the resignation of Todd Salmans as Chief Executive Officer of PrimeLending and the appointment of his successor, Steve Thompson. These management changes and the related impact on our results of operations are collectively referred to as the “Leadership Changes.” For additional information regarding the Leadership Changes, refer to the section captioned “Factors Affecting the Current Year - Changes in Management and Efficiency Initiative-Related Changes” in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our 2019 Form 10-K.
In addition to the costs associated with the Leadership Changes, during 2019, corporate and the broker-dealer segment recognized $1.0 million and $0.7 million, respectively, in efficiency initiative-related charges resulting in aggregated charges of $1.7 million.
Technology Enhancements and Corporate Initiatives
In furtherance of our goal of building a premier, diversified financial services company, we regularly evaluate strategic opportunities to invest in our business and technology platforms. Such investments are intended to support long-term technological competitiveness and improve operational efficiencies throughout our organization. During 2018, we began the significant investment in new technological solutions, substantial core system upgrades and other technology enhancements. Such significant investments specifically include single enterprise-wide general ledger and procurement solutions, a mortgage loan origination system and a core system replacement within our broker-dealer segment (collectively referred to as “Core System Improvements”). In combination with these technology enhancements, we are continuing our efforts to consolidate common back office functions. Costs incurred related to these Core System Improvements and the consolidation of common back office functions represents a significant portion of our noninterest expenses throughout 2020, and we believe this trend will continue into 2021, but we are making such investments with the expectation that they will result in cost savings over the long term. Beginning in the second quarter of 2019, the mortgage origination segment began the implementation of a new mortgage loan origination system. The transition from the previous mortgage loan origination system was completed during the fourth quarter of 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, we implemented the core system replacement within our broker-dealer segment. This was a highly complex endeavor and the broker-dealer segment continues to work with the technology vendors, clients and internal stakeholders. Additionally, through the third quarter of 2020, we made significant progress in our transition to a single, enterprise-wide general ledger solution by replacing legacy ledgers at our banking and mortgage origination segments, as well as corporate.
LIBOR
In July 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”) announced that it intends to cease compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after 2021. Working groups comprised of various regulators and other industry groups have been formed in the United States and other countries in order to provide guidance on this topic. In particular, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (“ARRC”) has proposed that SOFR is the rate that represents best practice as the alternative to LIBOR for use in derivatives and other financial contracts that are currently indexed to LIBOR. The ARRC has also published recommended fall-back language for LIBOR-linked financial instruments, among numerous other areas of guidance.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued guidance in March 2020 intended to provide temporary optional expedients and exceptions to the GAAP guidance on contract modifications and hedge accounting to ease the financial reporting burdens related to the expected market transition from LIBOR and other interbank offered rates to alternative reference rates. Additionally, the FASB issued specific accounting guidance that permits the use of the Overnight Index Swap rate based on the SOFR to be designated as a benchmark interest rate for hedge accounting purposes.
Certain loans we originate bear interest at a floating rate based on LIBOR. We also pay interest on certain borrowings, are counterparty to derivative agreements that are based on LIBOR and have existing contracts with payment calculations that use LIBOR as the reference rate. These changes will create various risks surrounding the financial, operational, compliance and legal aspects associated with changing certain elements of existing contracts.
ARRC has proposed a paced market transition plan to SOFR from LIBOR, and organizations are currently working on industry-wide and company-specific transition plans as it relates to derivatives and cash markets exposed to LIBOR. However, in November 2020, Intercontinental Exchange announced that ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (“IBA”) will consult on its intention to cease the publication of the one-week and two-month settings of United States Dollar (“USD”) LIBOR immediately after December 31, 2021, and cease publishing remaining USD LIBOR settings on June 30, 2023, providing time for many legacy LIBOR-referencing contracts to mature.
We have made an assessment of areas across the organization that will be affected by the migration away from LIBOR. We have assembled individuals from across the organization and established a governance process as part of a coordinated effort to prepare for the cessation of LIBOR. During the third quarter of 2020, PrimeLending began originating conventional adjustable-rate mortgage, or ARM, loan products utilizing a SOFR rate with terms consistent with government-sponsored enterprise guidelines. In addition, the Bank’s management team is currently working with its commercial relationships who have LIBOR-based contracts maturing after 2021 to amend terms and establish an alternative benchmark rate. We are also continuing work on an enterprise-wide contract model and software review to better evaluate both the impacts of the LIBOR phase-out and transition requirements. As a result of this ongoing effort, we may incur significant expenses in effecting the transition, including, but not limited to, changes to our agreements and our agreements with customers that do not contemplate LIBOR being unavailable, as well as changes to systems and processes.
Company Background
In January 2007, we acquired NLC, a property and casualty insurance holding company. As a result, our subsequent primary operations through November 2012 were limited to providing fire and homeowners insurance to low value dwellings and manufactured homes primarily in Texas and other areas of the southern United States through NLC’s wholly owned insurance subsidiaries. As previously discussed, on June 30, 2020, we completed the sale of all of the outstanding capital stock of NLC.
On November 30, 2012, we acquired PlainsCapital Corporation pursuant to a plan of merger whereby PlainsCapital Corporation merged with and into our wholly owned subsidiary (the “PlainsCapital Merger”), which continued as the surviving entity under the name “PlainsCapital Corporation”. Concurrent with the consummation of the PlainsCapital Merger, Hilltop became a financial holding company registered under the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956.
On September 13, 2013 (the “Bank Closing Date”), the Bank assumed substantially all of the liabilities, including all of the deposits, and acquired substantially all of the assets of Edinburg, Texas-based FNB from the FDIC, as receiver, and reopened former branches of FNB acquired from the FDIC under the “PlainsCapital Bank” name (the “FNB
Transaction”). Pursuant to the Purchase and Assumption Agreement by and among the FDIC as receiver for FNB, the FDIC and the Bank (the “P&A Agreement”), the Bank and the FDIC entered into loss-share agreements whereby the FDIC agreed to share in the losses of certain loans and real estate acquired through foreclosure (“OREO”) that the Bank acquired in the FNB Transaction. The loss-share agreements with the FDIC were terminated in the fourth quarter of 2018.
On January 1, 2015, we acquired SWS in a stock and cash transaction (the “SWS Merger”), whereby SWS’s broker-dealer subsidiaries became subsidiaries of Securities Holdings and SWS’s banking subsidiary, Southwest Securities, FSB, was merged into the Bank. On October 5, 2015, Southwest Securities, Inc. was renamed “Hilltop Securities Inc.”
On August 1, 2018, we acquired privately-held, Houston-based BORO in an all-cash transaction (“BORO Acquisition”). In connection with the BORO Acquisition, we merged BORO into the Bank, and all customer accounts were converted to the PlainsCapital Bank platform.
Segment Information
As previously discussed, on June 30, 2020, we completed the sale of all of the outstanding capital stock of NLC, which comprised the operations of the former insurance segment. As a result, insurance segment results and its assets and liabilities have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements, and we no longer have an insurance segment. Additional details are presented in Note 3, Discontinued Operations, in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Following the above noted sale of NLC, we have two primary business units within continuing operations, PCC (banking and mortgage origination) and Securities Holdings (broker-dealer). Under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), our continuing operations business units are comprised of three reportable business segments organized primarily by the core products offered to the segments’ respective customers: banking, broker-dealer and mortgage origination. Consistent with our historical segment operating results, we anticipate that future revenues will be driven primarily from the banking segment, with the remainder being generated by our broker-dealer and mortgage origination segments. Operating results for the mortgage origination segment have historically been more volatile than operating results for the banking and broker-dealer segments.
The banking segment includes the operations of the Bank. The banking segment primarily provides business and consumer banking services from offices located throughout Texas and generates revenue from its portfolio of earning assets. The Bank’s results of operations are primarily dependent on net interest income. The Bank also derives revenue from other sources, including service charges on customer deposit accounts and trust fees.
The broker-dealer segment includes the operations of Securities Holdings, which operates through its wholly owned subsidiaries Hilltop Securities, Momentum Independent Network and Hilltop Securities Asset Management, LLC. The broker-dealer segment generates a majority of its revenues from fees and commissions earned from investment advisory and securities brokerage services. Hilltop Securities is a broker-dealer registered with the SEC and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) and a member of the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”). Momentum Independent Network is an introducing broker-dealer that is also registered with the SEC and FINRA. Hilltop Securities, Momentum Independent Network and Hilltop Securities Asset Management, LLC are registered investment advisers under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.
The mortgage origination segment includes the operations of PrimeLending, which offers a variety of loan products and generates revenue predominantly from fees charged on the origination and servicing of loans and from selling these loans in the secondary market.
Corporate includes certain activities not allocated to specific business segments. These activities include holding company financing and investing activities, merchant banking investment opportunities, and management and administrative services to support the overall operations of the Company.
The eliminations of intercompany transactions are included in “All Other and Eliminations.” Additional information concerning our reportable segments is presented in Note 30, Segment and Related Information, in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
The following table presents certain information about the continuing operating results of our reportable segments (in thousands). This table serves as a basis for the discussion and analysis in the segment operating results sections that follow.
NMNot meaningful
Key Performance Indicators
We utilize several key indicators of financial condition and operating performance to evaluate the various aspects of our business. In addition to traditional financial metrics, such as revenue and growth trends, we monitor several other financial measures and non-financial operating metrics to help us evaluate growth trends, measure the adequacy of our capital based on regulatory reporting requirements, measure the effectiveness of our operations and assess operational efficiencies. These indicators change from time to time as the opportunities and challenges in our businesses change.
Specifically, performance ratios and asset quality ratios are typically used for measuring the performance of banking and financial institutions. We consider return on average stockholders’ equity, return on average assets and net interest margin to be important supplemental measures of operating performance that are commonly used by securities analysts, investors and other parties interested in the banking and financial industry. The net charge-offs to average loans outstanding ratio is also considered a key measure for our banking segment as it indicates the performance of our loan portfolio.
In addition, we consider regulatory capital ratios to be key measures that are used by us, as well as banking regulators, investors and analysts, to assess our regulatory capital position and to compare our regulatory capital to that of other financial services companies. We monitor our capital strength in terms of both leverage ratio and risk-based capital ratios based on capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. The risk-based capital ratios are minimum supervisory ratios generally applicable to banking organizations, but banking organizations are widely expected to operate with capital positions well above the minimum ratios. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
How We Generate Revenue
We generate revenue from net interest income and from noninterest income. Net interest income represents the difference between the income earned on our assets, including our loans and investment securities, and our cost of funds, including the interest paid on the deposits and borrowings that are used to support our assets. Net interest income is a significant contributor to our operating results. Fluctuations in interest rates, as well as the amounts and types of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities we hold, affect net interest income. We generated $424.2 million in net interest income during 2020, compared with net interest income of $439.0 million and $433.3 million during 2019 and 2018, respectively. Changes in net interest income during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily included increases within our banking segment, partially offset by decreases in our broker-dealer, mortgage origination and corporate segments.
The other component of our revenue is noninterest income, which is primarily comprised of the following:
(i) Income from broker-dealer operations. Through Securities Holdings, we provide investment banking and other related financial services that generated $274.0 million, $241.5 million and $241.0 million in securities brokerage commissions and fees and investment advisory fees and commissions, and $203.1 million, $150.0 million and $47.8 million in gains from derivative and trading portfolio activities (included within other noninterest income) during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(ii) Income from mortgage operations. Through PrimeLending, we generate noninterest income by originating and selling mortgage loans. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, we generated $1.2 billion, $634.9 million and $548.7 million, respectively, in net gains from sale of loans, other mortgage production income (including income associated with retained mortgage servicing rights), and mortgage loan origination fees.
In the aggregate, we generated $1.7 billion, $1.1 billion and $0.9 billion in noninterest income during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in noninterest income during 2020, compared with 2019, was predominantly attributable to increases of $537.9 million in net gains from sale of loans, other mortgage production income and mortgage loan origination fees within our mortgage origination segment and $53.0 million in gains from derivative and trading portfolio activities within our broker-dealer segment.
We also incur noninterest expenses in the operation of our businesses. Our businesses engage in labor intensive activities and, consequently, employees’ compensation and benefits represent the majority of our noninterest expenses.
Consolidated Operating Results
Income from continuing operations applicable to common stockholders during 2020 was $409.4 million, or $4.58 per diluted share, compared with $211.3 million, or $2.29 per diluted share, during 2019, and $116.5 million, or $1.23 per diluted share, during 2018. Hilltop’s financial results from continuing operations during 2020 reflect both a significant increase in mortgage origination segment net gains from sales of loans and other mortgage production income and a significant build in the allowance for credit losses associated with the deterioration of the economic outlook attributable to the market disruption and economic uncertainties caused by COVID-19. Results during 2019 included the costs incurred associated with the significant Leadership Changes and other efficiency initiative-related charges which, in the aggregate, totaled $11.0 million before income taxes.
Including income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes, income applicable to common stockholders was $447.8 million, or $5.01 per diluted share, during 2020, compared to $225.3 million, or $2.44 per diluted share, during 2019, and $121.4 million, or $1.28 per diluted share, during 2018.
Certain items included in net income during 2020, 2019 and 2018 resulted from purchase accounting associated with the PlainsCapital Merger, the FNB Transaction, the SWS Merger and the BORO Acquisition (collectively, the “Bank Transactions”). Income before income taxes during 2020, 2019 and 2018 included net accretion on earning assets and liabilities of $18.9 million, $28.5 million and $37.6 million, respectively, and amortization of identifiable intangibles of $6.3 million, $7.6 million and $8.0 million, respectively, related to the Bank Transactions.
The information shown in the table below includes certain key performance indicators on a consolidated basis.
(1) Return on average stockholders’ equity ratio is defined as consolidated income attributable to Hilltop divided by average total Hilltop stockholders’ equity.
(2) Return on average assets ratio is defined as consolidated net income divided by average assets.
(3) Net interest margin is defined as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. We consider net interest margin as a key indicator of profitability as it represents interest earned on our interest-earning assets compared to interest incurred.
(4) The securities financing operations within our broker-dealer segment had the effect of lowering net interest margin by 25 basis points, 40 basis points and 42 basis points during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(5) The leverage ratio is a regulatory capital ratio and is defined as Tier 1 risk-based capital divided by average consolidated assets.
(6) The common equity Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio is a regulatory capital ratio and is defined as common equity Tier 1 risk-based capital divided by risk weighted assets. Common equity includes common equity Tier 1 capital (common stockholders’ equity and certain minority interests in the equity capital accounts of consolidated subsidiaries, but excluding goodwill and various intangible assets) and additional Tier 1 capital (certain qualifying minority interests not included in common equity Tier 1 capital, certain preferred stock and related surplus, and certain subordinated debt).
We present net interest margin and net interest income below on a taxable-equivalent basis. Net interest margin (taxable equivalent), a non-GAAP measure, is defined as taxable equivalent net interest income divided by average interest earning assets. Taxable equivalent adjustments are based on the applicable corporate federal income tax rates of 21% for all periods presented. The interest income earned on certain earning assets is completely or partially exempt from federal income tax. As such, these tax-exempt instruments typically yield lower returns than taxable investments. To provide more meaningful comparisons of net interest margins for all earning assets, we use net interest income on a taxable-equivalent basis in calculating net interest margin by increasing the interest income earned on tax-exempt assets to make it fully equivalent to interest income earned on taxable investments.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, purchase accounting contributed 14, 25 and 34 basis points to our consolidated taxable equivalent net interest margin of 2.85%, 3.48% and 3.56%, respectively. The purchase accounting activity is primarily related to the accretion of discount of loans which totaled $18.8 million, $28.7 million and $39.1 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, associated with the Bank Transactions.
The table below provides additional details regarding our consolidated net interest income (dollars in thousands).
(1) Average balance includes non-accrual loans.
(2) Presented on a taxable equivalent basis with taxable equivalent adjustments based on a 21% federal income tax rate for all periods presented. The adjustment to interest income was $1.2 million, $0.6 million and $0.9 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The banking segment’s net interest margin exceeds our consolidated net interest margin shown above. Our consolidated net interest margin includes certain items that are not reflected in the calculation of our net interest margin within our banking segment and reduce our consolidated net interest margin, such as the borrowing costs of Hilltop and the yields and costs associated with certain items within interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities in the broker-dealer segment, including items related to securities financing operations that particularly decrease net interest margin. In addition, yields and costs on certain interest-earning assets, such as warehouse lines of credit extended to subsidiaries (operating segments) by the banking segment, are eliminated from the consolidated financial statements. Our
consolidated net interest margin during 2020 was also negatively impacted by certain actions taken by management to strengthen our available liquidity position. Such actions, including increasing overall cash balances by raising brokered money market and brokered time deposits and raising capital through the issuance of subordinated debt, were taken out of an abundance of caution as the pandemic created significant uncertainty in the banking and capital markets.
Net interest income from continuing operations decreased during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily due to decreases in interest earned on loans held for investment, interest incurred beginning in May 2020 related to the new Subordinated Notes at corporate and decreases in net interest income from our stock lending business, customer margin loans and other customer activities within the broker-dealer segment. The increase in net interest income during 2019, compared with 2018, was primarily related to changes attributable to both volumes and yields within our banking segment, partially
offset by a decrease in accretion of discount on loans within the banking segment and declining net yields on mortgage loans held for sale within our mortgage origination segment. Refer to the discussion in the “Banking Segment” section that follows for more details on the changes in net interest income, including the component changes in the volume of average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and changes in the rates earned or paid on those items.
The provision for (reversal of) credit losses is determined by management as the amount to maintain the allowance for credit losses at the amount of expected credit losses inherent within the loans held for investment portfolio. The amount of expense and the corresponding level of allowance for credit losses for loans are based on our evaluation of the collectability of the loan portfolio based on historical loss experience, reasonable and supportable forecasts, and other significant qualitative and quantitative factors. Substantially all of our consolidated provision for (reversal of) credit losses is related to the banking segment. During 2020, the provision for credit losses was significantly impacted by the banking segment’s build in reserves associated with the increase in the expected lifetime credit losses under the Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) methodology on both individually evaluated loans and collectively evaluated loans within the portfolio attributable to the market disruption and related economic uncertainties caused by COVID-19 during 2020. Refer to the discussion in the “Financial Condition - Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans” section that follows for more details regarding the significant assumptions and estimates involved in estimating credit losses. During 2019, the provision for (reversal of) credit losses was impacted by the banking segment’s release during the first quarter of 2019 of a $2.0 million reserve associated with previously estimated hurricane loss exposures due to improved customer performance.
Noninterest income from continuing operations increased during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily due to increases in total mortgage loan sales volume and changes in net fair value and related derivative activity within our mortgage origination segment, as well as increases in fixed income services, public finance services and structured finance net revenues with our broker-dealer segment. The increase in noninterest income from continuing operations during 2019, compared with 2018, was primarily due to increases in noninterest income within our mortgage origination and broker-dealer segments.
Noninterest expense from continuing operations increased during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily due to increases in variable compensation and segment operating costs associated with the increased mortgage loan originations within our mortgage origination segment and increases in variable compensation within our broker-dealer segment. Noninterest expense increased during 2019, compared with 2018, primarily due to increases in noninterest expense within our broker-dealer and mortgage origination segments as well as corporate, partially offset by a decrease within our banking segment.
Effective income tax rates from continuing operations were 23.6%, 22.5% and 22.1% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate during 2020 was primarily attributable to the percentage of income at subsidiaries with higher state effective tax rates, while the effective tax rates for 2019 and 2018 approximated statutory rates and includes the effect of investments in tax-exempt instruments, offset by nondeductible expenses.
Segment Results from Continuing Operations
Banking Segment
The following table presents certain information about the operating results of our banking segment (in thousands).
The decline in income before income taxes during 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to the significant increase in the provision for credit losses associated with the adoption of CECL and the market disruption caused by COVID-19 during 2020. Changes to net interest income related to the component changes in the volume of average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and changes in the rates earned or paid on those items are discussed in more detail below.
The information shown in the table below includes certain key indicators of the performance and asset quality of our banking segment.
(1) Efficiency ratio is defined as noninterest expenses divided by the sum of total noninterest income and net interest income for the period. We consider the efficiency ratio to be a measure of the banking segment’s profitability.
(2) Return of average assets ratio is defined as net income divided by average assets.
(3) Net interest margin is defined as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. We consider net interest margin as a key indicator of profitability, as it represents interest earned on interest-earning assets compared to interest incurred.
(4) The net charge-offs to average loans outstanding ratio is defined as charge-offs during the reported period minus recoveries divided by average loans outstanding. We use the ratio to measure the credit performance of our loan portfolio.
The banking segment presents net interest margin and net interest income in the following discussion and tables below, on a taxable equivalent basis. Net interest margin (taxable equivalent), a non-GAAP measure, is defined as taxable equivalent net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Taxable equivalent adjustments are based on the applicable corporate federal income tax rates of 21% for all periods presented. The interest income earned on certain earning assets is completely or partially exempt from federal income tax. As such, these tax-exempt instruments typically yield lower returns than taxable investments. To provide more meaningful comparisons of net interest margins for all earning assets, we use net interest income on a taxable equivalent basis in calculating net interest margin by increasing the interest income earned on tax-exempt assets to make it fully equivalent to interest income earned on taxable investments.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, purchase accounting contributed 18, 33 and 48 basis points, respectively, to the banking segment’s taxable equivalent net interest margin of 3.31%, 4.01% and 4.24%, respectively. These purchase accounting items are primarily related to accretion of discount of loans associated with the Bank Transactions as discussed in the Consolidated Operating Results section.
The table below provides additional details regarding our banking segment’s net interest income (dollars in thousands).
(1) Average balance includes non-accrual loans.
(2) Presented on a taxable equivalent basis with taxable equivalent adjustments based on the applicable corporate federal income tax rates of 21% for all periods presented. The adjustment to interest income was $0.8 million, $0.6 million and $0.8 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
The banking segment’s net interest margin exceeds our consolidated net interest margin. Our consolidated net interest margin includes certain items that are not reflected in the calculation of our net interest margin within our banking segment and reduce our consolidated net interest margin, such as the borrowing costs of Hilltop and the yields and costs associated with certain items within interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities in the broker-dealer segment, including items related to securities financing operations that particularly decrease net interest margin. In addition, the banking segment’s interest-earning assets include warehouse lines of credit extended to other subsidiaries, which are eliminated from the consolidated financial statements. The banking segment’s net interest margins during 2020 were also negatively impacted by certain actions taken by management to strengthen the Bank’s available liquidity position. Such actions, including increasing overall cash balances by raising brokered money market and brokered time deposits and raising capital through the issuance of subordinated debt, were taken out of an abundance of caution as the pandemic created significant uncertainty in the banking and capital markets.
The following table summarizes the changes in the banking segment’s net interest income for the periods indicated below, including the component changes in the volume of average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and changes in the rates earned or paid on those items (in thousands).
(1) Changes attributable to both volume and yield/rate are included in yield/rate column.
(2) Taxable equivalent.
Changes in the yields earned on interest-earning assets decreased taxable equivalent net interest income during 2020, compared with 2019, primarily as a result of lower loan yields due to decreased market rates, the addition of 1% note rate PPP loans, and the decrease in accretion of discount on loans of $9.9 million. Accretion of discount on loans is expected to continue to decrease in future periods as loans acquired in the Bank Transactions are repaid, refinanced or renewed. Changes in the volume of interest-earning assets, primarily due to the significant increase in mortgage warehouse lending volume and new PPP loan originations, increased taxable equivalent net interest income during 2020, compared with 2019. Changes in rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities increased taxable equivalent net interest income during 2020, compared with 2019, due to decreases in market interest rates. Our portfolio includes loans that periodically reprice or mature prior to the end of an amortized term. Some of our variable-rate loans remain at applicable rate floors, which may delay and/or limit changes in net interest income during a period of changing rates. If interest rates were to fall further, the impact on our net interest income for certain variable-rate loans would be limited by these rate floors. In addition, declining interest rates may reduce our cost of funds on deposits. The extent of this impact will ultimately be driven by the timing, magnitude and frequency of interest rate and yield curve movements, as well as changes in market conditions and timing of management strategies. If interest rates were to rise, yields on the portion of our loan portfolio that remain at applicable rate floors would rise more slowly than increases in market interest rates. Any changes in interest rates across the term structure will continue to impact net interest income and net interest margin. The impact of rate movements will change with the shape of the yield curve, including any changes in steepness or flatness and inversions at any points on the yield curve.
Changes in the yields earned on interest-earning assets increased taxable equivalent net interest income during 2019, compared with 2018, primarily as a result of higher yields due to increased market rates, significantly offset by a decrease in accretion of discount on loans of $10.3 million. Changes in the volume of interest-earning assets, primarily due to an increase in the loan portfolio as a result of the BORO Acquisition, and seasonal increases in mortgage warehouse lending volume increased taxable equivalent net interest income during 2019, compared with 2018. Changes in rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities decreased taxable equivalent net interest income during 2019, compared with 2018, due to increases in market interest rates and increased competitive pressure for deposits.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank implemented several actions to better support our impacted banking clients. Such programs include loan modifications such as principal and/or interest payment deferrals, participation in the
PPP as an SBA preferred lender and personal banking assistance including waived fees, increased daily spending limits and suspension of residential foreclosure activities. The extent to which these measures will impact the Bank is uncertain. The adverse economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have had and can be expected to continue to have a significant adverse effect on the banking segment’s business and results of operations, including significantly reduced demand for loan products and services from customers, deposit balance attrition, possible recognition of credit losses and increases in allowance for credit losses, especially if businesses remain limited in their operating capacity, unemployment remains elevated and customers draw on their lines of credit or seek additional loans to help finance their businesses, and possible constraints on liquidity and capital, whether due to increases in risk-weighted assets related to supporting customer activities or to regulatory actions. In the event future operating performance is below our projections, there are negative changes to projected provision for credit losses on loans, long-term loan and deposit growth rates or discount rates increase, the fair value of the banking reporting unit may decline, and we may be required to record a goodwill impairment charge. Additionally, with regards to its core deposit intangible assets, in the event that the deposit retention levels and derived cost savings from available core deposits at the Bank relative to an alternative cost of funds falls to a level that cannot support the remaining carrying value, we may be required to record an impairment charge. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic negatively affects the banking segment’s business, results of operations and financial condition, as well as its regulatory capital and liquidity ratios, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic and actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic, as discussed in more detail in the “Recent Developments” section above.
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the banking segment retained approximately $193 million, $149 million and $97 million, respectively, in mortgage loans originated by the mortgage origination segment. These loans are purchased by the banking segment at par. For origination services provided, the banking segment reimburses the mortgage origination segment for direct origination costs associated with these mortgage loans, in addition to payment of a correspondent fee. The correspondent fees are eliminated in consolidation. We expected loans originated by the mortgage origination segment on behalf of and retained by the banking segment to increase during 2020 based on approved authority for up to 5% of the mortgage origination segment’s total origination volume. However, in March 2020, the Bank made a decision to sell the previously purchased mortgage loans to the mortgage origination segment, instead of holding them for investment. In October 2020, the Bank began purchasing and retaining mortgage loans originated by the mortgage origination segment again. During 2021, we expect loans originated by the mortgage origination segment on behalf of and retained by the banking segment to increase based on approved authority for up to 5% of the mortgage origination segment’s total origination volume. The determination of mortgage loan retention levels by the banking segment will be impacted by, among other things, an ongoing review of the prevailing mortgage rates, balance sheet positioning at Hilltop and the banking segment’s outlook for commercial loan growth.
The banking segment’s provision for credit losses during 2020 included a significant build in the provision for credit losses on individually evaluated loans of $20.1 million, while the provision for credit losses on expected losses of collectively evaluated loans accounted for $76.1 million of the total provision primarily due to the increase in the expected lifetime credit losses under CECL attributable to the deteriorating economic outlook associated with the impact of the market disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The change in provision for credit losses during 2020 was also attributable to other factors including, but not limited to, loan growth, loan mix and changes in risk rating grades. The change in the allowance during 2020 was also impacted by net charge-offs of $21.1 million, primarily associated with loans specifically reserved for during the first quarter of 2020. Refer to the discussion in the “Financial Condition - Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans” section that follows for more details regarding the significant assumptions and estimates involved in estimating credit losses.
The banking segment’s noninterest income was relatively flat during 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to sales activity in our available-for-sale investment portfolio as well as changes in our intercompany financing charges. The decrease in noninterest income during 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily due to sales activity in our available-for sale investment portfolio.
The banking segment’s noninterest expenses were relatively flat during 2020, compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in the reserve for unfunded commitments attributable to macroeconomic uncertainties associated with the impact of market disruption caused by COVID-19 conditions, offset by a reduction in legal, business development and other operating expenses. The decrease in noninterest expense during 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily due to a reduction in the previously mentioned BORO Acquisition-related transaction expenses and expenses related to a wire fraud incident, as well as a reduction in net expenses related to previously covered assets.
Broker-Dealer Segment
The following table provides additional details regarding our broker-dealer operating results (in thousands).
(1) Securities commissions and fees includes income of $13.2 million, $11.4 million, and $11.3 million during 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, that is eliminated in consolidation.
(2) Net revenue is defined as the sum of total net interest income and total noninterest income. We consider net revenue to be a key performance measure in the
evaluation of the broker-dealer segment’s financial position and operating performance as it is the primary revenue performance measure used by investors and
analysts. Net revenue provides for some level of comparability of trends across the financial services industry as it reflects both noninterest income, including
investment and securities advisory fees and commissions, as well as net interest income. Internally, we assess the broker-dealer segment’s performance on a revenue
basis for comparability with our banking segment.
(3) Variable compensation represents performance-based commissions and incentives.
(4) Segment operating costs include provision for credit losses associated with the broker-dealer segment within other noninterest expenses.
(5) Noted balances during all prior periods include certain reclassifications to conform to current period presentation.
Despite the economic disruptions related to the pandemic, during the second half of 2020, the broker-dealer’s public finance services business line experienced improved results in line with modest improvements in both Texas and national issuance activity and market share compared to the same period during the prior year. The structured finance business line experienced robust results given strong issuance volumes and improved demand for mortgage products following market volatility in the first quarter of 2020. Structuring activity results also improved as demand for structured agency products rebounded starting in the second quarter of 2020. Additionally, the fixed income services business line demonstrated improved operating results. During 2020, transactional revenues in the fixed income business line improved compared with the same period in 2019 as we experienced relative strength in municipal and taxable products. The wealth management business line’s net revenues were lower during 2020, compared to 2019, as customer balance revenues were driven lower due to the current low interest rate environment. Additional information related to the impact of COVID-19 is included within the “Recent Developments” section above.
The specific components of the overall increase in the broker-dealer segment’s income before income taxes 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily as a result of the following:
● a $40.6 million increase in net revenue in our fixed income services business line due to strong performances in our municipal and taxable products, which noted significant increases beginning in March 2020 through December 2020. Improved client demand combined with active position management and effective hedging tools led to improved municipal revenue. The broker-dealer segment wound-down the equity capital market business line, resulting in an offsetting decline of net revenues of $9.1 million during 2020 for a net increase of $31.5 million in net revenue in our fixed income services business line year over year;
● a $44.1 million increase in compensation expense, of which $41.6 million was due to the increase in variable compensation, resulting from increases in our public finance services, fixed income services and structured finance business line revenues;
● an $8.6 million decrease in net revenue in our wealth management business line during 2020 was primarily due to lower customer balance based revenues, including FDIC insured investment products’ fees and net interest on other customer balances as a result of the low interest rate environment. During 2020, the decrease in the wealth management business line’s net revenues was partially offset by the activity in the first quarter of 2020 from improved transactional revenues due to the significant re-allocation of customer assets into cash and cash equivalents as clients exited risk markets and increases in other production and fee income during 2020 compared to 2019; and
● a $42.7 million increase in the broker-dealer segment’s structured finance net revenues. During 2020, activity in March 2020 was weaker as demand for structured agency products declined, resulting in a $14.4 million decrease in the business line’s other noninterest income in the first quarter of 2020 compared to the first quarter of 2019. After March 2020, structured finance revenues improved in line with increased volumes reflecting robust activity in mortgage originations combined with improved product demand from the buy-side and other changes in the business line, resulting in a $57.6 million increase in the business line’s other noninterest income for the period from April 1 to December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. As a result, the structured finance business produced a $43.2 million increase in noninterest income during 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
The broker-dealer segment is subject to interest rate risk as a consequence of maintaining inventory positions, trading in interest rate sensitive financial instruments and maintaining a matched stock loan book. Changes in interest rates are likely to have a meaningful impact on our overall financial performance. Our broker-dealer segment has historically earned a significant portion of its revenues from advisory fees upon the successful completion of client transactions, which could be adversely impacted by interest rate volatility. Rapid or significant changes in interest rates could adversely affect the broker-dealer segment’s bond trading, sales, underwriting activities and other interest spread-sensitive activities described below. The broker-dealer segment also receives administrative fees for providing money market and FDIC investment alternatives to clients, which tend to be sensitive to short term interest rates. In addition, the profitability of the broker-dealer segment depends, to an extent, on the spread between revenues earned on customer loans and excess customer cash balances, and the interest expense paid on customer cash balances, as well as the interest revenue earned on trading securities, net of financing costs.
In the broker-dealer segment, interest is earned from securities lending activities, interest charged on customer margin loan balances and interest earned on investment securities used to support sales, underwriting and other customer activities. The decrease in net interest income during 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to decreases in net interest income from our stock lending business, customer margin loans and other customer activities. The decrease in net interest income was partially offset by an increase in net interest earned from the broker-dealer’s taxable securities. The increase in net interest income during 2019, compared with 2018, was primarily due to an increase in net interest earned on trading securities as a result of increases in market interest rates. The increase in net interest income was partially offset by decreases in net interest income from our structured finance operations due to a decline in pool inventory from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019 and decreases in average customer margin balances within the segment’s clearing business of 19% during 2019.
Noninterest income increased during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to increases in securities commissions and fees, investment and securities advisory fees and commissions, and other noninterest income. Noninterest income increased during 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to increases in other noninterest income and investments and securities advisory fees and commissions, partially offset by decreases in securities commissions and fees.
Securities commissions and fees increased during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the increases in commissions earned in our fixed income service line of business of $18.1 million offset by the decreases in commissions earned through the wind-down of our equity capital markets business line, which resulted in a decrease of $5.5 million. Additionally, the overall increase in securities commissions and fees was offset by the decreases in commissions and fees earned by our wealth management business line from declines in our money market and FDIC sweep revenues, primarily in the wealth management business line. Securities commissions and fees decreased during 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to decreases in commissions earned in our retail group and fixed income services business line and fees related to our FDIC insured investment products, as well as commissions earned on insurance and mutual fund transactions, and fees earned from correspondent transactions.
Investment and securities advisory fees and commissions increased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increases in municipal advisory and underwriting transactions. Investment and securities advisory fees and commissions increased during 2019, compared with 2018, primarily due to the increase in the number of issues and the aggregate amount of those issues by our public finance services business line.
Other noninterest income increased during 2020, compared to 2019. The increase during the period was primarily the result of a $43.2 million increase in trading gains earned from our structured finance business line’s derivative activities due to strong year-over-year volumes and robust customer demand despite heightened market volatility in the first quarter of 2020. Additionally, other noninterest income within our fixed income services business line increased $9.5 million during the year associated with both our taxable and municipal securities trading portfolio activities, partially offset by a decrease in our securitized mortgage backed securities portfolio. The increase in other noninterest income during 2019, compared with 2018, was primarily the result of a $102.3 million increase in trading gains earned from our derivative and trading portfolio activities, most notably in our structured finance business, which accounted for $79.2 million of the increase, as well as our fixed income services business line, which accounted for $23.0 million of the increase. The increases in our structured finance business were primarily due to the 77 basis-point decline in the 10-year treasury bond yield during 2019 compared to a 29 basis-point increase during 2018, and a 22% increase in the business line’s TBA mortgage-backed securities volume. The $23.0 million increase in our fixed income services business line was attributable to an improved market environment, improved spreads and a 26% increase in trading volume.
Noninterest expenses increased during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to increases in variable compensation, partially offset by $2.9 million in pre-tax costs associated with the Leadership Changes and efficiency initiative-related charges in 2019 as noted in the “Factors Affecting Results of Operations” section above. Other noninterest expenses increased during the period primarily due to deployment of a new back-office system on June 1, 2020. Noninterest expenses increased during 2019, compared with 2018, primarily due to an increase in variable compensation and the pre-tax costs associated with the Leadership Changes and efficiency initiative-related charges as noted in the “Factors Affecting Results of Operations” section above.
Selected information concerning the broker-dealer segment follows (dollars in thousands).
(1) Total compensation includes the sum of non-variable compensation and benefits and variable compensation. We consider total compensation as a percentage of net revenue to be a key performance measure and indicator of segment profitability.
(2) Pre-tax margin is defined as income before income taxes divided by net revenue. We consider pre-tax margin to be a key performance measure given its use as a profitability metric representing the percentage of net revenue earned that results in a profit.
Mortgage Origination Segment
The following table presents certain information regarding the operating results of our mortgage origination segment (in thousands).
The mortgage lending business is subject to variables that can impact loan origination volume, including seasonal and interest rate fluctuations. Historically, the mortgage origination segment has experienced increased loan origination volume from purchases of homes during the spring and summer, when more people tend to move and buy or sell homes. An increase in mortgage interest rates tends to result in decreased loan origination volume from refinancings, while a decrease in mortgage interest rates tends to result in increased loan origination volume from refinancings. Average mortgage interest rates decreased during both 2020 and 2019, which resulted in refinancing volume as a percentage of total origination volume increasing in each period when compared to 2019 and 2018, respectively. See details regarding refinancing volume in the table below. Changes in mortgage interest rates have historically had a lesser impact on home purchases volume than on refinancing volume. An increase in mortgage interest rates during 2021 could impact the percentage mix of refinancing and purchase volumes relative to total loan origination volume compared to 2020.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during the first quarter of 2020, the FOMC reduced short-term rates by 150 basis points to a range of 0% to 0.25%. Further, 10-year interest rates also declined significantly during the first quarter 2020, which led to a steady decrease in mortgage interest rates during the remainder of the year. This decrease in mortgage interest rates was the primary driver of a significant increase in mortgage loan applications and resulting increases in interest rate lock commitments (“IRLCs”) and loan sales volume. In addition, an increase in average loans sales margin was recognized as a result of PrimeLending managing increased loan origination volumes to a level that could be supported by its loan fulfillment operations and addressing anticipated enhanced credit and liquidity risks triggered by the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, income before income taxes increased $343.3 million, or 530.5%, during 2020, compared with 2019.
The CARES Act provides borrowers the ability to request forbearance of residential mortgage loan payments, placing a significant strain on mortgage servicers as they may be required to fund missed or deferred payments related to loans in forbearance. A significant increase in nationwide forbearance requests has resulted in the reduction of third-party mortgage servicers willing to purchase mortgage servicing rights. As a result of this market dynamic, beginning in the second quarter 2020, we increased the amount of retained servicing on mortgage loan sales. During both the second and third quarters of 2020, PrimeLending retained servicing on 89% of total mortgage loans sold. As forbearance requests leveled off during the latter part of 2020, the third party market for mortgage servicing rights improved, increasing demand, which allowed PrimeLending to reduce retained servicing to 57% of total mortgage loans sold during the fourth quarter 2020. PrimeLending utilizes a third-party to manage its servicing portfolio and we therefore have not experienced additional infrastructure costs to manage the increase in PrimeLending’s servicing portfolio. PrimeLending’s liquidity has not been, and we do not expect that it will be, significantly impacted by recent forbearance requests. In addition, GNMA, Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation have imposed certain restrictions
on loans the agencies will accept under a forbearance agreement, which could result in PrimeLending seeking non-agency investors or choosing to retain these loans.
As average mortgage interest rates decreased between, 2019 and 2020, refinancing volume as a percentage of total origination volume increased from 24.8% during 2019 to 41.6% during 2020. As average mortgage interest rates decreased between 2018 and 2019, refinancing volume as a percentage of total origination volume increased from 13.8% during 2018 to 24.8% during 2019. See details regarding refinancing volume in the table below. A higher refinance percentage could also be driven by a slowing of purchase volume due to the negative impact on new and existing home sales resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. While PrimeLending experienced an increase in purchase volume as a percentage of total loan origination volume between the second and third quarters of 2020, purchase volume as a percentage of total loan origination volume decreased during the fourth quarter of 2020. We are uncertain whether this trend will continue.
The mortgage origination segment primarily originates its mortgage loans through a retail channel, with limited lending through its affiliated business relationships (“ABAs”). For 2020, funded loan volume through ABAs was approximately 7% of the mortgage origination segment’s total loan volume. During the nine months ended September 30, 2020, PrimeLending had a 51% membership interest in four ABAs. On October 1, 2020, the mortgage origination segment divested its interest in one of its ABAs, resulting in three ABAs remaining as of December 31, 2020. We expect total production within the ABA channel to decrease slightly to 6% loan volume of the mortgage origination segment during 2021.
The following table provides further details regarding our mortgage loan originations and sales for the periods indicated below (dollars in thousands).
We consider the mortgage origination segment’s total loan origination volume to be a key performance measure. Loan origination volume is central to the segment’s ability to generate income by originating and selling mortgage loans, resulting in net gains from the sale of loans, other mortgage production income and mortgage loan origination fees. Total loan origination volume is a measure utilized by management, our investors and analysts in assessing market share and growth of the mortgage origination segment.
The mortgage origination segment’s total loan origination volume during 2020 increased 47.4% compared with 2019, while income before income taxes during 2020 increased 530.5%, compared with 2019. The increase in income before income taxes during 2020 was primarily due to an increase in net gains from sale of loans. These changes were partially offset by an increase in compensation that varies with the volume of mortgage loan originations (“variable compensation”), an increase in non-variable compensation, a decrease in change in net fair value of mortgage servicing rights (“MSR”) assets, and an increase in segment operating costs.
The mortgage origination segment’s total loan origination volume increased 13.8% between 2019 and 2018, while income before income taxes during 2019 increased 402.8%, compared with 2018. The increase in income before income taxes during 2019 was primarily due to an increase in the change in net fair value of IRLCs and loans held for sale, an increase in mortgage loan origination fees and other related income, an increase in net gains from sale of loans and a decrease in segment operating costs. These changes were partially offset by an increase in variable compensation, a decrease in change in net fair value of MSR assets, and an increase in net interest expense.
Net interest expense was comprised of interest income earned on loans held for sale, offset by interest incurred on warehouse lines of credit held with the Bank and related intercompany financing costs. The increase in net interest expense during 2020, compared with 2019, included the effects of declining net yields on mortgage loans held for sale.
Noninterest income was comprised of the following (in thousands).
The increases in net gains from sale of loans during 2020, compared with 2019, were primarily a result of an increase in total loan sales volume, in addition to an increase in average loan sales margin. Since PrimeLending sells substantially all mortgage loans it originates to various investors in the secondary market, the increases in loan sales volume during 2020 are consistent with increases in loan origination volume during 2020. The increase in average loans sales margin was primarily driven by PrimeLending managing increased loan origination volumes to a level that could be supported by its loan fulfillment operations and addressing anticipated enhanced credit and liquidity risks triggered by the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increases in mortgage loan origination fees during 2020, compared with 2019, were primarily the result of an increase in loan origination volume, partially offset by a decrease in average mortgage loan origination fees.
We consider the mortgage origination segment’s net gains from sale of loans margin, in basis points, to be a key performance measure. Net gains from sale of loans margin is defined as net gains from sale of loans divided by loan sales volume. The net gains from sale of loans is central to the segment’s generation of income. The mortgage origination segment’s net gains from sale of loans margins, including loans sold to the banking segment, during 2020, 2019 and 2018 were 406 bps, 324 bps and 328 bps, respectively. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the mortgage origination segment originated approximately $193 million, $149 million and $97 million, respectively, in loans on behalf of the banking segment, representing up to 1% of PrimeLending’s total loan origination volume during each respective year. These loans were sold to the banking segment at par. For origination services provided, the mortgage origination segment was reimbursed direct origination costs associated with these loans, in addition to payment of a correspondent fee. The reimbursed origination costs and correspondent fee are included in the mortgage origination segment operating results, and the correspondent fees are eliminated in consolidation. The impact of loans sold to the banking segment at par was to reduce this margin 3 bps in 2019, while the impact on 2020 and 2018 was de minimis. Loan volumes to be originated on behalf of and retained by the banking segment are evaluated each quarter. We anticipate an increase in loans sold to the banking segment during 2021 as compared to 2020. The mortgage origination segment has been approved to sell up to 5% of its total loan volume to the banking segment. In March 2020, the mortgage origination segment executed a letter of intent with the banking segment to purchase mortgage loans previously sold to the banking segment with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $210 million. Such original sales of approximately $121 million and $91 million are reflected in the previous mortgage loan details table within the mortgage loan sales volume to the banking segment in 2020 and 2019, respectively. When these loans were sold at par by the mortgage origination segment, the banking segment’s intent was to hold these loans for
investment. The mortgage origination segment completed the repurchase of these loans from the banking segment and in turn sold the loans to investors in the secondary market during the second quarter of 2020. This sale is reflected in the previous mortgage loan details table within the mortgage loan sales volume to external third parties in 2020.
Noninterest income included changes in the net fair value of the mortgage origination segment’s IRLCs and loans held for sale and the related activity associated with forward commitments used by the mortgage origination segment to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its IRLCs and loans held for sale. The increase during 2020 was the result of an increase in the total volume of individual IRLCs and loans held for sale, as well as an increase in the average value of individual IRLCs and loans held for sale. The decreases during 2019 and 2018 were the result of decreases in the average value and the total volume of individual IRLCs and loans held for sale at the end of these periods.
The mortgage origination segment sells substantially all mortgage loans it originates to various investors in the secondary market, historically with the majority servicing released. In addition, the mortgage origination segment originates loans on behalf of the Bank. The mortgage origination segment’s determination of whether to retain or release servicing on mortgage loans it sells is impacted by, among other things, changes in mortgage interest rates, and refinancing and market activity. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the mortgage origination segment retained servicing on approximately 67%, 6% and 13% of loans sold, respectively. The increase in rates of retained servicing during 2020 was due to the reduction in third party servicing outlets during the second quarter of 2020 resulting from the impact of the CARES Act. The CARES Act permits borrowers of federally-backed mortgage loans to forbear payments, which could negatively impact servicers’ liquidity and their ability to purchase servicing. We expect that PrimeLending will retain servicing on approximately 50% to 60% of its mortgage loan sales during 2021. The related MSR asset was valued at $144.2 million on $14.7 billion of serviced loan volume at December 31, 2020, compared with a value of $56.7 million on $5.1 billion of serviced loan volume at December 31, 2019. The mortgage origination segment may, from time to time, manage its MSR asset through different strategies, including varying the percentage of mortgage loans sold servicing released and opportunistically selling MSR assets. The mortgage origination segment has also retained servicing on certain loans sold to the banking segment. Gains and losses associated with such sales to the banking segment and the related MSR asset are eliminated in consolidation. The mortgage origination segment uses derivative financial instruments, including U.S. Treasury bond futures and options, as a means to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its MSR asset. Changes in the net fair value of the MSR asset and the related derivatives associated with normal customer payments, changes in discount rates, prepayment speed assumptions and customer payoffs resulted in net losses as noted in the table above. Additionally, net servicing income was $15.0 million, $12.3 million and $10.9 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In October 2020, February 2020, and March 2018, the mortgage origination segment sold MSR assets of $18.1 million, $18.7 million, and $9.3 million, respectively, which represented $2.3 billion, $1.5 billion, and $834.3 million, respectively, of its serviced loan volume at the time. There were no sales of MSR assets during 2019. On February 12, 2021, the mortgage origination segment executed a letter of intent to sell MSR assets of approximately $53 million, which represented approximately $5 billion of its current serviced loan volume. The MSR sale is scheduled to close in March 2021.
Noninterest expenses were comprised of the items set forth in the table below (in thousands).
Total employees’ compensation and benefits accounted for the majority of the noninterest expenses incurred during all periods presented. Specifically, variable compensation comprised 69.0% and 60.4% of the total employees’ compensation and benefits expenses during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Variable compensation increased $152.2 million during 2020, compared to 2019, and increased $36.9 million during 2019, compared with 2018. The increases in the percentage concentration of variable compensation and benefits were primarily due to an increase in loan origination volume. Variable compensation, which is primarily driven by loan origination volume, tends to fluctuate to a greater degree than loan origination volume because mortgage loan originator and fulfillment staff incentive compensation plans are structured to pay at increasing rates as higher monthly volume tiers are achieved. However, certain other incentive compensation plans driven by non-mortgage production criteria may alter this trend. In addition to an increase in loan origination volume primarily driving the increase in variable compensation and benefits, an increase in the average
incentive rate paid and the impact of incentive plans driven by non-mortgage production criteria contributed to the increase in variable compensation.
While total loan origination volumes increased 47.4% during 2020, compared with 2019, the aggregate non-variable compensation and benefits of the mortgage origination segment increased by 9.3%. The aforementioned increase during 2020, compared with 2019, was primarily due to an increase in overtime expense incurred due to increased loan volume and an increase in salaries resulting from increased underwriting and loan fulfillment staff, to support the increase in loan origination volume beginning in the second quarter of 2020.
While total loan origination volumes increased 13.8% during 2019, compared with 2018, the mortgage origination segment’s operating costs decreased 5.0%. The decrease in segment operating costs during 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily due to decreases in non-variable compensation and related benefits, depreciation, professional fees, and business development. These decreases were partially offset by increases in loan origination costs, as well as software license and maintenance expense. The decrease in non-variable compensation and benefits during 2019, compared to 2018, was due to reductions in corporate headcount, loan processing, and loan fulfillment primarily resulting from PrimeLending’s cost reduction plan initiated during the third quarter of 2018, partially offset by $1.25 million in pre-tax costs associated with the Leadership Changes discussed in the “Factors Affecting Results of Operations” section.
In exchange for a higher interest rate, customers may opt to have PrimeLending pay certain costs associated with the origination of their mortgage loan (“lender paid closing costs”). Fluctuations in lender paid closing costs are not always aligned with fluctuations in loan origination volume. Other loan pricing conditions, including the mortgage loan interest rate, loan origination fees paid by the customer, and a customer’s willingness to pay closing costs, may influence fluctuations in lender paid closing costs.
Between January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2020, the mortgage origination segment sold mortgage loans totaling $137.2 billion. These loans were sold under sales contracts that generally include provisions that hold the mortgage origination segment responsible for errors or omissions relating to its representations and warranties that loans sold meet certain requirements, including representations as to underwriting standards and the validity of certain borrower representations in connection with the loan. In addition, the sales contracts typically require the refund of purchased servicing rights plus certain investor servicing costs if a loan experiences an early payment default. While the mortgage origination segment sold loans prior to 2011, it does not anticipate experiencing significant losses in the future on loans originated prior to 2011 because of investor claims under these provisions of its sales contracts.
When a claim for indemnification of a loan sold is made by an agency, investor, or other party, the mortgage origination segment evaluates the claim and determines if the claim can be satisfied through additional documentation or other deliverables. If the claim is valid and cannot be satisfied in that manner, the mortgage origination segment negotiates with the claimant to reach a settlement of the claim. Settlements typically result in either the repurchase of a loan or reimbursement to the claimant for losses incurred on the loan.
Following is a summary of the mortgage origination segment’s claims resolution activity relating to loans sold between January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands).
(1) Losses incurred include refunded purchased servicing rights.
For each loan it concludes its obligation to a claimant is both probable and reasonably estimable, the mortgage origination segment has established a specific claims indemnification liability reserve. An additional indemnification liability reserve has been established for probable agency, investor or other party losses that may have been incurred, but not yet reported to the mortgage origination segment based upon a reasonable estimate of such losses. In addition to other factors, the
mortgage origination segment has considered that GNMA, FNMA and FHLMC have imposed certain restrictions on loans the agencies will accept under a forbearance agreement resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, which could increase the magnitude of indemnification losses on these loans.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the mortgage origination segment’s total indemnification liability reserve totaled $21.5 million and $11.8 million, respectively. The related provision for indemnification losses was $11.2 million, $3.1 million, and $3.2 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
On October 23, 2018, PrimeLending entered into a Settlement Agreement and an Indemnification Agreement with the DOJ and HUD, respectively. These agreements provide for payments of $13.5 million, in the aggregate, to the DOJ and HUD. In exchange for these payments, each of the DOJ and HUD released any civil claims they may have related to certain loans originated by PrimeLending. The payments were made to the DOJ and HUD during the fourth quarter of 2018, and the indemnification liability related to this matter was released. The mortgage origination segment’s operating results or financial condition will not be impacted by this matter in future periods.
Corporate
The following table presents certain financial information regarding the operating results of corporate (in thousands).
Corporate includes certain activities not allocated to specific business segments. These activities include holding company financing and investing activities, merchant banking investment opportunities and management and administrative services to support the overall operations of the Company. Hilltop’s merchant banking investment activities include the identification of attractive opportunities for capital deployment in companies engaged in non-financial activities through its merchant bank subsidiary, Hilltop Opportunity Partners LLC.
As a holding company, Hilltop’s primary investment objectives are to support capital deployment for organic growth and to preserve capital to be deployed through acquisitions, dividend payments and potential stock repurchases. Investment and interest income earned during 2020 was primarily comprised of dividend income from merchant banking investment activities, in addition to interest income earned on intercompany notes.
Interest expense during 2020, 2019 and 2018 was primarily associated with recurring annual interest expense of $7.7 million incurred on our $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5% senior notes due 2025 (“Senior Notes”). During 2020, we incurred interest expense of $7.9 million on our $200 million aggregate principal amount of Subordinated Notes, which we issued in May 2020. Additionally, we incurred interest expense of $2.8 million, $3.9 million and $3.7 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, on junior subordinated debentures of $67.0 million issued by PCC (the “Debentures”).
Noninterest income from continuing operations during 2020 and 2019 included activity related to our investment in a new real estate development in Dallas’ University Park, Hilltop Plaza, which also serves as headquarters for both Hilltop and the Bank, and net noninterest income associated with activity within our merchant bank subsidiary. Noninterest income during 2018 included a $5.3 million pre-tax gain on the sale of a merchant bank investment, partially offset by a $2.5 million charge on a legacy merchant bank equity investment as a result of our periodic fair value assessment, as well as activity related to the Hilltop Plaza investment.
Noninterest expenses from continuing operations were primarily comprised of employees’ compensation and benefits, occupancy expenses and professional fees, including corporate governance, legal and transaction costs. During 2020, compared with 2019, the increase in noninterest expenses was primarily due to increased employees’ compensation and benefits costs associated with the consolidation of certain common back office functions into corporate and improved operating results, and professional fees, partially offset by a decrease of $6.8 million of aggregate pre-tax costs associated with the Leadership Changes and efficiency initiative-related charges discussed in the “Factors Affecting Comparability
of Results of Operations” section. During 2019, compared with 2018, the $14.3 million increase in noninterest expenses was primarily due to Core System Improvements and the Leadership Changes and efficiency initiative-related charges as previously discussed.
Results from Discontinued Operations
Insurance Segment
As previously discussed, on June 30, 2020, we completed the sale of NLC. Accordingly, insurance segment results and its assets and liabilities have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements. Additional details are presented in Note 3, Discontinued Operations, in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Income from discontinued operations before income taxes was $2.1 million, $17.6 million and $5.8 million during 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Corporate
As a result of the previously noted sale of NLC on June 30, 2020 for cash proceeds of $154.1 million, Hilltop recognized an aggregate pre-tax gain on sale within discontinued operations of corporate of $36.8 million, net of customary transaction costs of $5.1 million. The resulting book gain from this sale transaction was not recognized for tax purposes pursuant to the rules under the Internal Revenue Code. Income from discontinued operations before income taxes was $36.8 million.
Financial Condition
The following discussion contains a more detailed analysis of our financial condition at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.
Securities Portfolio
At December 31, 2020, investment securities consisted of securities of the U.S. Treasury, U.S. government and its agencies, obligations of municipalities and other political subdivisions, primarily in the State of Texas, as well as mortgage-backed, corporate debt, and equity securities. We may categorize investments as trading, available for sale, held to maturity and equity securities.
Trading securities are bought and held principally for the purpose of selling them in the near term and are carried at fair value, marked to market through operations and held at the Bank and the Hilltop Broker-Dealers. Securities classified as available for sale may, from time to time, be bought and sold in response to changes in market interest rates, changes in securities’ prepayment risk, increases in loan demand, general liquidity needs and to take advantage of market conditions that create more economically attractive returns. Such securities are carried at estimated fair value, with unrealized gains and losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Equity investments are carried at fair value, with all changes in fair value recognized in net income. Securities are classified as held to maturity based on the intent and ability of our management, at the time of purchase, to hold such securities to maturity. These securities are carried at amortized cost.
The table below summarizes our securities portfolio from continuing operations (in thousands).
We had net unrealized gains of $26.3 million and $11.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared with net unrealized losses of $10.3 million at December 31, 2018, related to the available for sale investment portfolio. We had net unrealized gains of $14.7 million and $2.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared with net unrealized losses associated with the securities held to maturity portfolio of $9.9 million at December 31, 2018. Equity securities included net unrealized gains of $0.1 million at both December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, compared with net unrealized gains of $0.1 million at December 31, 2018.
Banking Segment
The banking segment’s securities portfolio plays a role in the management of our interest rate sensitivity and generates additional interest income. In addition, the securities portfolio is used to meet collateral requirements for public and trust deposits, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and other purposes. The available for sale and equity securities portfolios serve as a source of liquidity. Historically, the Bank’s policy has been to invest primarily in securities of the U.S. government and its agencies, obligations of municipalities in the State of Texas and other high grade fixed income securities to minimize credit risk. At December 31, 2020, the banking segment’s securities portfolio of $1.8 billion was comprised of trading securities of $1.1 million, available for sale securities of $1.5 billion, held to maturity securities of $311.9 million and equity securities of $0.1 million, in addition to $14.8 million of other investments included in other assets within the consolidated balance sheets.
Broker-Dealer Segment
The broker-dealer segment holds securities to support sales, underwriting and other customer activities. The interest rate risk inherent in holding these securities is managed by setting and monitoring limits on the size and duration of positions and on the length of time the securities can be held. The Hilltop Broker-Dealers are required to carry their securities at fair value and record changes in the fair value of the portfolio in operations. Accordingly, the securities portfolio of the Hilltop Broker-Dealers included trading securities of $693.2 million at December 31, 2020. In addition, the Hilltop Broker-Dealers enter into transactions that represent commitments to purchase and deliver securities at prevailing future market prices to facilitate customer transactions and satisfy such commitments. Accordingly, the Hilltop Broker-Dealers’ ultimate obligation may exceed the amount recognized in the financial statements. These securities, which are carried at fair value and reported as securities sold, not yet purchased in the consolidated balance sheets, had a value of $79.8 million at December 31, 2020.
Corporate
At December 31, 2020, the corporate portfolio included other investments, including those associated with merchant banking, of $39.0 million in other assets within the consolidated balance sheets.
Allowance for Credit Losses for Available for Sale Securities and Held to Maturity Securities
We have evaluated available for sale debt securities that are in an unrealized loss position and have determined that any declines in value are unrelated to credit loss and related to changes in market interest rates since purchase. None of the available for sale debt securities held were past due at December 31, 2020. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had evaluated our held to maturity debt securities, considering the current credit ratings and recognized losses, and determined the potential credit loss to be minimal. With respect to these securities, we considered the risk of credit loss to be negligible, and therefore, no allowance was recognized on the debt securities portfolio at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the estimated maturities of our debt securities, excluding trading securities, at December 31, 2020. Contractual maturities may be different (dollars in thousands, yields are tax-equivalent).
Loan Portfolio
Consolidated loans held for investment are detailed in the tables below, classified by portfolio segment.
Banking Segment
The loan portfolio constitutes the primary earning asset of the banking segment and typically offers the best alternative for obtaining the maximum interest spread above the banking segment’s cost of funds. The overall economic strength of the banking segment generally parallels the quality and yield of its loan portfolio.
The banking segment’s total loans held for investment, net of the allowance for credit losses, were $9.6 billion, $8.6 billion and $7.5 billion at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The banking segment’s loan portfolio includes warehouse lines of credit extended to PrimeLending of $3.3 billion, of which $2.5 billion, $1.8 billion and $1.2 billion was drawn at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Amounts advanced against the warehouse lines of credit are eliminated from net loans held for investment on our consolidated balance sheets. The banking segment does not generally participate in syndicated loan transactions and has no foreign loans in its portfolio.
The banking segment’s loan portfolio included $486.7 million in PPP loans at December 31, 2020. While these loans have terms up to 60 months, borrowers can apply for forgiveness of these loans with the SBA. Through February 12, 2021, the SBA had approved approximately 1,500 PPP forgiveness applications totaling approximately $294 million, with PPP loans of approximately $171 million pending SBA review and approval. We anticipate a significant amount of these remaining loans pending approval to be forgiven over the next two quarters. The forgiveness or payoff of these loans would generate an increase in interest income as we would recognize the remaining unamortized origination fee at the time of payoff.
At December 31, 2020, the banking segment had loan concentrations (loans to borrowers engaged in similar activities) that exceeded 10% of total loans in its real estate portfolio. The areas of concentration within our real estate portfolio were non-construction commercial real estate loans and construction and land development loans, which represented 43.2% and 11.4%, respectively, of the banking segment’s total loans held for investment at December 31, 2020. The banking segment’s loan concentrations were within regulatory guidelines at December 31, 2020.
The following table provides information regarding the maturities of the banking segment’s real estate and commercial and industrial gross loans held for investment, net of unearned income (in thousands).
In the table above, real estate includes commercial real estate, construction and land development and 1-4 family residential loans. Commercial and industrial includes amounts advanced against the warehouse lines of credit extended to PrimeLending, mortgage warehouse lending and PPP loans. Floating rate loans that have reached their applicable rate floor or ceiling are classified as fixed rate loans rather than floating rate loans. As of December 31, 2020, floating rate loans totaling $2.86 billion had reached their applicable rate floor. The majority of floating rate loans carry an interest rate tied to The Wall Street Journal Prime Rate, as published in The Wall Street Journal.
Broker-Dealer Segment
The loan portfolio of the broker-dealer segment consists primarily of loans to customers and correspondents. These loans are collateralized by the securities purchased or by other securities owned by the clients and, because of collateral coverage ratios, are believed to present minimal collectability exposure. Additionally, these loans are subject to a number of regulatory requirements as well as the Hilltop Broker-Dealers’ internal policies. The broker-dealer segment’s total loans held for investment, net of the allowance for credit losses, were $436.8 million, $576.5 million and $578.2 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease during 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily attributable to a decrease of $54.1 million, or 17.4%, in customer margin accounts and a decrease of $84.0 million, or 31.8%, in receivables from correspondents. The decrease during 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily attributable to a decrease of $22.3 million in customer margin accounts, partially offset by an increase of $20.5 million in receivables from correspondents.
Mortgage Origination Segment
The loan portfolio of the mortgage origination segment consists of loans held for sale, primarily single-family residential mortgages funded through PrimeLending, and IRLCs with customers pursuant to which we agree to originate a mortgage loan on a future date at an agreed-upon interest rate. The components of the mortgage origination segment’s loans held for sale and IRLCs are as follows (in thousands).
The mortgage origination segment uses forward commitments to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its loans held for sale and IRLCs. The notional amounts of these forward commitments at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $4.0 billion, $2.2 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively, while the related estimated fair values were ($28.0) million, ($3.8) million and ($11.6) million, respectively.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans
For additional information regarding the allowance for credit losses, refer to the section captioned “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” included in this Form 10-K.
Loans Held for Investment
The Bank has lending policies in place with the goal of establishing an asset portfolio that will provide a return on stockholders’ equity sufficient to maintain capital to assets ratios that meet or exceed established regulations. Loans are underwritten with careful consideration of the borrower’s financial condition, the specific purpose of the loan, the primary sources of repayment and any collateral pledged to secure the loan.
Underwriting procedures address financial components based on the size and complexity of the credit. The financial components include, but are not limited to, current and projected cash flows, shock analysis and/or stress testing, and trends in appropriate balance sheet and statement of operations ratios. The Bank’s loan policy provides specific underwriting guidelines by portfolio segment, including commercial and industrial, real estate, construction and land development, and consumer loans. The guidelines for each individual portfolio segment set forth permissible and impermissible loan types. With respect to each loan type, the guidelines within the Bank’s loan policy provide minimum requirements for the underwriting factors listed above. The Bank’s underwriting procedures also include an analysis of any collateral and guarantor. Collateral analysis includes a complete description of the collateral, as well as determined values, monitoring requirements, loan to value ratios, concentration risk, appraisal requirements and other information relevant to the collateral being pledged. Guarantor analysis includes liquidity and cash flow evaluation based on the significance with which the guarantors are expected to serve as secondary repayment sources.
The Bank maintains a loan review department that reviews credit risk in response to both external and internal factors that potentially impact the performance of either individual loans or the overall loan portfolio. The loan review process reviews the creditworthiness of borrowers and determines compliance with the loan policy. The loan review process complements and reinforces the risk identification and assessment decisions made by lenders and credit personnel. Results of these reviews are presented to management and the Bank’s board of directors.
The allowance for credit losses for loans held for investment represents management’s best estimate of all expected credit losses over the expected contractual life of our existing portfolio. Determining the appropriateness of the allowance is complex and requires judgment by management about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Subsequent evaluations of the then-existing loan portfolio, in light of the factors then prevailing, may result in significant changes in the allowance for credit losses in those future periods. Such future changes in the allowance for credit losses are expected to be volatile given dependence upon, among other things, the portfolio composition and quality, as well as the impact of significant drivers, including prepayment assumptions and macroeconomic conditions and forecasts.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a weak labor market and weak overall economic conditions that will affect borrowers across our lending portfolios and significant judgment is required to estimate the severity and duration of the current economic downturn, as well as its potential impact on borrower defaults and loss severity. In particular, macroeconomic conditions and forecasts regarding the duration and severity of the economic downturn are rapidly changing and remain highly uncertain as the resurgence of COVID-19 cases evolves nationally and in key geographies. It is difficult to predict exactly how borrower behavior will be impacted by these economic conditions as the effectiveness of government stimulus, customer relief and enhanced unemployment benefits should help mitigate in the short term, but the extent and duration of government stimulus as well as performance of payment deferral programs remains uncertain.
One of the most significant judgments involved in estimating our allowance for credit losses relates to the macroeconomic forecasts used to estimate credit losses over the reasonable and supportable forecast period. To determine the allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2020, we utilized a single macroeconomic baseline scenario published by a third party in December 2020.
The following table summarizes the U.S. Real Gross Domestic Product (“GDP”) growth rates and unemployment rate assumptions used in our baseline economic forecast to determine our best estimate of expected credit losses.
The baseline economic forecast used to determine our best estimate of expected credit losses as of March 31, 2020 assumed a severe, but short U.S. recession during the first half of 2020 with growth rates down, followed by a strong economic recovery as businesses re-open, consumer spending increases during the second half of 2020 and positive GDP growth rates. The unemployment rates were expected to remain elevated into the fourth quarter of 2021, then revert to historical data in the fourth quarter of 2022. Management’s recovery assumptions included some expected benefit of COVID-19 related fiscal and monetary stimulus measures and the expected beneficial impacts of the CARES Act and certain regulatory interagency guidance.
As of June 30, 2020, our best estimate of expected credit losses used a baseline economic forecast that continued to assume the Federal Reserve target range of the federal funds rate at 0% to 0.25% into 2023, but was updated for continued deterioration in the U.S. economic outlook due to COVID-19 conditions. Compared to assumptions as of March 31, 2020, GDP growth rates declined significantly in the second quarter of 2020, but reflected higher recovery in the third quarter of 2020. Unemployment rates were forecasted to be at higher levels than those assumed as of March 31, 2020 into the fourth quarter of 2022. The timing of the release in early June 2020 of the third party’s baseline forecast utilized did not assume a second wave of COVID-19 cases into the summer months, so the model results as of June 30, 2020 were qualitatively adjusted to consider recent developments in Texas, uncertainty in Texas’ economic re-opening plan and such impacts on our most adversely impacted loan portfolios. Qualitative adjustments considered both significant government relief programs and stimulus, as well as certain model limitations with the current economic forecast and recent commodity price shocks not observed in historical data.
As of September 30, 2020, our near-term baseline economic forecast improved from June 30, 2020, reflecting better than expected economic data as states progressed with their re-opening plans. Projected real GDP growth rates were revised for the third quarter of 2020 as economic data suggested the assumed peak-to-trough decline in real GDP during the second quarter of 2020 was significant, but not as severe as expected. As such, projected real GDP growth in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 were revised upward to reflect monthly recovery trends in consumer and government spending observed in July and August. Projected near-term unemployment rates were adjusted lower to reflect the initial phase of the labor market recovery as states re-opened and temporarily furloughed workers are recalled to their jobs. Our interest rate expectations continued to assume monetary policy supported the Federal Reserve target range of the federal funds rate at 0% to 0.25% into late 2023. However, baseline assumptions around fiscal policy and additional government
stimulus were revised lower as it was uncertain whether additional stimulus legislation would be passed before early 2021 and how its delay would affect our most adversely impacted loan portfolios.
As of December 31, 2020, our near-term baseline economic forecast improved from September 30, 2020, reflecting better than expected economic data and approval of additional government stimulus earlier than expected. As such, projected real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2020 was revised upward. However, we revised our near-term 2021 real GDP forecast to reflect approximately $900 billion of additional stimulus compared to $1.5 trillion planned as of September 30, 2020. Unemployment rate forecasts were adjusted lower based on economic data observed in October and November 2020, as well as recent COVID vaccine approvals showing progress towards the next phase of labor market recovery. Forecasts for commercial real estate prices nationally were updated lower as of December 31, 2020 to reflect declines through 2022 and recovery to pre-COVID levels in late 2024. Prior quarter forecasts as of September 30, 2020 assumed declines through 2021 and recovery to pre-COVID levels in mid-2023. Our interest rate expectations continued to assume monetary policy supported the Federal Reserve target range of the federal funds rate at 0% to 0.25% into late 2023.
Since December 31, 2019, our baseline economic forecast changed significantly year-over-year in response to weak economic conditions caused by the COVID pandemic as developments occurred rapidly in February and March 2020. As of December 31, 2019, we assumed the U.S. economy was in the late stages of the economic cycle with unemployment rates near historical lows of 3.6% increasing to 3.8% in Q4 2020 and reverting to historical data in the fourth quarter of 2022. Downside risks to the economy were concerns over international trade war between the U.S. and its trading partners and potential fallout from a Brexit in 2020. Interest rate expectations assumed one rate cut in 2020 with the Federal Reserve target range of the federal funds rate at 1.25% to 1.50% before reverting to historical data in 2023. In response to the COVID pandemic, the Federal Reserve twice cut federal funds rate targets in March 2020 to 0% to 0.25% with interest rate expectations as of December 31, 2020 unchanged until late 2023. Several U.S. fiscal and monetary policy changes during early 2020 were enacted to counter a severe, but short U.S. recession during the first half of 2020 and support a strong economic recovery during the second half of 2020 with U.S. budget deficits increasing to more than $3 trillion during the year. U.S. unemployment rates reached 14.8% in April 2020 before declining to 6.7% as of December 31, 2020, which is 3.1% higher than the unemployment rate as of December 31, 2019. Annualized real GDP growth rates declined -31.4% in Q2 2020 and increased 33.4% in Q3 2020. The U.S. presidential election later in 2020 resulted in several changes, as Presidential Candidate Joe Biden won the electoral vote to replace President Donald Trump in 2021 and majority control of the U.S. Congress moved from Republican to Democratic parties. As economic growth slowed during Q4 2020, additional government stimulus of approximately $900 billion was approved.
As previously discussed, we adopted the new CECL standard and recorded transition adjustment entries that resulted in an allowance for credit losses for loans held for investment of $73.7 million as of January 1, 2020, an increase of $12.6 million. This increase reflected credit losses of $18.9 million from the expansion of the loss horizon to life of loan and also takes into account forecasts of expected future macroeconomic conditions, partially offset by the elimination of the non-credit component within the historical allowance related to previously categorized PCI loans of $6.3 million. This increase, net of tax, was largely reflected within the banking segment and included a decrease of $5.7 million to opening retained earnings at January 1, 2020.
During 2020, the significant build in the allowance included provision for credit losses on individually evaluated loans of $20.2 million, while the provision for credit losses on expected losses of collectively evaluated loans accounted for $76.1 million of the total provision primarily due to the identified changes in the Bank’s loan portfolio composition and credit quality and increase in the expected lifetime credit losses under CECL attributable to the deteriorating economic outlook associated with the impact of the market disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The change in the allowance for credit losses during 2020 was primarily attributable to the Bank and also reflected other factors including, but not limited to, loan growth, loan mix, and changes in risk rating grades, macroeconomic factor assumptions and qualitative factors. The change in the allowance during 2020 was also impacted by net charge-offs of $21.1 million, primarily associated with loans specifically reserved for during the first quarter of 2020.
As discussed under the section entitled “Loan Portfolio” earlier in this Item 7, the Bank’s actions, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, included supporting our impacted banking clients experiencing an increased level of risk due to the COVID-19 pandemic through loan modifications. The significant build in the allowance included provision for credit losses associated with this deteriorating economic outlook and resulted in an allowance for credit losses as a percentage of our total loan portfolio, excluding margin loans in the broker-dealer segment and banking segment mortgage warehouse lending and PPP lending programs, of 2.48%.
The respective distribution of the allowance for credit losses as a percentage of our total loan portfolio and total active loan modifications, excluding margin loans in the broker-dealer segment and banking segment mortgage warehouse lending and PPP lending programs, are presented in the following table (dollars in thousands).
(1) Commercial and industrial portfolio amounts reflect balances excluding broker-dealer segment margin loans and banking segment mortgage warehouse lending and PPP loans.
Allowance Model Sensitivity
Our allowance model was designed to capture the historical relationship between economic and portfolio changes. As such, evaluating shifts in individual portfolio attributes or macroeconomic variables in isolation may not be indicative of past or future performance. It is difficult to estimate how potential changes in any one factor or input might affect the overall allowance for credit losses because we consider a wide variety of factors and inputs in the allowance for credit losses estimate. Changes in the factors and inputs considered may not occur at the same rate and may not be consistent across all geographies or product types, and changes in factors and input may be directionally inconsistent, such that improvement in one factor may offset deterioration in others.
However, to consider the sensitivity of credit loss estimates to alternative macroeconomic forecasts, we compared the Company’s allowance for credit loss estimates as of December 31, 2020, excluding loans in the broker-dealer segment margin, the banking segment mortgage warehouse, and PPP lending programs, with modeled results using both upside (“S1”) and downside (“S3”) economic scenario forecasts published by Moody’s Analytics.
Compared to our baseline economic forecast, the upside scenario assumes consumer and business confidence increases as successful developments in vaccines and medical treatments slow the progression of the virus and most businesses affected by local restrictions reopen earlier than expected. Real GDP growth is expected to grow 5.1% in the first quarter of 2021, 8.0% in the second quarter of 2021, 7.0% in the third quarter of 2021 and 8.7% in the fourth quarter of 2021. Average unemployment rates decline to 5.0% by the end of 2021 and 3.8% by the end of 2022. Monetary and fiscal policy assumptions include the Federal Reserve maintaining a near 0% target for the federal funds rate through mid-2022 and $900 billion of additional stimulus payments are approved consistent with the baseline economic forecast.
Compared to our baseline economic forecast, the downside scenario assumes consumer and business confidence continues to decline as infections rise, while consumer concerns regarding vaccines and medical treatments increase in the short-term. As the number of new cases rise, some nonessential businesses are forced to close again, and most businesses affected by local restrictions reopen slower than expected. Real GDP growth is expected to decrease 4.9% in the first quarter of 2021, 3.2% in the second quarter of 2021 and 0.3% in the third quarter of 2021, then is expected to grow 2.3% in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2.3% in the first quarter of 2022. Average unemployment rates increase to 9.8% by the fourth quarter of 2021 and improve modestly to 8.6% by the end of 2022. Unemployment is expected to remain elevated, but improve to 6.4% in the fourth quarter of 2023 and reverts to historical average rates over time. Monetary and fiscal policy assumptions include the Federal Reserve maintaining a near 0% target for the federal funds rate through early 2025, while disagreements in Congress prevent any additional stimulus from being enacted at all, resulting in no expanded programs for unemployment insurance benefits or state and local governments.
The impact of applying all of the assumptions of the upside economic scenario during the reasonable and supportable forecast period would have resulted in a decrease in the allowance for credit losses of approximately $26 million or a weighted average expected loss rate of 1.77% as a percentage of our total loan portfolio, excluding margin loans in the broker-dealer segment and the banking segment mortgage warehouse lending and PPP lending programs.
The impact of applying all of the assumptions of the downside economic scenario during the reasonable and supportable forecast period would have resulted in an increase in the allowance for credit losses of approximately $94 million or a weighted average expected loss rate of 3.83% as a percentage of our total loan portfolio, excluding margin loans in the broker-dealer segment and the banking segment mortgage warehouse lending and PPP lending programs.
This analysis relates only to the modeled credit loss estimates and is not intended to estimate changes in the overall allowance for credit losses as they do not reflect any potential changes in the adjustment to the quantitative calculation, which would also be influenced by the judgment management applies to the modeled lifetime loss estimates to reflect the uncertainty and imprecision of these modeled lifetime loss estimates based on then-current circumstances and conditions. It also did not consider impacts from recent Bank deferral and customer accommodation efforts or government fiscal and monetary stimulus measures.
Our allowance for credit losses reflects our best estimate of current expected credit losses, which is highly dependent on the path of the virus and expectations around the development of reliable vaccines and medical treatments. We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related policy measures on the economy and if pace and vigor of the expected recovery is worse than expected, further meaningful provisions could be required. Future allowance for credit losses may vary considerably for these reasons.
Allowance Activity
The following tables present the activity in our allowance for credit losses within our loan portfolio for the periods presented (in thousands). Substantially all of the activity shown below occurred within the banking segment.
The distribution of the allowance for credit losses among loan types and the percentage of the loans for that type to gross loans, excluding unearned income, within our loan portfolio is presented in the tables below (dollars in thousands).
The following table summarizes historical levels of the allowance for credit losses on loans held for investment, distributed by portfolio segment (in thousands).
The increase in the allowance for credit losses for loans held for investment subsequent to December 31, 2019 in the table above was primarily attributable to the adoption of the new CECL standard as of January 1, 2020 and a deteriorating economic outlook associated with the impact of the market disruption caused by COVID-19 conditions. As previously noted, CECL requires that we reflect the expansion of the loss horizon to life of loan and take into account forecasts of expected future macroeconomic conditions in our determination of the allowance for credit losses.
Unfunded Loan Commitments
In order to estimate the allowance for credit losses on unfunded loan commitments, the Bank uses a process similar to that used in estimating the allowance for credit losses on the funded portion. The allowance is based on the estimated exposure at default, multiplied by the lifetime probability of default grade and loss given default grade for that particular loan segment. The Bank estimates expected losses by calculating a commitment usage factor based on industry usage factors. The commitment usage factor is applied over the relevant contractual period. Loss factors from the underlying loans to which commitments are related are applied to the results of the usage calculation to estimate any liability for credit losses related for each loan type. The expected losses on unfunded commitments align with statistically calculated parameters used to calculate the allowance for credit losses on the funded portion. Letters of credit are not currently reserved because they are issued primarily as credit enhancements and the likelihood of funding is low.
Changes in the allowance for credit losses for loans with off-balance sheet credit exposures are shown below (in thousands).
At December 31, 2020, the reserve for unfunded commitments was $8.4 million, compared to $2.1 million and $2.4 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As previously discussed, we adopted the new CECL standard and recorded a transition adjustment entry that resulted in an allowance for credit losses of $5.9 million as of January 1, 2020. During 2020, the increase in the reserve for unfunded commitments was primarily due to economic uncertainties associated with the impact of the market disruption caused by COVID-19 conditions.
Potential Problem Loans
Potential problem loans consist of loans that are performing in accordance with contractual terms but for which management has concerns about the ability of an obligor to continue to comply with repayment terms because of the obligor’s potential operating or financial difficulties. Management monitors these loans and reviews their performance on a regular basis. Potential problem loans contain potential weaknesses that could improve, persist or further deteriorate. If such potential weaknesses persist without improving, the loan is subject to downgrade, typically to substandard, in three to six months. Potential problem loans are assigned a grade of special mention within our risk grading matrix. Potential problem loans do not include purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans because PCD loans exhibited evidence of more than insignificant credit deterioration at acquisition that made it probable that all contractually required principal payments would not be collected. Additionally, potential problem loans do not include loans that have been modified in connection with our COVID-19 payment deferment programs which allow for a deferral of principal and/or interest payments. Within our loan portfolio, we had seven credit relationships totaling $11.3 million of potential problem loans at December 31, 2020, compared with five credit relationships totaling $16.8 million of potential problem loans at December 31, 2019 and seven credit relationships totaling $17.8 million of potential problem loans at December 31, 2018.
Non-Performing Assets
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act was passed in March 2020, which among other things, allows the Bank to suspend the requirements for certain loan modifications to be categorized as a TDR. Starting in March, the Bank implemented several actions to better support our impacted banking clients and allow for loan modifications such as principal and/or interest payment deferrals, participation in the PPP as an SBA preferred lender and personal banking assistance including waived fees, increased daily spending limits and suspension of residential foreclosure activities. The COVID-19 payment deferment programs allow for a deferral of principal and/or interest payments with such deferred principal payments due and payable on the maturity date of the existing loan.
Specifically, as discussed under the section entitled “Loan Portfolio” earlier in this Item 7, the Bank’s actions during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 included approval of an additional $75 million of new COVID-19 related loan modifications since June 30, 2020. The portfolio of active deferrals that have not reached the end of their deferral period was approximately $240 million as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately $90 million had received an additional deferral. COVID-19 related loan modifications of approximately $714 million have returned to agreed-upon contractual terms and had made at least one required principal and/or interest payment since the end of their initial deferral period. Such loans represent elevated risk, therefore management continues to monitor these loans. The extent to which these measures will impact the Bank, and any progression of loans, whether receiving COVID-19 payment deferrals or not, into non-performing assets, during future periods is uncertain and will depend on future developments that cannot be predicted.
The following table presents components of our non-performing assets (dollars in thousands).
(1) Noted balances and percentages during all prior periods reflect reclassifications to conform to current period presentation.
At December 31, 2020, non-accrual loans included 60 commercial and industrial relationships with loans secured by accounts receivable, life insurance, oil and gas, livestock and equipment. Non-accrual loans at December 31, 2020 also included $10.9 million of loans secured by residential real estate which were classified as loans held for sale. At December 31, 2019, non-accrual loans included 23 commercial and industrial relationships with loans secured by accounts receivable, life insurance, oil and gas, livestock and equipment. Non-accrual loans at December 31, 2019 also included $4.8 million of loans secured by residential real estate which were classified as loans held for sale. At December 31, 2018, non-accrual loans included 16 commercial and industrial relationships with loans secured by accounts receivable, life insurance, livestock, oil and gas, and equipment. Non-accrual loans at December 31, 2018 also included $3.4 million of loans secured by residential real estate which were classified as loans held for sale.
At December 31, 2020, TDRs were comprised of $2.0 million of loans that were considered to be performing and accruing, and of $16.0 million of loans considered to be non-performing reported in non-accrual loans. At December 31, 2019, TDRs were comprised of $2.2 million of loans that were considered to be performing and accruing, and $11.9 million of loans considered to be non-performing reported in non-accrual loans. At December 31, 2018, TDRs were comprised of $1.3 million related to loans that were considered to be performing and accruing, and of $5.9 million of loans considered to be non-performing reported in non-accrual loans. In March 2020, the CARES Act was passed, which, among other things, allows the Bank to suspend the requirements for certain loan modifications to be categorized as a TDR. Therefore, the Bank is not reporting COVID-19 related modifications as TDRs.
OREO increased from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to additions totaling $13.9 million, partially offset by disposals of $10.8 million. OREO as of December 31, 2019 decreased from December 31, 2018 primarily due to $14.0 million of disposals and fair value decreases, partially offset by additions of totaling $4.6 million. OREO as of December 31, 2018 decreased from December 31, 2017 due to $16.7 million of disposals and fair value decreases, partially offset by additions totaling $6.7 million. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, OREO was primarily comprised of commercial properties.
Loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were primarily comprised of loans held for sale and guaranteed by U.S. government agencies, including GNMA related loans subject to repurchase within our mortgage origination segment. As of December 31, 2020, $198.8 million of loans subject to repurchase were
under a forbearance agreement resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. During May 2020, GNMA announced it will temporarily exclude any new GNMA lender delinquencies, occurring on or after April 2020, when calculating the delinquency ratios for the purposes of enforcing compliance with its delinquency rate thresholds. This exclusion is extended automatically to GNMA lenders that were compliant with GNMA’s delinquency rate thresholds as reflected by their April 2020 investor accounting report. The mortgage origination segment qualified for this exclusion as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, $142.1 million of loans subject to repurchase under a forbearance agreement had delinquencies on or after April 2020.
Deposits
The banking segment’s major source of funds and liquidity is its deposit base. Deposits provide funding for its investments in loans and securities. Interest paid for deposits must be managed carefully to control the level of interest expense and overall net interest margin. The composition of the deposit base (time deposits versus interest-bearing demand deposits and savings), as discussed in more detail within the section entitled “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Banking Segment” below, is constantly changing due to the banking segment’s needs and market conditions.
The table below presents the average balance of, and rate paid on, consolidated deposits (dollars in thousands).
The maturity of consolidated interest-bearing time deposits of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2020 is set forth in the table below (in thousands).
The banking segment experienced an increase of $384 million in interest-bearing time deposits of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019. The increase during 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to an increase in the use of brokered certificates of deposit to strengthen the Bank’s available liquidity position given the economic uncertainties associated with the impact of the market disruption caused by COVID-19 conditions. This is compared to an increase of $96 million in interest-bearing time deposits of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2019, compared to December 31, 2018. The increase during 2019, compared to 2018, was primarily due customers locking in higher rates before the federal funds interest rate started to decrease during 2019 and a more competitive deposit pricing environment. At December 31, 2020, there were $1.5 billion in interest-bearing time deposits scheduled to mature within one year.
Borrowings
Our borrowings associated with continuing operations are shown in the table below (dollars in thousands).
Short-term borrowings has historically consisted of federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, borrowings at the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”), short-term bank loans and commercial paper. The $728.2 million decrease in short-term borrowings at December 31, 2020, compared with December 31, 2019, included a decrease in borrowings in our banking and broker-dealer segments primarily associated with the increased utilization of available internal funds, a decrease in FHLB borrowings and a decrease in securities sold under agreements to repurchase by the Hilltop Broker-Dealers, partially offset by an increase in commercial paper used by the Hilltop Broker-Dealers to finance their activities. The $358.2 million increase in short-term borrowings at December 31, 2019 compared with December 31, 2018 included a net increase of $363.7 million in our banking segment primarily associated with increases in FHLB notes, partially offset by a net decrease of $5.5 million in short-term bank loans, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and commercial paper used by the Hilltop Broker-Dealers to finance their activities.
Notes payable at December 31, 2020 of $382.0 million was comprised of $148.9 million related to Senior Notes, net of loan origination fees, Subordinated Notes, net of origination fees, of $196.8 million and mortgage origination segment borrowings of $36.2 million. Notes payable at December 31, 2019 of $283.8 million was comprised of $148.8 million related to Senior Notes, net of loan origination fees, FHLB borrowings with an original maturity greater than one year within our banking segment of $28.8 million, and mortgage origination segment borrowings of $78.7 million. Notes payable at December 31, 2018 of $228.9 million was comprised of $148.6 million related to Senior Notes, net of loan origination fees, FHLB borrowings with an original maturity greater than one year held within our banking segment of $4.4 million, and mortgage origination segment borrowings of $48.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Hilltop is a financial holding company whose assets primarily consist of the stock of its subsidiaries and invested assets. Hilltop’s primary investment objectives, as a holding company, are to support capital deployment for organic growth and to preserve capital to be deployed through acquisitions, dividend payments and stock repurchases. At December 31, 2020, Hilltop had $374.8 million in cash and cash equivalents, an increase of $269.2 million from $105.6 million at December 31, 2019. This increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily due to the receipt of $196.6 million in net proceeds associated with the Subordinated Notes offering, cash proceeds of $154.1 million from the completed sale of NLC and $207.2 million of dividends from subsidiaries, partially offset by $32.5 million in cash dividends declared, $208.7 million of stock repurchases, including through the tender offer completed in November 2020, and other general corporate expenses. Subject to regulatory restrictions, Hilltop has received, and may also continue to receive, dividends from its subsidiaries. If necessary or appropriate, we may also finance acquisitions with the proceeds from equity or debt issuances. We believe that Hilltop’s liquidity is sufficient for the foreseeable future, with current short-term liquidity needs including operating expenses, interest on debt obligations, dividend payments to stockholders and potential stock repurchases.
COVID-19
As previously discussed, in light of the extreme volatility and disruptions in the capital and credit markets beginning in March 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 crisis, including a significant decline in corporate debt and equity issuances and a deterioration in the mortgage servicing and commercial paper markets, we took a number of precautionary actions in March to enhance our financial flexibility by bolstering our cash position to ensure we have adequate cash readily available to meet both expected and unexpected funding needs without adversely affecting our daily operations.
The FOMC reduced the target range for short-term rates by 150 basis points to a range of 0% to 0.25% during March 2020 to support the economy and potentially reduce the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of these rate adjustments and the stressed economic outlook, mortgage rates fell to historically low levels, which resulted in significant growth in mortgage originations at both PrimeLending and Hilltop Securities through its partnerships with certain housing finance authorities. To strengthen the Bank’s available liquidity position, we raised brokered deposits that totaled $1.4 billion at June 30, 2020, as well as swept an additional $200 million of deposits from Hilltop Securities into the Bank, bringing the total funds swept from Hilltop Securities to approximately $1.5 billion until June 2020 when the total funds swept was reduced back to $1.3 billion at June 30, 2020. During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, given the continued strong cash and liquidity levels at the Bank, brokered deposits declined to $731.0 million and $1.0 billion as of December 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, respectively, and the total funds swept from Hilltop Securities into the Bank was reduced further to approximately $700 million and $900 million as of December 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020, respectively.
Further, during March 2020, we substantially reduced the trading portfolio inventory limits at Hilltop Securities in an effort to protect capital, minimize losses and ensure target liquidity levels throughout the crisis. During March 2020, the capital markets experienced significant friction and in certain portions of the market, liquidity was not prevalent. In particular for us, the market for municipal securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, mortgage derivatives and GNMA mortgage pools experienced significant liquidity stress at points during the month. The Federal Reserve, in partnership with the Treasury of the United States, has stepped in to provide additional liquidity in each of these critical markets. We will continue to evaluate market conditions and determine the appropriateness of capital market inventory limits.
To meet demand for customer loan advances and satisfy our obligations to repay long-term debt maturing over the next 12 months, we believe we currently have sufficient liquidity from the available on- and off-balance sheet liquidity sources and our ability to issue debt in the capital markets. We continue to review actions that we may take to further enhance our financial flexibility in the event that market conditions deteriorate further or for an extended period.
Tender Offer
On September 23, 2020, we announced the commencement of a modified “Dutch auction” tender offer to purchase shares of our common stock for an aggregate cash purchase price of up to $350 million. On November 17, 2020, we completed our tender offer, repurchasing 8,058,947 shares of outstanding common stock at a price of $24.00 per share for a total of $193.4 million excluding fees and expenses. We funded the tender offer with cash on hand.
NLC Sale
On June 30, 2020, we completed the sale of all of the outstanding capital stock of NLC, which comprised the operations of our former insurance segment, for cash proceeds of $154.1 million. During 2020, Hilltop recognized an aggregate gain associated with this transaction of $36.8 million, net of customary transaction costs of $5.1 million and was subject to post-closing adjustments. The resulting book gain from this sale transaction was not recognized for tax purposes due to the excess tax basis over book basis being greater than the recorded book gain. Any tax loss related to this transaction is deemed disallowed pursuant to the rules under the Internal Revenue Code. We also agreed to enter into an agreement at closing to refrain for a specified period from certain activities that compete with the business of NLC. As a result, NLC’s results and its assets and liabilities have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements, and we no longer have an insurance segment.
Dividend Program and Declaration
In October 2016, we announced that our board of directors authorized a dividend program under which we intend to pay quarterly dividends on our common stock, subject to quarterly declarations by our board of directors. During 2020, we declared and paid cash dividends of $0.36 per common share, or $32.5 million.
On January 28, 2021, our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.12 per common share, payable on February 26, 2021 to all common stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 15, 2021.
Future dividends on our common stock are subject to the determination by the board of directors based on an evaluation of our earnings and financial condition, liquidity and capital resources, the general economic and regulatory climate, our ability to service any equity or debt obligations senior to our common stock and other factors.
Stock Repurchases
In January 2021, our board of directors authorized a new stock repurchase program through January 2022 pursuant to which we are authorized to repurchase, in the aggregate, up to $75.0 million of our outstanding common stock, inclusive of repurchases to offset dilution related to grants of stock-based compensation. Under the stock repurchase program authorized, we may repurchase shares in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions as permitted under Rule 10b-18 promulgated under the Exchange Act. The extent to which we repurchase our shares and the timing of such repurchases depends upon market conditions and other corporate considerations, as determined by Hilltop’s management team. Repurchased shares will be returned to our pool of authorized but unissued shares of common stock.
During 2020, we paid $15.2 million to repurchase an aggregate of 720,901 shares of common stock at a weighted average price of $21.13 per share. The purchases were funded from available cash balances.
Senior Notes due 2025
On April 9, 2015, we completed an offering of $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 5% senior notes due 2025 (“Senior Unregistered Notes”) in a private offering that was exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. The Senior Unregistered Notes were offered within the United States only to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act, and to persons outside of the United States under Regulation S under the Securities Act. The Senior Unregistered Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of April 9, 2015 (the “indenture”), by and between Hilltop and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting estimated fees and expenses and the initial purchasers’ discounts, were approximately $148 million. We used the net proceeds of the offering to redeem all of our outstanding Series B Preferred Stock at an aggregate liquidation value of $114.1 million, plus accrued but unpaid dividends of $0.4 million, and Hilltop utilized the remainder for general corporate purposes.
In connection with the issuance of the Senior Unregistered Notes, on April 9, 2015, we entered into a registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers of the Senior Unregistered Notes. Under the terms of the registration rights agreement, we agreed to offer to exchange the Senior Unregistered Notes for notes registered under the Securities Act (the “Senior Registered Notes”). The terms of the Senior Registered Notes are substantially identical to the Senior Unregistered Notes for which they were exchanged (including principal amount, interest rate, maturity and redemption rights), except that the Senior Registered Notes generally are not subject to transfer restrictions. On May 22, 2015, and subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Senior Registered Notes prospectus, we commenced an offer to exchange the outstanding Senior Unregistered Notes for Senior Registered Notes. Substantially all of the Senior Unregistered Notes were tendered for exchange, and on June 22, 2015, we fulfilled all of the requirements of the registration rights agreement for the Senior Unregistered Notes by issuing Senior Registered Notes in exchange for the tendered Senior Unregistered Notes. We refer to the Senior Registered Notes and the Senior Unregistered Notes that remain outstanding collectively as the “Senior Notes.”
The Senior Notes bear interest at a rate of 5% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears in cash on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing on October 15, 2015. The Senior Notes will mature on April 15, 2025, unless we redeem the Senior Notes, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, on or after January 15, 2025 (three months prior to the maturity date of the Senior Notes) at our election at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes to be redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. At December 31, 2020, $150.0 million of our Senior Notes was outstanding.
The indenture contains covenants that limit our ability to, among other things and subject to certain significant exceptions: (i) dispose of or issue voting stock of certain of our bank subsidiaries or subsidiaries that own voting stock of our bank subsidiaries, (ii) incur or permit to exist any mortgage, pledge, encumbrance or lien or charge on the capital stock of certain of our bank subsidiaries or subsidiaries that own capital stock of our bank subsidiaries and (iii) sell all or substantially all of our assets or merge or consolidate with or into other companies. The indenture also provides for certain events of default, which, if any of them occurs, would permit or require the principal amount, premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest on the then outstanding Senior Notes to be declared immediately due and payable.
Subordinated Notes due 2030 and 2035
On May 7, 2020, we completed a public offering of $50 million aggregate principal amount of 2030 Subordinated Notes and $150 million aggregate principal amount of 2035 Subordinated Notes. The price to the public for the Subordinated Notes was 100% of the principal amount of the Subordinated Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and fees and expenses of $3.4 million, were $196.6 million. We intend to use the net proceeds of the offerings for general corporate purposes.
The 2030 Subordinated Notes and the 2035 Subordinated Notes will mature on May 15, 2030 and May 15, 2035, respectively. We may redeem the Subordinated Notes, in whole or in part, from time to time, subject to obtaining Federal Reserve approval, beginning with the interest payment date of May 15, 2025 for the 2030 Subordinated Notes and beginning with the interest payment date of May 15, 2030 for the 2035 Subordinated Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Subordinated Notes being redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date of redemption.
The 2030 Subordinated Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.75% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears commencing on November 15, 2020. The interest rate for the 2030 Subordinated Notes will reset quarterly beginning May 15, 2025 to an interest rate, per year, equal to the then-current benchmark rate, which is expected to be three-month term SOFR rate, plus 5.68%, payable quarterly in arrears. The 2035 Subordinated Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.125% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears commencing on November 15, 2020. The interest rate for the 2035 Subordinated Notes will reset quarterly beginning May 15, 2030 to an interest rate, per year, equal to the then-current benchmark rate, which is expected to be three-month term SOFR rate plus 5.80%, payable quarterly in arrears. At December 31, 2020, $200 million of our Subordinated Notes was outstanding.
Junior Subordinated Debentures
The Debentures have a stated term of 30 years with maturities ranging from July 2031 to February 2038 with interest payable quarterly. The rate on the Debentures, which resets quarterly, is three-month LIBOR plus an average spread of 3.22%. The total average interest rate at December 31, 2020 was 3.45%. The Debentures are callable at PCC’s discretion with a minimum of a 45 to 60-day notice. At December 31, 2020, $67.0 million of PCC’s Debentures were outstanding.
Regulatory Capital
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements may prompt certain actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Under capital adequacy and regulatory requirements, we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. Our capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors.
Under the comprehensive capital framework (“Basel III”) for U.S. banking organizations, total capital consists of two tiers of capital, Tier 1 and Tier 2. Tier 1 capital is further composed of common equity Tier 1 capital and additional Tier 1 capital. Total capital is the sum of Tier 1 capital and Tier 2 capital. We perform reviews of the classification and calculation of risk-weighted assets to ensure accuracy and compliance with the Basel III regulatory capital requirements. Our capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors.
In order to avoid limitations on capital distributions, including dividend payments, stock repurchases and certain discretionary bonus payments to executive officers, Basel III requires banking organizations to maintain a capital conservation buffer above minimum risk-based capital requirements measured relative to risk-weighted assets.
Bank holding companies with less than $15 billion in assets as of December 31, 2009 are allowed to include junior subordinated debentures in Tier 1 capital, subject to certain restrictions. However, because Hilltop has grown above $15 billion in assets, if we make an acquisition in the future, the debentures issued to the Trusts may be phased out of Tier 1 and into Tier 2 capital. All of the debentures issued to the PCC Statutory Trusts I, II, III and IV (the “Trusts”), less the common stock of the Trusts, qualified as Tier 1 capital as of December 31, 2020, under guidance issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Actual capital amounts and ratios as of December 31, 2020 reflect PlainsCapital’s and Hilltop’s decision to elect the transition option as issued by the federal banking regulatory agencies in March 2020 that permits banking institutions to mitigate the estimated cumulative regulatory capital effects from CECL over a five-year transitionary period.
At December 31, 2020, Hilltop had a total capital to risk weighted assets ratio of 22.34%, Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets ratio of 19.57%, common equity Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets ratio of 18.97% and a Tier 1 capital to average assets, or leverage, ratio of 12.64%. Accordingly, Hilltop’s actual capital amounts and ratios in accordance with Basel III exceeded the regulatory capital requirements including conservation buffer in effect at the end of the period.
At December 31, 2020, PlainsCapital had a total capital to risk weighted assets ratio of 15.27%, Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets ratio of 14.40%, common equity Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets ratio of 14.40%, and a Tier 1 capital to average assets, or leverage, ratio of 10.44%. Accordingly, PlainsCapital’s actual capital amounts and ratios in accordance with Basel III resulted in it being considered “well-capitalized” and exceeded the regulatory capital requirements including conservation buffer in effect at the end of the period.
We discuss regulatory capital requirements in more detail in Note 24 to our consolidated financial statements, as well as under the caption “Government Supervision and Regulation - Corporate - Capital Adequacy Requirements and BASEL III” set forth in Part I, Item I. of this Annual Report.
Banking Segment
Within our banking segment, our primary uses of cash are for customer withdrawals and extensions of credit as well as our borrowing costs and other operating expenses. Our corporate treasury group is responsible for continuously monitoring our liquidity position to ensure that our assets and liabilities are managed in a manner that will meet our short-term and long-term cash requirements. Our goal is to manage our liquidity position in a manner such that we can meet our customers’ short-term and long-term deposit withdrawals and anticipated and unanticipated increases in loan demand without penalizing earnings. Funds invested in short-term marketable instruments, the continuous maturing of other interest-earning assets, cash flows from self-liquidating investments such as mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations, the possible sale of available for sale securities, and the ability to securitize certain types of loans provide sources of liquidity from an asset perspective. The liability base provides sources of liquidity through deposits and the maturity structure of short-term borrowed funds. For short-term liquidity needs, we utilize federal fund lines of credit with correspondent banks, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, borrowings from the Federal Reserve and borrowings under lines of credit with other financial institutions. For intermediate liquidity needs, we utilize advances from the FHLB. To supply liquidity over the longer term, we have access to brokered time deposits, term loans at the FHLB and borrowings under lines of credit with other financial institutions.
As previously discussed, to meet increased liquidity demands, to ensure we have adequate cash readily available to meet both expected and unexpected funding needs without adversely affecting our daily operations and to improve the Bank’s already strong liquidity position, we raised brokered deposits that totaled $731 million at December 31, 2020, down from $1.4 billion at June 30, 2020. Further, beginning in March 2020, an additional $200 million of deposits was swept from Hilltop Securities into the Bank, bringing the total funds swept from Hilltop Securities to approximately $1.5 billion until June 2020 when the total funds swept was reduced back to $1.3 billion at June 30, 2020. During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, given the continued strong cash and liquidity levels at the Bank, the total funds swept from Hilltop Securities into the Bank was reduced further to approximately $900 million as of September 30, 2020, and then approximately $700 million as of December 31, 2020. As a result, the Bank was able to further fortify its borrowing capacity through access to secured funding sources as summarized in the following table (in millions).
As noted in the table above, the Bank’s available liquidity position and borrowing capacity at December 31, 2020 is at a heightened level given the uncertain outlook for 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. While the extent to which COVID-19 will impact the Bank is uncertain, the Bank is targeting available liquidity of between approximately $5 billion and $6 billion during 2021. Available liquidity does not include borrowing capacity available through the discount window at the Federal Reserve.
Within our banking segment, deposit flows are affected by the level of market interest rates, the interest rates and products offered by competitors, the volatility of equity markets and other factors. While the Bank experienced an increase in non-brokered customer deposits during 2020, an economic recovery and improved commercial real estate investment outlook may result in an outflow of deposits at an accelerated pace as customers utilize such available funds for expanded operations and investment opportunities. The Bank regularly evaluates its deposit products and pricing structures relative to the market to maintain competitiveness over time.
The Bank’s 15 largest depositors, excluding Hilltop and Hilltop Securities, collectively accounted for 9.58% of the Bank’s total deposits, and the Bank’s five largest depositors, excluding Hilltop and Hilltop Securities, collectively accounted for 4.40% of the Bank’s total deposits at December 31, 2020. The loss of one or more of our largest Bank customers, or a significant decline in our deposit balances due to ordinary course fluctuations related to these customers’
businesses, could adversely affect our liquidity and might require us to raise deposit rates to attract new deposits, purchase federal funds or borrow funds on a short-term basis to replace such deposits.
Broker-Dealer Segment
The Hilltop Broker-Dealers rely on their equity capital, short-term bank borrowings, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing client credit balances, correspondent deposits, securities lending arrangements, repurchase agreement financing, commercial paper issuances and other payables to finance their assets and operations, subject to their respective compliance with broker-dealer net capital and customer protection rules. At December 31, 2020, Hilltop Securities had credit arrangements with four unaffiliated banks, with maximum aggregate commitments of up to $600.0 million. These credit arrangements are used to finance securities owned, securities held for correspondent accounts, receivables in customer margin accounts and underwriting activities. These credit arrangements are provided on an “as offered” basis and are not committed lines of credit. In addition, Hilltop Securities has committed revolving credit facilities with three unaffiliated banks, with aggregate availability of up to $250.0 million. At December 31, 2020, Hilltop Securities had no borrowings under its credit arrangements or its credit facilities.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, Hilltop Securities initiated two commercial paper programs, in the ordinary course of its business, of which the net proceeds (after deducting related issuance expenses) from the sale will be used for general corporate purposes, including working capital and the funding of a portion of its securities inventories. The commercial paper notes (“CP Notes”) may be issued with maturities of 14 days to 270 days from the date of issuance. The CP Notes are issued under two separate programs, Series 2019-1 CP Notes and Series 2019-2 CP Notes, in maximum aggregate amounts of $300 million and $200 million, respectively. The CP Notes are not redeemable prior to maturity or subject to voluntary prepayment and do not bear interest, but are sold at a discount to par. The discount to maturity will be based on an interest factor and the CP Notes are secured by a pledge of collateral owned by Hilltop Securities. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted average maturity of the CP Notes was 146 days at a rate of 1.23%, with a weighted average remaining life of 70 days. At December 31, 2020, the amount outstanding under these secured arrangements was $277.6 million, which was collateralized by securities held for firm accounts valued at $296.3 million.
Mortgage Origination Segment
PrimeLending funds the mortgage loans it originates through warehouse lines of credit maintained with the Bank which have an aggregate commitment of $3.3 billion, of which $2.5 billion was drawn at December 31, 2020. PrimeLending sells substantially all mortgage loans it originates to various investors in the secondary market, historically with the majority with servicing released. As these mortgage loans are sold in the secondary market, PrimeLending pays down its warehouse line of credit with the Bank. In addition, PrimeLending has an available line of credit with an unaffiliated bank of up to $1.0 million, of which no borrowings were outstanding at December 31, 2020.
PrimeLending owns a 100% membership interest in PrimeLending Ventures Management, LLC (“Ventures Management”) which holds an ownership interest in and is the managing member of certain ABAs. At December 31, 2020, these ABAs had combined available lines of credit totaling $170.0 million, $80.0 million of which was with a single unaffiliated bank, and the remaining $90.0 million of which was with the Bank. At December 31, 2020, Ventures Management had outstanding borrowings of $47.5 million, $11.3 million of which was with the Bank.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents information regarding our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 (in thousands). Payments related to leases are based on actual payments specified in the underlying contracts, and the table below includes all leases that had commenced as of December 31, 2020. Payments related to short-term borrowings and long-term debt obligations include the estimated contractual interest payments under the respective agreements.
In addition to the contractual obligations presented above, during 2018, Hilltop and the Bank entered into leases for a majority of the available corporate office space in Hilltop Plaza to serve as the headquarters for both companies as well as retail space for a PlainsCapital Bank branch. The two separate 129-month office and retail leases, which commenced in February 2020, have combined total base rent of approximately $35 million with the first nine months of rent abated.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Our consolidated financial statements included herein have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which presently require us to measure financial position and operating results primarily in terms of historic dollars. Changes in the relative value of money due to inflation or recession are generally not considered. The primary effect of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. In management’s opinion, changes in interest rates affect the financial condition of a financial institution to a far greater degree than changes in the inflation rate. While interest rates are greatly influenced by changes in the inflation rate, they do not necessarily change at the same rate or in the same magnitude as the inflation rate. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors that are beyond our control, including changes in the expected rate of inflation, the influence of general and local economic conditions and the monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. government, its agencies and various other governmental regulatory authorities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments; Guarantees
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets.
Banking Segment
We enter into contractual loan commitments to extend credit, normally with fixed expiration dates or termination clauses, at specified rates and for specific purposes. Substantially all of our commitments to extend credit are contingent upon customers maintaining specific credit standards until the time of loan funding. We minimize our exposure to loss under these commitments by subjecting them to credit approval and monitoring procedures. We assess the credit risk associated with certain commitments to extend credit and have recorded a liability related to such credit risk in our consolidated financial statements.
Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event the customer does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek recovery from the customer. Our policies generally require that standby letter of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants similar to those contained in loan agreements.
In the aggregate, the Bank had outstanding unused commitments to extend credit of $1.9 billion at December 31, 2020 and outstanding financial and performance standby letters of credit of $91.5 million at December 31, 2020.
Broker-Dealer Segment
In the normal course of business, the Hilltop Broker-Dealers execute, settle and finance various securities transactions that may expose the Hilltop Broker-Dealers to off-balance sheet risk in the event that a customer or counterparty does not fulfill its contractual obligations. Examples of such transactions include the sale of securities not yet purchased by customers or for the account of the Hilltop Broker-Dealers, use of derivatives to support certain non-profit housing organization clients, clearing agreements between the Hilltop Broker-Dealers and various clearinghouses and broker-dealers, secured financing arrangements that involve pledged securities, and when-issued underwriting and purchase commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting policies are fundamental to understanding our management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition. Our significant accounting policies are presented in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in this Annual Report. We have identified certain significant accounting policies which involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in making certain estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. Actual amounts and values as of the balance sheet dates may be materially different than the amounts and values reported due to the inherent uncertainty in the estimation process. Also, future amounts and values could differ materially from those estimates due to changes in values and circumstances after the balance sheet date. The significant accounting policies, as summarized below, which we believe to be the most critical in preparing our consolidated financial statements relate to allowance for credit losses, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, mortgage loan indemnification liability, mortgage servicing rights asset and acquisition accounting.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses for loans represents management’s estimate of all expected credit losses over the expected contractual life of our existing loan portfolio. Determining the appropriateness of the allowance is complex and requires judgment by management about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Subsequent evaluations of the then existing loan portfolio, in light of the factors then prevailing, may result in significant changes in the allowance for credit losses in those future periods.
We employ a disciplined process and methodology to establish our allowance for credit losses that has two basic components: first, an asset-specific component involving individual loans that do not share risk characteristics with other loans and the measurement of expected credit losses for such individual loans; and second, a pooled component for estimated expected credit losses for pools of loans that share similar risk characteristics.
The credit loss estimation process for both on and off-balance sheet exposures involves procedures to appropriately consider the unique characteristics of our loan portfolio segments, which are further disaggregated into loan classes, the level at which credit risk is monitored. When computing allowance levels, credit loss assumptions are estimated using models that analyze loans according to credit risk ratings, loss history, delinquency status and other credit trends and risk characteristics, including current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future. Significant variables that impact the modeled losses across our loan portfolios are the U.S. Real Gross Domestic Product, or GDP, growth rates and unemployment rate assumptions. Future factors and forecasts may result in significant changes in the allowance and provision for (reversal of) credit losses in those future periods.
Credit quality is assessed and monitored by evaluating various attributes, such as credit risk ratings, historic loss experience, past due status and other credit trends and risk characteristics, including current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future. The results of these continuous credit quality evaluations help form our underwriting criteria for new loans and also factor into the process for estimation of the allowance for credit losses. The allowance level is influenced by loan volumes, loan asset quality, delinquency status, historic loss experience and other conditions influencing loss expectations, such as reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions. The allowance for credit losses will primarily reflect estimated losses for pools of loans that share similar risk characteristics, but will also consider individual loans that do not share risk characteristics with other loans.
In estimating the component of the allowance for credit losses for loans that share similar risk characteristics with other loans, such loans are segregated into loan classes. Loans are designated into loan classes based on loans pooled by product types and similar risk characteristics or areas of risk concentration. In determining the allowance for credit losses, we derive an estimated credit loss assumption from a model that categorizes loan pools based on loan type and internal risk rating or delinquency bucket.
When a loan moves to a substandard non-accrual risk rating grade, it is removed from the collective evaluation allowance methodology and is subject to individual evaluation. A problem asset report is prepared for each loan in excess of a predetermined threshold and the net realizable value of the loan is determined. This value is compared to the appropriate loan basis (depending on whether the loan is a PCD loan or a non-PCD loan) to determine the required allowance for credit loss reserve amount.
Estimating the timing and amounts of future loss cash flows is subject to significant management judgment as these loss cash flows rely upon estimates such as default rates, loss severities, collateral valuations, the amounts and timing of principal payments (including any expected prepayments) or other factors that are reflective of current or future expected conditions. These estimates, in turn, depend on the duration of current overall economic conditions, industry, borrower, or portfolio specific conditions, the expected outcome of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings, as well as, in certain circumstances, other economic factors, including the level of current and future real estate prices. All of these estimates and assumptions require significant management judgment and certain assumptions that are highly subjective. Model imprecision also exists in the allowance for credit losses estimation process due to the inherent time lag of available industry information and differences between expected and actual outcomes.
The provision for (reversal of) credit losses recorded through earnings, and reduced by the charge-off of loan amounts, net of recoveries, is the amount necessary to maintain the allowance for credit losses at the amount of expected credit losses inherent within the loans held for investment portfolio. The amount of expense and the corresponding level of allowance for credit losses for loans are based on our evaluation of the collectability of the loan portfolio based on historical loss experience, reasonable and supportable forecasts, and other significant qualitative and quantitative factors.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Prior to the adoption of the Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) methodology on January 1, 2020, our allowance for loan losses was a valuation allowance for probable losses existing in the loan portfolio. Loans were charged to the allowance when the loss was confirmed or when a determination was made that a probable loss had been incurred on a specific loan. Recoveries were credited as a reduction to the allowance at the time of recovery. Throughout the respective year, management estimated the probable level of losses to determine whether the allowance for credit losses was appropriate to absorb losses existing in the portfolio. Based on these estimates, an amount was charged to or recovered from the provision for loan losses in order to adjust the allowance to a level determined to be appropriate to absorb losses. Management’s judgment regarding the appropriateness of the allowance for loan losses involved consideration of current economic conditions and their estimated effects on specific borrowers; an evaluation of the existing relationships among loans, potential loan losses and the present level of the allowance; results of examinations of the loan portfolio by regulatory agencies; and management’s internal review of the loan portfolio. In determining the ability to collect certain loans, management also considered the fair value of any underlying collateral. The amount ultimately realized may differ from the carrying value of these assets because of economic or other conditions beyond our control.
Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other identifiable intangible assets are initially recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Goodwill and other intangible assets having an indefinite useful life are not amortized for financial statement purposes. In the event that facts and circumstances indicate that the goodwill or other identifiable intangible assets may be impaired, an interim impairment test would be required. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. We perform required annual impairment tests of our goodwill and other intangible assets as of October 1st for our reporting units.
The goodwill impairment test requires us to make judgments and assumptions. The test consists of estimating the fair value of each reporting unit based on valuation techniques, including a discounted cash flow model using revenue and profit forecasts and recent industry transaction and trading multiples of our peers, and comparing those estimated fair values with the carrying values of the assets and liabilities of each reporting unit, which includes the allocated goodwill. If
the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value, we will recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, any loss recognized will not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
This evaluation includes multiple assumptions, including estimated discounted cash flows and other estimates that may change over time. If future discounted cash flows become less than those projected by us, future impairment charges may become necessary that could have a materially adverse impact on our results of operations and financial condition in the period in which the write-off occurs.
Mortgage Loan Indemnification Liability
The mortgage origination segment may be responsible for errors or omissions relating to its representations and warranties that the mortgage loans sold meet certain requirements, including representations as to underwriting standards and the validity of certain borrower representations in connection with a mortgage loan. If determined to be at fault, the mortgage origination segment either repurchases the mortgage loans from the investors or reimburses the investors’ losses (a “make-whole” payment). The mortgage origination segment has established an indemnification liability for such probable losses based upon, among other things, the level of current unresolved repurchase requests, the volume of estimated probable future repurchase requests, our ability to cure the defects identified in the repurchase requests, and the severity of an estimated loss upon repurchase. Although we consider this reserve to be appropriate, there can be no assurance that the reserve will prove to be appropriate over time to cover ultimate losses due to conditions outside of our control such as unanticipated adverse changes in the economy and historical loss patterns, discrete events adversely affecting specific borrowers or industries, or actions taken by institutions or investors. The impact of such matters will be considered in the reserving process when known.
Mortgage Servicing Rights Asset
The Company measures its residential mortgage servicing rights asset using the fair value method. Under the fair value method, the retained MSR assets are carried in the balance sheet at fair value and the changes in fair value are reported in earnings within other noninterest income in the period in which the change occurs. Retained MSR assets are measured at fair value as of the date of sale of the related mortgage loan. Subsequent fair value measurements are determined using a discounted cash flow model. In order to determine the fair value of the MSR asset, the present value of expected future cash flows is estimated. Assumptions used include market discount rates, anticipated prepayment speeds, delinquency and foreclosure rates, and ancillary fee income.
The model assumptions and the MSR asset fair value estimates are compared to observable trades of similar portfolios as well as to MSR asset broker valuations and industry surveys, as available. The expected life of the loan can vary from management’s estimates due to prepayments by borrowers, especially when rates fall. Prepayments in excess of management’s estimates would adversely impact the recorded value of the MSR asset. The value of the MSR asset is also dependent upon the discount rate used in the model, which is based on current market rates and is reviewed by management on an ongoing basis. An increase in the discount rate would result in a decrease in the value of the MSR asset.
Acquisition Accounting
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method, which requires an allocation of the purchase price of an acquired entity to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including identifiable intangibles, based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Management applies various valuation methodologies to these acquired assets and assumed liabilities which often involve a significant degree of judgment, as liquid markets often do not exist for certain loans, deposits, identifiable intangible assets and other assets and liabilities acquired or assumed. Our valuation methodologies employ significant estimates and assumptions to value such items, including, among others, projected cash flows, prepayment and default assumptions, discount rates, and realizable collateral values. Purchase date valuations, which are permitted to be revised for up to one year after the acquisition date, determine the amount of goodwill or bargain purchase gain recognized in connection with a business combination. Changes to provisional amounts identified during this measurement period are recognized in the reporting period in which the adjustment amounts are determined. Certain assumptions and estimates must be updated regularly in connection with the ongoing accounting for purchased loans. Valuation assumptions and estimates may also have to be revisited in connection with our periodic impairment assessments of goodwill, intangible assets and certain other long-lived assets. The use of different assumptions could
produce significantly different valuation results, which could have material positive or negative effects on the Company’s results of operations.