ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Company Overview
We provide a cloud-based customer relationship management (“CRM”) Platform. Our CRM Platform is comprised of Marketing Hub, Sales Hub, Service Hub and content management system (“CMS”) Hub as well as other tools and integrations that enable companies to attract, engage, and delight customers throughout the customer experience.
At the core of our CRM Platform is our CRM that our customers use which creates a single view of all interactions a prospective or existing customer has with their marketing, sales and customer service teams. The CRM shares data across every application in the CRM Platform, automatically informing more personalized emails, website content, ads, and conversations, and enables more accurate timing cues for our customer’s internal teams. In addition, the CRM Platform was built to easily and seamlessly integrate third party applications to further customize to an individual company’s industry or needs. We designed and built our CRM Platform to serve a broad range of customers globally. Our CRM Platform starts completely free and grows with our customers to meet their needs at different stages in their life-cycles. It supports multiple languages and currencies and offers an array of sophisticated features, including content partitioning at the enterprise level for companies operating in or serving multiple countries.
We focus on selling to mid-market business-to-business, or B2B, companies, which we define as companies that have between two and 2,000 employees. While our CRM Platform was built to grow with any company, we focus on selling to mid-market businesses because we believe we have significant competitive advantages attracting and serving this market segment. These mid-market businesses seek an integrated, easy-to-implement and easy-to-use solution to reach customers and compete with organizations that have larger marketing, sales, and customer service budgets. We efficiently reach these businesses at scale through our proven inbound methodology, our Solutions Partners, and our “freemium” model. A Solutions Partner is a service provider that helps businesses with strategy, execution, and implementation of go-to-market activities and technology solutions. Our freemium model attracts customers who begin using our CRM Platform through our free products and then upgrade to our paid products. As of December 31, 2020, we had 4,225 full-time employees and 103,994 Total Customers of varying sizes in more than 120 countries, representing almost every industry.
Our CRM Platform is a multi-tenant, single code-based and globally available software-as-a-service product delivered through web browsers or mobile applications. We sell our CRM Platform on a subscription basis. Our total revenue increased to $883.0 million in 2020, from $674.9 million in 2019, and from $513.0 million in 2018, representing year-over-year increases of 31% in 2020 and 32% in 2019. We had net losses of $85.0 million in 2020, $53.7 million in 2019, and $63.8 million in 2018, primarily due to investments in our growth.
We derive most of our revenue from subscriptions to our cloud-based CRM Platform and related professional services, which consist of customer on-boarding and training services. Subscription revenue accounted for 97% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, 96% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 95% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. We sell multiple product plans at different base prices on a subscription basis, each of which includes our CRM and integrated applications to meet the needs of the various customers we serve. Customers pay additional fees if the number of contacts stored and tracked in the customer’s database exceeds specified thresholds. We also generate additional revenue based on the purchase of additional subscriptions and products, and the number of account users and subdomains. Most of our customers’ subscriptions are one year or less in duration.
Subscriptions are billed in advance on various schedules. Because the mix of billing terms for orders can vary from period to period, the annualized value of the orders we enter into with our customers will not be completely reflected in deferred revenue at any single point in time. Accordingly, we do not believe that change in deferred revenue is an accurate indicator of future revenue.
Many of our customers purchase on-boarding and training services which are designed to help customers enhance their ability to attract, engage and delight their customers using our CRM Platform. Professional services and other revenue accounted for 3% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, 4% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 5% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018. We expect professional services and other margins to range from a moderate loss to breakeven for the foreseeable future.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization, or WHO, declared the outbreak of a disease caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) to be a pandemic (the “pandemic”). This pandemic is having widespread, rapidly-evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global societies, economies, financial markets, and business practices. Federal and state governments have implemented measures in an effort to contain the virus, including physical distancing, travel bans and restrictions, closure of non-essential businesses, quarantines, work-from-home directives, shelter-in-place orders, and limitations on public gatherings. These measurements have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide.
Our focus remains on promoting employee health and safety, serving our customers, and ensuring business continuity. In March 2020, we temporarily closed our global offices, including our corporate headquarters, suspended all company-related travel, and all HubSpot employees globally were required to work from home. We shifted our Solutions Partner events and INBOUND 2020 to virtual-only experiences and have cancelled other customer and industry events. During the third quarter of 2020, we began to slowly re-open our offices on a staggered, region-to-region basis in accordance with local authority guidelines while ensuring that our return to work was thoughtful, prudent, and handled with an abundance of caution with the health of our employees being the top priority. During the fourth quarter of 2020, due to surges in COVID-19 cases at almost all of our office locations, we elected to close all of our global offices. We are closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic and will continue to be thoughtful about employee safety and well-being.
Given that the economic consequences of the pandemic have been exceptionally challenging for many of our customers and prospects, we also implemented certain changes to our pricing structure in March 2020, including reducing prices on our Starter Growth Suite, offering certain product functionality free of charge for a limited time, suspending marketing email send limits for a limited time, and offering a one-time six-month advance on commissions to certain of our Solutions Partners.
While the pandemic has not had a material adverse financial impact on our business to date, the broader implications of the pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance will depend on future developments and conditions. The pandemic and its adverse effects are prevalent in the locations where we, our customers, and partners conduct business. As a result, at the outset of the pandemic, we experienced, and may again experience in the future, curtailed customer demand that could adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. Specifically, we may be impacted by changes in our customers’ ability or willingness to purchase our offerings; changes in the timing of our current or prospective customers’ purchasing decisions; pricing discounts or extended payment terms; reductions in the amount or duration of customers’ subscription contracts; or increased customer attrition rates. While our revenue, customer retention, and earnings are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model, the effect of the pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
While the implications of the pandemic remain uncertain, we plan to continue to make investments to support business growth. We believe that the growth of our business is dependent on many factors, including our ability to expand our customer base, increase adoption of our CRM Platform within existing customers, develop new products and applications to extend the functionality of our CRM Platform and provide a high level of customer service. We expect to invest in sales and marketing to support customer growth. We also expect to invest in research and development as we continue to introduce new products and applications to extend the functionality of our CRM Platform. We also intend to maintain a high level of customer service and support which we consider critical for our continued success. We plan to continue to invest in our data center infrastructure and services capabilities in order to support continued customer growth. We also expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses to support our business and to maintain the infrastructure required to be a public company. We expect to use our cash flow from operations and the proceeds from our convertible debt and stock offerings to fund these growth strategies and support our business despite the potential impact from the pandemic and do not expect to be profitable in the near term.
Key Business Metrics
The following key business metrics are presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K or in our press releases announcing our financial results which are furnished on Form 8-K. We use these key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business and results of operations, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. These key business metrics may be calculated in a manner different than similar key business metrics used by other companies.
Total Customers. We believe that our ability to increase our customer base is an indicator of our market penetration and growth of our business as we continue to expand our sales force and invest in marketing efforts. We define our Total Customers at the end of a particular period as the number of business entities or individuals with one or more paid subscriptions to our CRM Platform either paid directly or through a Solutions Partner. We do not include in Total Customers business entities or individuals with one or more paid subscriptions solely for our legacy Sales Hub ($10) product or any PieSync product. A single customer may have separate paid subscriptions for separate websites, sales licenses or seats, or our Sales Hub, Marketing Hub, Service Hub, or CMS Hub products, but we count these as one customer if certain customer-provided information such as company name, URL, or email address indicate that these subscriptions are managed by the same business entity or individual.
Total Average Subscription Revenue per Customer. We believe that our ability to increase the Total Average Subscription Revenue per Customer is an indicator of our ability to grow the long-term value of our existing customer relationships. We define Total Average Subscription Revenue per Customer during a particular period as subscription revenue, excluding revenue from our legacy Sales Hub ($10) and PieSync products, from our Total Customers during the period divided by the average Total Customers during the same period.
Total Subscription Dollar Retention Rate. We believe that our ability to retain and expand a customer relationship is an indicator of the stability of our revenue base and the long-term value of our customers. We assess our performance in this area using a metric we refer to as our Total Subscription Dollar Retention Rate. We compare the aggregate Total Contractual Monthly Subscription Revenue of our Total Customer base as of the beginning of each month, which we refer to as Total Retention Base Revenue, to the aggregate Total Contractual Monthly Subscription Revenue of the same group of Total Customers at the end of that month, which we refer to as Total Retained Subscription Revenue. We define Total Contractual Monthly Subscription Revenue as the total amount of subscription fees contractually committed to be paid for a full month under all of our Total Customer agreements, excluding any commissions owed to our Solutions Partners. Our Total Subscription Dollar Retention Rate for a given period is calculated by first dividing Total Retained Subscription Revenue by Total Retention Base Revenue for each month in the period, calculating the weighted average of these rates using the Total Retention Base Revenue for each month in the period, and then annualizing the resulting rates.
Key Components of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Revenue
We derive our revenue from two major sources, revenue from subscriptions to our CRM Platform and professional services and other revenue consisting mainly of on-boarding and training services fees.
Subscription based revenue is derived from customers using our CRM Platform for their inbound marketing, sales, service, and content management needs. Our CRM Platform features integrated applications that create a cohesive and adaptable customer experience. These integrated applications include a CRM, search engine optimization, blogging, website content management, messaging, chatbots, social media, marketing automation, email, predictive lead scoring, sales productivity, ticketing and helpdesk tools, customer NPS surveys, analytics, and reporting. Subscriptions are billed in advance on various schedules. All subscription fees that are billed in advance of service are recorded in deferred revenue. Subscription based revenue is recognized net of consideration paid to Solutions Partners when those Partners purchase a subscription to our CRM Platform.
Professional services and other revenue are derived primarily from customer on-boarding and training services. The on-boarding and training services provided to customers typically involves an implementation specialist. An implementation specialist will typically work with our customers to enhance their understanding of how to attract leads and convert them into customers through search engine optimization, social media, blogging and other content. Training is generally sold in connection with a customer’s initial
subscription and is billed in advance. The training is also available to be purchased separately following a customer’s purchase of its initial subscription and our Solutions Partners routinely provide the same training to customers. The Company recognizes revenue from on-boarding and training services as the services are provided.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription revenue consists primarily of managed hosting providers and other third-party service providers, employee-related costs including payroll, benefits and stock-based compensation expense for our customer support team, amortization of capitalized software development costs and acquired technology, and allocated overhead costs, which we define as rent, facilities, depreciation of fixed assets, and costs related to information technology.
Cost of professional services and other revenue consists primarily of personnel costs of our professional services organization, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, amortization of capitalized software development costs associated with our internally built software platform, as well as allocated overhead costs.
We expect that cost of subscription and professional services and other revenue will increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in growing our business. Over time, we expect to gain benefits of scale associated with our costs of hosting our CRM Platform relative to subscription revenues, resulting in improved subscription gross margin, exclusive of stock-based compensation. We expect professional services and other margins to range from a moderate loss to breakeven for the foreseeable future, exclusive of stock-based compensation.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of our development team, including payroll, benefits and stock-based compensation expense and allocated overhead costs. We capitalize certain software development costs that are attributable to developing new products and adding incremental functionality to our CRM Platform and amortize such costs as costs of subscription revenue over the estimated life of the new product or incremental functionality, which is generally two years. We also capitalize certain development costs that are attributable to developing our internally developed software platforms and amortize such costs throughout the consolidated statement of operations over the estimated life of our internally developed software platforms, which is generally five years. We focus our research and development efforts on improving our products and developing new ones, delivering new functionality and enhancing the customer experience. We believe delivering new functionality for our customers is an integral part of our solution and provides our customers with access to a broad array of options and information critical to their marketing, sales, and customer service efforts. We expect to continue to make investments in and expand our offerings to enhance our customers’ experience and satisfaction and attract new customers. We expect research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to increase the functionality of our CRM Platform.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of our sales and marketing employees, including sales commissions and incentives, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, marketing programs, including lead generation, costs of our annual INBOUND conference, other brand building expenses, amortization of capitalized software development costs associated with our internally built software platforms, and allocated overhead costs. We defer certain sales commissions related to acquiring new contracts and amortize them ratably over a period of benefit that we have determined to be approximately one to three years. Sales and marketing expenses also include commissions paid to our Solutions Partners in instances where the end customer purchases and pays for a subscription to our CRM Platform.
We plan to continue to expand sales and marketing to grow our customer base and increase sales to existing customers. This growth will include adding sales personnel and expanding our marketing activities to continue to generate additional leads and build brand awareness. We expect sales and marketing expenses will increase as a result of hiring net new quota-carrying sales representatives in the United States and worldwide and adding to our marketing staff. Over time, we expect sales and marketing expenses will decline as a percentage of total revenue, exclusive of stock-based compensation.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs and related expenses for executive, finance, legal, human resources, employee-related information technology, administrative personnel, including payroll, benefits and stock-based compensation expense; professional fees for external legal, accounting and other consulting services, amortization of capitalized software development costs associated with our internally built software platforms, and allocated overhead costs. We expect that
general and administrative expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis but decrease as a percentage of total revenue, exclusive of stock-based compensation expense, as we focus on processes, systems and controls to enable our internal support functions to scale with the growth of our business. We also anticipate continuing increases to general and administrative expenses as we incur the costs of compliance associated with being a publicly traded company, including audit and consulting fees.
Other Expense
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on invested cash and cash equivalents balances and investments. Interest expense primarily consists of amortization of the debt discount, issuance costs and contractual interest expense related to our Notes, and the loss on early extinguishment of our 2022 Notes. Other expense primarily consists of the impact of foreign currency transaction gains and losses associated with monetary assets and liabilities.
Income Tax Expense
The income tax expense consists of current and deferred taxes for U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. We have historically had a taxable loss in our most significant jurisdiction, the U.S., and a full valuation allowance against the majority of our deferred tax assets. We expect this to continue in the near term.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth certain consolidated financial data in dollar amounts and as a percentage of total revenue.
*
Percentages are based on actual values. Totals may not sum due to rounding.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Subscription revenue increased during 2020 due to an increase throughout the year in Total Customers, which grew from 73,483 as of December 31, 2019 to 103,994 as of December 31, 2020. Total Average Subscription Revenue per Customer decreased from $9,920 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $9,582 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth in Total Customers was primarily driven by our increased sales representative capacity to meet market demand as well as our freemium product offering and lower priced starer products. The decrease in average subscription revenue per customer was driven primarily by the volume of continued purchases of our lower priced starter products.
The 5% increase in professional services and other revenue resulted primarily from the increase in Total Customers and from the delivery of on-boarding services for the additional subscriptions sold, slightly offset by fewer classroom trainings being held due to social gathering restrictions and travel bans implemented due to the pandemic.
Total cost of revenue increased 28% during 2020 primarily due to an increase in subscription and hosting costs, employee-related costs, amortization of capitalized software development costs, and allocated overheard expenses, offset by a decrease in amortization of acquired technology due to certain acquired technology reaching the end of its useful life during the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin remained consistent year-over-year.
The increase in subscription cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the following:
Subscription and hosting costs increased primarily due to growth in our Total Customer base from 73,483 at December 31, 2019 to 103,994 at December 31, 2020. Additionally, we saw higher subscription and hosting costs as we focus on the security, reliability and performance of our CRM Platform. Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our customer support organization to support our customer growth and improve service levels and offerings, offset slightly by reduced discretionary spending as a result of the pandemic. Amortization of capitalized software development costs increased due to the increased number of developers working on our software platform as we continue to develop new products and increased functionality. Allocated overhead expenses increased due to the expansion of our leased space and infrastructure as we continued to grow our business and expand headcount. Amortization of acquired technology decreased due to certain acquired technology reaching the end of its useful life during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in professional services and other cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our professional services organization to support our customer growth.
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our engineering organization to develop new products, increase functionality and to maintain our existing CRM Platform, slightly offset by reduced discretionary spending as a result of the pandemic. Allocated overhead expense increased due to expanding our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount.
Sales and Marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to expand our selling and marketing organizations to grow our customer base, offset by reduced discretionary spending as a result of the pandemic. Marketing programs increased due to the timing and size of certain marketing efforts as we continue to make investments in attracting new customers. Solutions Partner commissions increased as a result of increased revenue generated through our partners. Allocated overhead expenses increased due to expanding our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our business and require additional personnel to support our expanded operations, offset by reduced discretionary spending as a result of the pandemic. Allocated overhead expenses increased due to expanding our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount. Customer credit card fees increased due to increased customer transactions as we continue to grow our business.
Other Expense
*
not meaningful
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on invested cash and cash equivalents balances and investments. The decrease during the year is due to a decrease in yields on our investment balances, offset by an increase in the amount of investment holdings from the proceeds received from the issuance of the 2025 Notes.
Interest expense primarily consists of amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs and contractual interest expense related to our Notes, and the loss on early extinguishment of our 2022 Notes. The increase during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the $10.5 million loss on the early extinguishment of our 2022 Notes and amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs related to the 2025 Notes.
Other expense primarily consists of the impact of foreign currency transaction gains and losses associated with monetary assets and liabilities. The increase was primarily due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Income Tax expense
Income tax expense consists of current and deferred taxes for U.S. and foreign income taxes. The increase in the income tax expense was primarily driven by increased income in jurisdictions outside of the United States that are profitable from a tax perspective.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue
Subscription revenue increased during 2019 due to an increase throughout the year in Total Customers, which grew from 56,628 as of December 31, 2018 to 73,483 as of December 31, 2019. Total Average Subscription Revenue per Customer increased from $9,904 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $9,920 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The growth in Total Customers was primarily driven by our increased sales representative capacity to meet market demand as well as the freemium model. The increase in
average subscription revenue per customer was driven primarily by existing customers increasing their use of our products, existing customers purchasing additional subscriptions, and new customers purchasing our higher price product plans. The increase in average subscription revenue per customer was partially offset by the continued adoption of our freemium model.
The 12% increase in professional services and other revenue resulted primarily from the increase in Total Customers and from delivery of on-boarding and training services for the additional subscriptions sold.
Total Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Total cost of revenue increased 29% during 2019 primarily due to an increase in subscription and hosting costs, employee-related costs, amortization of capitalized software development costs, amortization of acquired technology, and allocated overheard expenses. The increase in gross margin was primarily driven by changes to our service offerings for our products offset by increased hosting costs in subscription revenue as we focus on the reliability of our CRM Platform.
The increase in subscription cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to the following:
Subscription and hosting costs increased primarily due to growth in our Total Customer base from 56,628 at December 31, 2018 to 73,483 at December 31, 2019, as we focus on the reliability of our CRM Platform. Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our customer support organization to support our customer growth and improve service levels and offerings. Amortization of capitalized software development costs increased due to the increased number of developers working on our software platform as we continue to develop new products and increased functionality. Amortization of acquired technology increased due to a full year of amortization of acquired technology that was placed into service the second half of 2018. Allocated overhead expenses increased due to expansion of our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount.
The increase in professional services and other cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our professional services organization to support our customer growth.
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our engineering organization to develop new products, increase functionality and to maintain our existing CRM Platform. Allocated overhead expense increased due to expanding our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount.
Sales and Marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to expand our selling and marketing organizations to grow our customer base. Solutions Partner commissions increased as a result of increased revenue generated through our Partners. Allocated overhead expenses increased due to expanding our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount. Marketing programs increased due to the timing and size of certain marketing efforts as we continue to make investments in attracting new customers.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to the following:
Employee-related costs increased as a result of increased headcount as we continue to grow our business and require additional personnel to support our expanded operations. Customer credit card fees increased due to increased customer transactions as we continue to grow our business. Allocated overhead expenses increased due to expanding our leased space and infrastructure as we continue to grow our business and expand headcount.
Other Expense
*
not meaningful
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on invested cash and cash equivalents balances and investments. The increase is primarily due to the increase in the amount of investment holdings from the proceeds received from the common stock offering that occurred during the first quarter of 2019.
Interest expense primarily consists of amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs related to the 2022 Notes that is recorded as interest expense and contractual interest expense on the 2022 Notes. The increase was primarily due to the use of the effective-interest method to amortize the debt discount and issuance costs related to the 2022 Notes.
Other expense primarily consists of the impact of foreign currency transaction gains and losses associated with monetary assets and liabilities. The decrease was primarily due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists of current and deferred taxes for U.S. and foreign income taxes. The increase in the income tax expense was primarily driven by increased income in jurisdictions outside of the United States that are profitable from a tax perspective.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity to date have been cash and cash equivalents, net accounts receivable, our common stock offerings, and our convertible notes offerings.
The following table shows cash and cash equivalents, working capital, net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities, net cash and cash equivalents used in investing activities, and net cash and cash equivalents provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 was held for working capital purposes. We believe our working capital is sufficient to support our operations for at least the next 12 months. At December 31, 2020, $83.7 million of our cash and cash equivalents was held in accounts outside the United States. As of December 31, 2018, we no longer assert indefinite reinvestment of our foreign earnings because these earnings have been subject to U.S. Federal tax. While we have concluded that any incremental tax incurred upon ultimate distribution of these earnings to be immaterial, our current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate undistributed earnings to fund our U.S. operations.
Net Cash and Cash Equivalents Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities consists primarily of net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization and other non-cash charges, net.
Net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected our net loss of $85.0 million, the portion of the repayment of the 2022 Notes attributable to the debt discount of $49.0 million, benefit for deferred income taxes of $2.2 million and accretion of bond discounts of $3.7 million, offset by non-cash expenses that included $37.1 million of depreciation and amortization, $121.5 million in stock-based compensation, $10.5 million of loss on early extinguishment of 2022 Notes and $24.9 million of amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. Working capital sources of cash and cash equivalents primarily included a $72.6 million increase in deferred revenue primarily resulting from the growth in the number of customers invoiced during the period, a $26.0 million increase in accrued expenses, a $3.7 million increase in accounts payable related to timing of bill payments, and a $31.4 million increase in right-of-use asset. These sources of cash and cash equivalents were offset by a $31.6 million decrease in lease liabilities, a $30.0 million increase in accounts receivable as a result of increased billings to customers consistent with the overall growth of the business, $19.3 million increase in deferred commissions and a $17.0 million increase in prepaid and other assets.
Net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily reflected our net loss of $53.7 million and accretion of bond discount of $14.2 million offset by non-cash expenses that included $28.8 million of depreciation and amortization, $97.8 million in stock-based compensation, and $21.8 million of amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. Working capital sources of cash and cash equivalents primarily included a $49.3 million increase in deferred revenue primarily resulting from the growth in the number of customers invoiced during the period, a $7.8 million increase in accrued expenses, a $3.9 million increase in accounts payable related to timing of bill payments, and a $22.7 million increase in right-of-use asset. These sources of cash and cash equivalents were offset by a $15.8 million decrease in lease liabilities, a $15.4 million increase in accounts receivable as a result of increased billings to customers consistent with the overall growth of the business, $9.7 million increase in deferred commissions and a $3.3 million increase in prepaid and other assets.
Net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily reflected our net loss of $63.8 million and accretion of bond discount of $6.8 million offset by non-cash expenses that included $23.4 million of depreciation and amortization, $76.3 million in stock-based compensation, $2.3 million of non-cash rent expense and $20.3 million of amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. Working capital sources of cash and cash equivalents primarily included a $49.3 million increase in deferred revenue primarily resulting from the growth in the number of customers invoiced during the period and a $11.9 million increase in accrued expenses, a $5.8 million increase in deferred rent, a $3.9 million decrease in prepaid and other assets, and a $3.3 million increase in accounts payable related to timing of bill payments. These sources of cash and cash equivalents were offset by a $17.7 million increase in accounts receivable as a result of increased billings to customers consistent with the overall growth of the business, and a $23.9 million increase in deferred commissions.
Net Cash and Cash Equivalents Used in Investing Activities
Our investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases, maturities and sale of investments, property and equipment purchases, an acquisition of a business, strategic investments, and capitalization of software development costs. Capitalized software development costs are related to new products or improvements to our existing software platform that expands the functionality for our customers.
Net cash and cash equivalents used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $1.5 billion in purchases of investments, $37.3 million of purchased property and equipment, $2.5 million of purchases of strategic investments, and $21.6 million of capitalized software development costs. These uses of cash were offset by $1.4 billion received related to the maturity of investments and $10.9 million received for sale of investments.
Net cash and cash equivalents used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of $1.3 billion of purchases of investments, $40.4 million of purchased property and equipment, $13.5 million of capitalized software development costs, a $23.3 million business acquisition and $0.6 million related to the purchase of strategic investments. These uses of cash were offset by $1.1 billion received related to the maturity of investments.
Net cash and cash equivalents used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted primarily of $681.6 million of purchases of investments, $22.3 million of purchased property and equipment, $11.2 million of capitalized software development costs and $0.5 million related to the purchase of strategic investments. These uses of cash were offset by $644.4 million received related to the maturity of investments.
Net Cash and Cash Equivalents Provided by Financing Activities
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of our stock offerings, the various components of our 2025 Notes offering, the various components of our 2022 Notes repayment, the issuance of common stock under our stock plans, payments of employee taxes related to the net share settlement of stock-based awards, and repayments of our finance lease obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities consisted of $450.1 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the 2025 Notes, $363.6 million of proceeds from the settlement of the Convertible Note Hedges related to the 2022 Notes, and $30.4 million of proceeds related to issuance of common stock under stock plans. This source of cash was offset by $236.0 million used for repayment of the 2022 Notes attributable to the principal, $327.5 million for payment to settle the Warrants related to the 2022 Notes, $50.6 million for payment of the Capped Call Options related to the 2025 Notes, and $7.4 million used for payment of employee taxes related to the net share settlement of stock-based awards.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash and cash equivalents provided by financing activities consisted primarily of $342.6 million of net proceeds related to common stock offering and $23.6 million of proceeds related to issuance of common stock under stock plans. These sources of cash were offset by $6.2 million used for payment of employee taxes related to the net share settlement of stock-based awards, $0.3 million for repayment of debt associated with our business acquisition and $0.3 million used for repayments of finance leases.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, cash and cash equivalents provided by financing activities consisted primarily of $21.6 million of proceeds related to issuance of common stock under stock plans. These sources of cash were offset by $8.0 million used for payment of employee taxes related to the net share settlement of stock-based awards and $0.7 million used for repayments of finance leases.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In preparing our financial statements, we make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on our reported revenues, results of operations and net income or loss, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our balance sheet during and as of the reporting periods. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are necessary because future events and their effects on our results and the value of our assets cannot be determined with certainty and are made based on our historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained, and we may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within our control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements, the following accounting policies and specific estimates involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from arrangements with multiple performance obligations, which typically include subscriptions to our online software solutions and professional services which include on-boarding and training services. Our customers do not have the right to take possession of the online software products. Revenue from online software products is recognized ratably over the subscription period beginning on the date the online software product is made available to customers. We recognize revenue from on-boarding and training services as the services are provided. Amounts billed that have not yet met the applicable revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue.
We allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on the standalone selling price (“SSP”) of each good or service. We calculate SSP for each type of online software product and professional service offering by averaging the selling price of all purchases within the trailing four calendar quarters. We use four quarters of transaction data to determine SSP as most of our customer arrangements are one year or less and pricing may be subject to change upon each customer’s renewal. In instances where there are not sufficient data points, or the average selling prices for a particular online software product or professional service offering are disparate, we estimate the SSP using other observable inputs, such as similar products or services. If the actual selling price for the sale of an online software product or professional service offering within a multiple performance obligation arrangement substantially differs from the SSP of that offering, we use the relative SSP to allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
Costs to Obtain a Contract with a Customer
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental, recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for initial contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be approximately one to three years. The one to three-year period has been determined by taking into consideration the type of product sold, the commitment term of the customer contract, the nature of the Company’s technology development life-cycle, and an estimated customer relationship period. Sales commissions for upgrade contracts are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining estimated customer relationship period of the related customer.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
Software development costs consist of certain payroll and stock compensation costs incurred to develop functionality for our CRM Platform and internally-built software platforms, as well as certain upgrades and enhancements that are expected to result in enhanced functionality. We capitalize certain software development costs for new offerings as well as upgrades to our existing software platforms, while costs associated with planning new developments and maintaining our CRM Platform software and internally built software platforms are expensed as incurred.. We amortize these development costs over the estimated useful life of two to five years on a straight-line basis. We determined that a two- to five- year life is appropriate for our internal-use software based on our best estimate of the useful life of the internally developed software after considering factors such as continuous developments in the technology, obsolescence, and anticipated life of the service offering before significant upgrades. Management evaluates the useful lives of these assets on a quarterly basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
We determine the amount of internal software costs to be capitalized based on the amount of time spent by our developers on projects in the application stage of development. There is judgment involved in estimating the time allocated to a particular project in the application stage. A significant change in the time spent on each project could have a material impact on the amount capitalized and related amortization expense in subsequent periods.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the new lease guidance using a modified retrospective transition method applied to those leases which were not completed as of January 1, 2019.
We lease office facilities under non-cancelable operating leases that expire at various dates through May 2031. Certain leases contain optional termination dates.
We determine if an arrangement contains a lease at inception and does not separate lease and non-lease components of an arrangement determined to contain a lease. Operating and finance leases with a duration of less than 12 months are excluded from right-of-use-assets and lease liabilities and related expense is recorded as incurred.
We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate, which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date, in determining the present value of operating lease payments. To determine the estimated incremental borrowing rate, we use publicly available credit ratings for peer companies. We estimate the incremental borrowing rate using yields for maturities that are in line with the duration of the lease payments, which requires judgment.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contractual obligations are cash that we are obligated to pay as part of certain contracts that we have entered during our course of business. Certain of our leases contain optional termination dates. The table below only includes payments up to the optional termination date. If we were to extend leases beyond the optional termination date, the future commitments would increase by approximately $90.8 million. Below is a table that shows the projected outlays as of December 31, 2020:
Letters of Credit
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $3.4 million in letters of credit outstanding substantially in favor of certain landlords for office space. These irrevocable letters of credit, which are not included in the table of contractual obligations above, are expected to remain in effect, in some cases, until 2029.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020 or 2019 exclusive of items described above and indemnifications of officers, directors and employees for certain events or occurrences while the officer, director or employee is, or was, serving at our request in such capacity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Recent Accounting Pronouncements in the notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.