Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Alpha Healthcare Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. While our efforts to identify a target business may span many industries and regions worldwide, we intend to focus our search for prospects within the healthcare industry in the United States. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and concurrent private placement, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (including pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
On September 22, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 10,000,000 units. Each unit consists of one share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share and one-half of one redeemable warrant, with each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock for $11.50 per share. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to us of $100,000,000. Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. acted as the sole book running manager and Northland Securities, Inc. acted as the co-manager of the initial public offering. The securities sold in the initial public offering were registered under the Securities Act on registration statements on Form S-1 No. 333-240374. The SEC declared the registration statement effective on September 17, 2020.
On September 22, 2020, simultaneously with the consummation of the initial public offering, we completed the private placement of an aggregate of 355,000 units to AHAC Sponsor LLC, our sponsor, Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. and Northland Securities, Inc., generating gross proceeds to us of $3,550,000. Such securities were issued pursuant to the exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
A total of $100,000,000, comprised of $98,000,000 of the proceeds from the initial public offering and $2,000,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the private placement units, was placed in a U.S.-based trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, as of December 31, 2020, we had $1,094,761 in cash. Further, we expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering and identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combination candidates.
For the period from July 1, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $233,333. We incurred $249,524 of formation and operating costs (not charged against shareholders’ equity), consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses. We had interest income of $30 on the operating account and $16,161 of interest of the trust account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash outside the trust account of $1,094,761 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash held in the trust account are generally unavailable for the Company’s use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem common stock. As of December 31, 2020, none of the amount in the trust account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Through December 31, 2020, the Company’s liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares, advances from the sponsor in an aggregate amount of $95,136 and the remaining net proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of private placement units.
The Company anticipates that the $1,094,761 outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2020, will be sufficient to allow the Company to operate for at least the next 12 months, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, the Company will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5 to our financial statements) from the initial stockholders, the Company’s officers and directors, or their respective affiliates (which is described in Note 5 to our financial statements), for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
The Company does not believe it will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating its business. However, if the Company’s estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to the business combination. Moreover, the Company will need to raise additional capital through loans from its sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of the sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, the Company. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of its business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On July 20, 2020, we issued 2,875,000 shares of Class B common stock to our initial stockholder, AHAC Sponsor, LLC for $25,000, or approximately $0.01 per share. The founder shares include an aggregate of up to 375,000 shares subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option is not exercised by the underwriters in full. The over-allotment option was not exercised by the underwriters and therefore, as of December 31, 2020, 2,500,000 shares of common stock (the “Founder Shares”) are issued and outstanding.
Promissory Note - Related Party
On July 1, 2020, we issued an unsecured promissory note to the sponsor, pursuant to which we may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the initial public offering. This loan is non-interest bearing, unsecured, and due on the earlier of (a) March 31, 2021 or (b) the date on which we complete the initial public offering. The loan will be repaid out of the offering proceeds not held in the trust account. As of December 31, 2020, we had $95,136 in borrowings outstanding under the promissory note.
Administrative Service Fee
We have agreed to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of an aggregate of $10,000 for general and administrative services including office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. This arrangement will terminate upon completion of a business combination or the liquidation of the Company. For the period July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, we accrued $34,334 of administrative fees as a due to related party payable.
Related Party Loans
In addition, in order to finance transactions costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers, directors, or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a business combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be converted into units of the post business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, placement units (including securities contained therein) and units (including securities contained therein) that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the placement warrants and any shares of Class A common stock and warrants (and underlying Class A common stock) that may be issued upon conversion of the units issued as part of the working capital loans and Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of the founder shares, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to the registration rights agreement requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to our Class A common stock). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of an initial business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidated damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
On September 22, 2020, the underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of two percent (2.0%) of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $2,000,000. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting fee of three and a half percent (3.5%) of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering upon the completion of the Company’s initial business combination. The underwriters have agreed that up to 1% of the deferred underwriting fee may be re-directed to other FINRA member firms that have provided services in connection with the identification and consummation of a business combination, in the sole discretion of the Company; provided, that all such payments to other FINRA member firms may only be made if permitted under applicable law.
The Company may reduce the deferred underwriting fee by up to 50% based on stockholders redeeming their shares for their pro-rata amount of the proceeds in the trust account; provided, however, that (a) the underwriters’ maximum deferred underwriting fee reduction based on stockholder redemptions will be 50% regardless of whether stockholder redemptions exceed 50%; and (b) any sums paid to other advisors as discussed above, will be credited against the reduction of and added back to the deferred underwriting fee payable to the underwriters; and (c) under no circumstance will the deferred underwriting fee be less than 1.75% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering. As of December 31, 2020, the Company accrued a deferred underwriting fee of $1,847,788.
Contingencies
We have engaged a law firm to assist us with legal matters in connection with identifying, negotiating, and consummating a business combination, as well as assisting with other legal matters. In the event of a successful business combination, the amount of fees to be paid will be agreed upon between us and the law firm in light of all the facts and circumstances at that point in time. If a business combination does not occur, we will not be required to pay this contingent fee. Management is unable to determine the amount of the legal fees to be paid at this time. There can be no assurance that we will complete a business combination.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management is continuing to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $1,847,788 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.