ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Recent Developments
See "Part I. Item 1. Business-Recent Developments” for important updates that occurred in our businesses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Outlook
We expect the following factors to impact our operating segments:
Polyurethanes:
●
First quarter 2021 adjusted EBITDA projected to be slightly more than double first quarter 2020 results, including turnaround-related headwinds
●
Positive trends in construction (including spray polyurethane foam), automotive and elastomer markets
●
Continued strength in China, but lower margins in China component MDI and polymeric systems for first quarter 2021 compared to fourth quarter 2020
Performance Products:
●
First quarter 2021 adjusted EBITDA to be up approximately 10%-15% compared to first quarter 2020
●
Improving volumes in the Americas and Asia regions in first quarter 2021 compared to first quarter 2020
● Positive volume trends across the portfolio from fourth quarter 2020 to first quarter 2021
Advanced Materials:
●
First quarter 2021 adjusted EBITDA to be up approximately 40% compared to fourth quarter 2020
●
Improving trends from fourth quarter 2020 to first quarter 2021 across all markets, including aerospace
●
Synergy capture from acquisitions on track
Textile Effects:
●
First quarter 2021 adjusted EBITDA to be up slightly compared to first quarter 2020
●
Favorable trends in sustainable solutions
● First quarter 2021 orders returning to 2019 levels
In 2020, our adjusted effective tax rate was 19%. For 2021, our adjusted effective tax rate is expected to be approximately 22% to 24%. For further information, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and “Note 20. Income Taxes” to our consolidated financial statements.
Higher Insurance Costs in 2021
During 2020, we saw a deterioration in insurance markets in which we participate, particularly for property and excess/umbrella liability insurance. Rates increased significantly for these coverages, terms and conditions were restricted and some insurers either reduced their available capital or stopped underwriting accounts in the chemical sector. As a result, our annual insurance expense will increase from $32 million in 2020 to $52 million in 2021. We customarily prepay our insurance expense and, accordingly, we prepaid our 2021 insurance expense in December 2020. This prepaid expense will be recognized ratably in our statements of operations in 2021.
Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of the factors that may impact our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity and “Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of our use of forward-looking statements.
ReSULTS OF OPERATIONS
For each of our Company and Huntsman International, the following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions, except per share amounts).
Huntsman Corporation
Huntsman International
Huntsman Corporation
NM-Not meaningful
(1)
See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
(2) Includes the gain on the sale of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses in 2020.
(3)
Includes costs associated with transition activities relating to the acquisition of CVC Thermoset Specialties in 2020 and transition activities in 2018 relating to the transition of our Textile Effects segment’s production from Basel, Switzerland to a tolling facility. These transition costs were included in either selling, general and administrative expenses or cost of sales on our consolidated statements of operations.
(4)
The income tax impacts, if any, of each adjusting item represent a ratable allocation of the total difference between the unadjusted tax expense and the total adjusted tax expense, computed without consideration of any adjusting items using a with and without approach.
(5)
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $153 million of tax benefit relating to the outside basis difference in our investment in Venator, we recorded $18 million of tax benefit relating to realized tax losses on our remaining interest in Venator, we established $11 million of significant income tax valuation allowance in Australia and we recorded $32 million of deferred tax expense due to the reduction of tax rates in Switzerland. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we released $119 million of significant income tax valuation allowances in Switzerland, the U.K. and Luxembourg. We eliminated the effect of these significant changes in tax valuation allowances and deferred tax assets and liabilities from our presentation of adjusted net income to allow investors to better compare our ongoing financial performance from period to period.
(6)
In addition to income tax impacts, this adjusting item is also impacted by depreciation and amortization expense and interest expense.
(7) Represents the taxes paid in connection with the sale of the Chemical Intermediates Businesses and the sale of the India-based DIY business. For more information, see “Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Disposition” to our consolidated financial statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which we supplement with certain non-GAAP financial information. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related U.S. GAAP measures, and other companies may define such measures differently. We encourage investors to review our financial statements and the reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure. These non-GAAP measures exclude the impact of certain expenses that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating results.
Adjusted EBITDA
Our management uses adjusted EBITDA to assess financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income of Huntsman Corporation or Huntsman International, as appropriate, before interest, income tax, depreciation and amortization, net income attributable to noncontrolling interests and certain Corporate and other items, as well as eliminating the following adjustments: (a) business acquisition and integration expenses and purchase accounting inventory adjustments; (b) merger costs; (c) EBITDA from discontinued operations; (d) noncontrolling interest of discontinued operations; (e) fair value adjustments to Venator investment and related loss on disposal; (f) loss on early extinguishment of debt; (g) certain legal and other settlements and related expenses; (h) (gain) loss on sale of businesses/assets; (i) income from transition services arrangements related to the sale of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses to Indorama; (j) certain nonrecurring information technology project implementation costs; (k) amortization of pension and postretirement actuarial losses; (l) plant incident remediation costs; and (m) restructuring, impairment and plant closing and transition costs (credits). We believe that net income of Huntsman Corporation or Huntsman International, as appropriate, is the performance measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP that is most directly comparable to adjusted EBITDA.
We believe adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in assessing the businesses’ ongoing financial performance and provides improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that management believes are not indicative of the businesses’ operational profitability and that may obscure underlying business results and trends. However, this measure should not be considered in isolation or viewed as a substitute for net income of Huntsman Corporation or Huntsman International, as appropriate, or other measures of performance determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Moreover, adjusted EBITDA as used herein is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential inconsistencies in the methods of calculation. Our management believes this measure is useful to compare general operating performance from period to period and to make certain related management decisions. Adjusted EBITDA is also used by securities analysts, lenders and others in their evaluation of different companies because it excludes certain items that can vary widely across different industries or among companies within the same industry. For example, interest expense can be highly dependent on a company’s capital structure, debt levels and credit ratings. Therefore, the impact of interest expense on earnings can vary significantly among companies. In addition, the tax positions of companies can vary because of their differing abilities to take advantage of tax benefits and because of the tax policies of the various jurisdictions in which they operate. As a result, effective tax rates and tax expense can vary considerably among companies. Finally, companies employ productive assets of different ages and utilize different methods of acquiring and depreciating such assets. This can result in considerable variability in the relative costs of productive assets and the depreciation and amortization expense among companies.
Nevertheless, our management recognizes that there are material limitations associated with the use of adjusted EBITDA in the evaluation of our Company as compared to net income of Huntsman Corporation or Huntsman International, as appropriate, which reflects overall financial performance. For example, we have borrowed money in order to finance our operations and interest expense is a necessary element of our costs and ability to generate revenue. Our management compensates for the limitations of using adjusted EBITDA by using this measure to supplement U.S. GAAP results to provide a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting the business rather than U.S. GAAP results alone.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted net income is computed by eliminating the after tax amounts related to the following from net income attributable to Huntsman Corporation: (a) business acquisition and integration expenses and purchase accounting inventory adjustments; (b) merger costs; (c) loss (income) from discontinued operations; (d) noncontrolling interest of discontinued operations; (e) fair value adjustments to Venator investment and related loss on disposal; (f) loss on early extinguishment of debt; (g) certain legal and other settlements and related expenses; (h) gain on sale of businesses/assets; (i) income from transition services arrangements related to the sale of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses to Indorama; (j) certain nonrecurring information technology project implementation costs; (k) amortization of pension and postretirement actuarial losses; (l) significant activities related to deferred tax assets and liabilities; (m) U.S. Tax Reform Act impact on income tax expense; (n) plant incident remediation costs; and (o) restructuring, impairment and plant closing and transition costs (credits). Basic adjusted net income per share excludes dilution and is computed by dividing adjusted net income by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period. Adjusted diluted net income per share reflects all potential dilutive common shares outstanding during the period and is computed by dividing adjusted net income by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period increased by the number of additional shares that would have been outstanding as dilutive securities. Adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share amounts are presented solely as supplemental information.
We believe adjusted net income is useful to investors in assessing the businesses’ ongoing financial performance and provides improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that management believes are not indicative of the businesses’ operational profitability and that may obscure underlying business results and trends.
Free Cash Flow
We believe free cash flow is an important indicator of our liquidity as it measures the amount of cash we generate. Management internally uses a free cash flow measure: (a) to evaluate our liquidity, (b) evaluate strategic investments, (c) plan stock buyback and dividend levels and (d) evaluate our ability to incur and service debt. We have historically defined free cash flow as cash flows provided by operating activities and used in investing activities, excluding acquisition/disposition activities and including non-recurring separation costs. Starting with the quarter ended March 31, 2020, we updated our definition of free cash flow to a presentation more consistent with today’s market standard of net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. Free cash flow is not a defined term under U.S. GAAP, and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures.
Adjusted Effective Tax Rate
We believe that the effective tax rate of Huntsman Corporation or Huntsman International, as appropriate, is the performance measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP that is most directly comparable to adjusted effective tax rate. We believe our adjusted effective tax rate provides improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that management believes are not indicative of the businesses’ operational profitability and that may obscure underlying business results and trends. We do not provide reconciliations for adjusted effective tax rate on a forward-looking basis because we are unable to provide a meaningful or accurate calculation or estimation of reconciling items and the information is not available without unreasonable effort. This is due to the inherent difficulty of forecasting the timing and amounts of certain items, such as business acquisition and integration expenses and purchase accounting inventory adjustments, merger costs, certain legal and other settlements and related expenses, gains on sale of businesses/assets and amortization of pension and postretirement actuarial losses. Each of such adjustments have not yet occurred, is out of our control and/or cannot be reasonably predicted. For the same reasons, we are unable to address the probable significance of the unavailable information.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
As discussed in “Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions-Sale of Chemical Intermediates Businesses” and “Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions-Separation and Deconsolidation of Venator” to our consolidated financial statements, the results from continuing operations presented exclude primarily the results of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses for all periods presented and the results of Venator for 2018. The decrease of $134 million in net income attributable to Huntsman Corporation and the decrease of $122 million in net income attributable to Huntsman International from continuing operations was the result of the following items:
●
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $779, or 11%, as compared with the 2019 period. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales volumes in all our segments and lower average selling prices in all our segments, except for our Advanced Materials segment. See “-Segment Analysis” below.
●
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $282 million, or 20%, as compared with the 2019 period. The decrease resulted from lower gross profits in all our segments. See “-Segment Analysis” below.
●
Our operating expenses and the operating expenses of Huntsman International for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $336 million and $337 million, respectively, or 35% and 36%, respectively, as compared with the 2019 period, primarily related to lower selling, general and administrative costs resulting from cost suppression measures and actions taken to address the economic impacts of COVID-19 as well as gains related to the sale of the India-based DIY business and the sale of assets at our Basel, Switzerland site, partially offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative costs incurred in our newly acquired businesses of Icynene-Lapolla and CVC Thermoset Specialties.
●
Restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs (credits) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a cost of $49 million compared to a credit of $41 million in the 2019 period. For more information on restructuring activities, see “Note 13. Restructuring, Impairment and Plant Closing Costs (Credits)” to our consolidated financial statements.
● Our interest expense, net and the interest expense, net of Huntsman International for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $25 million and $38 million, respectively, or 23% and 30%, respectively, as compared with the 2019 period, primarily related to repayments of outstanding borrowings on our $1.2 billion senior revolving credit facility ("Revolving Credit Facility") and other prepayable debt.
● Equity in income of investment in unconsolidated affiliates for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $42 million from $54 million in the 2019 period. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in income at our PO/MTBE joint venture with Sinopec, of which we hold a 49% interest.
●
We recorded a loss of $88 million in fair value adjustments to our investment in Venator and related loss on disposal for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $18 million in the 2019 period. For more information, see “Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions-Separation and Deconsolidation of Venator” to our consolidated financial statements.
●
Loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 was nil compared to $23 million in the 2019 period due to the early repayment in full of our 2020 Senior Notes in the first quarter of 2019. See “Note. 15. Debt-Notes” to our consolidated financial statements.
●
Our income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $46 million from an income tax benefit of $38 million in the 2019 period. The income tax expense of Huntsman International for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $46 million from an income tax benefit of $41 million in the 2019 period. The increase in income tax expense was primarily due to fewer discrete benefit items in 2020 than in 2019. In 2020, discrete items include tax benefits related to the sale of the India-based DIY business, partially offset by foreign withholding tax on repatriated earnings. In 2019, discrete items include tax benefits related to built-in capital losses and realized tax losses both on our remaining interest in Venator, partially offset by tax expense related to the establishment of valuation allowances in Australia and the change in tax rate in Switzerland. Our income tax expense is significantly affected by the mix of income and losses in the tax jurisdictions in which we operate, as impacted by the presence of valuation allowances in certain tax jurisdictions. For further information concerning income taxes, see “Note 20. Income Taxes” to our consolidated financial statements.
Segment Analysis
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
NM-Not meaningful
(1) For more information, including reconciliation of segment adjusted EBITDA to net income of Huntsman Corporation or Huntsman International, as appropriate, see “Note 27. Operating Segment Information” to our consolidated financial statements.
(1)
Excludes revenues from tolling arrangements, byproducts and raw materials.
(2)
Excludes sales volumes of byproducts and raw materials.
Polyurethanes
The decrease in revenues in our Polyurethanes segment for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to lower MDI average selling prices and lower overall polyurethanes sales volumes. MDI average selling prices decreased across most major markets in relation to the global economic slowdown resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall polyurethanes sales volumes decreased primarily in relation to the global economic slowdown and the resulting decrease in demand across most major markets, partially offset by additional sales volumes in connection with the Icynene-Lapolla Acquisition. The decrease in segment adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to lower component and polymeric systems margins largely driven by lower MDI pricing and lower polyurethanes sales volumes, partially offset by lower raw material costs and lower fixed costs.
Performance Products
The decrease in revenues in our Performance Products segment for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to lower sales volumes and lower average selling prices. Sales volumes decreased primarily in relation to the global economic slowdown resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Average selling prices decreased primarily related to lower raw material costs. The decrease in segment adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to lower sales volumes, mostly offset by lower fixed costs.
Advanced Materials
The decrease in revenues in our Advanced Materials segment for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to lower sales volumes, slightly offset by higher average selling prices. Sales volumes decreased significantly across all markets, except in our global power market, primarily in relation to the global economic slowdown resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by additional sales volumes related to the CVC Thermoset Specialties Acquisition. Average selling prices increased in response to cost increases, partially offset by the impact of a stronger U.S. dollar against major international currencies. The decrease in segment adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to lower sales volumes, partially offset by lower fixed costs.
Textile Effects
The decrease in revenues in our Textile Effects segment for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to lower average selling prices and lower sales volumes. Average selling prices decreased as a result of product mix change, competitive market pressures and the impact of a stronger U.S. dollar against major international currencies. Sales volumes decreased primarily due to significantly weaker demand in relation to the global economic slowdown resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in segment adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to lower sales revenues and lower capitalization of indirect costs because of reduced production, partially offset by lower raw material costs and lower fixed costs.
Corporate and other
Corporate and other includes unallocated corporate overhead, unallocated foreign currency exchange gains and losses, LIFO inventory valuation reserve adjustments, loss on early extinguishment of debt, unallocated restructuring, impairment and plant closing costs, nonoperating income and expense and gains and losses on the disposition of corporate assets. For 2020, adjusted EBITDA from Corporate and other for Huntsman Corporation decreased by $6 million to a loss of $161 million from a loss of $155 million for 2019. For 2020, adjusted EBITDA from Corporate and other for Huntsman International decreased by $5 million to a loss of $155 million from a loss of $150 million for 2019. The decrease in adjusted EBITDA from Corporate and other resulted primarily from a charge from a LIFO inventory reserve adjustment, partially offset by an increase in unallocated foreign currency exchange gains.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see "Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 13, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following is a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources and generally does not include separate information with respect to Huntsman International in accordance with General Instruction I of Form 10-K.
Cash Flows For Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations for 2020 and 2019 was $277 million and $656 million, respectively. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations during 2020 compared with 2019 was primarily attributable to decreased operating income as described in “-Results of Operations” above, including $257 million of cash paid for taxes in connection with the sale of the Chemical Intermediates Businesses and the sale of the India-based DIY business, partially offset by a $338 million unfavorable variance in operating assets and liabilities for 2020 as compared with 2019.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities from continuing operations for 2020 and 2019 was $1,462 million and $(201) million, respectively. During 2020 and 2019, we paid $249 million and $274 million, respectively, for capital expenditures, including $54 million and $13 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively, on a new MDI splitter in Geismar, Louisiana. In January 2020, we received approximately $1.92 billion for the sale of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses. Additionally, in November 2020, we received approximately $257 million for the sale of the India-based DIY business. See "Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions-Sale of Chemical Intermediates Businesses" and "Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions-Sale of India-Based Do-It-Yourself Consumer Adhesives Business" to our consolidated financial statements. In December 2020, we completed the sale of approximately 42.4 million ordinary shares of Venator and received approximately $99 million. See "Note 4. Discontinued operations and Business Dispositions-Separation and Deconsolidation of Venator" to our consolidated financial statements. During 2020, we paid approximately $650 million for the acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired. See "Note 3. Business Combinations and Acquisitions" to our consolidated financial statements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into a sale and leaseback agreement to sell certain properties in Basel, Switzerland, for which we received approximately $73 million in proceeds from the sale of assets. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received approximately $49 million in proceeds from the sale of assets in connection with the closure of certain Textile Effects facilities and offices in Basel, Switzerland. During 2019, we received $16 million in proceeds from the settlement of the December 3, 2018 sale of Venator ordinary shares to Bank of America N.A.
Net cash used in financing activities for 2020 and 2019 was $655 million and $450 million, respectively. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to the increase in repayments on our Revolving Credit Facility during 2020 as compared with 2019, the repayment in full of our 364-day term loan facility ("2019 Term Loan") in the third quarter of 2020 and the proceeds from the issuance of our 2029 Senior Notes in the first quarter of 2019, partially offset by a decrease in repurchases of common stock during 2020 as compared with 2019 and cash paid in the third quarter of 2019 to acquire the 50% noncontrolling interest that we did not own in the Sasol-Huntsman joint venture.
Free cash flow from continuing operations for 2020 and 2019 were proceeds of cash of $28 million and $382 million, respectively. The reduction in free cash flow was primarily attributable to the decrease in cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations, partially offset by a decrease in cash used for capital expenditures during 2020 as compared with 2019.
Cash Flows For Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a comparison of our cash flows for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see "Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 13, 2020.
Changes in Financial Condition
The following information summarizes our working capital (dollars in millions):
(1)
Represents combined amounts related to the Icynene-Lapolla Acquisition and the CVC Thermoset Specialties Acquisition. For more information, see “Note 3. Business Combinations and Acquisitions” to our consolidated financial statements.
(2) Represents amounts related to the sale of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses. The assets and liabilities held for sale were classified as current as of December 31, 2019 because we completed the sale of our Chemical Intermediates Businesses on January 3, 2020. For more information, see “Note 4. Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions-Sale of Chemical Intermediates Businesses” to our consolidated financial statements.
Our working capital decreased by $252 million as a result of the net impact of the following significant changes:
●
The increase in cash and cash equivalents of $1,061 million resulted from the matters identified on our consolidated statements of cash flows. See also “-Cash Flows Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019.”
●
Accounts and notes receivable decreased by $91 million primarily due to improved days sales outstanding and reduction of overdue accounts receivable year-over-year, despite slightly higher revenues in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
●
Inventories decreased by $135 million primarily due to lower inventory costs and volumes.
●
Other current assets increased by $61 million primarily due to an increase in current income tax receivable and in prepaid insurance.
●
Accounts payable increased by $34 million primarily due to an increase in days payable outstanding year-over-year and higher capital expenditures in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
●
Current portion of debt increased by $381 million primarily due to the current classification of our 2021 Senior Notes, offset in part by our repayment of the 2019 Term Loan in full at maturity.
Direct and Subsidiary Debt
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt” to our consolidated financial statements.
Debt Issuance Costs
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-Debt Issuance Costs” to our consolidated financial statements.
Revolving Credit Facility
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-Revolving Credit Facility” to our consolidated financial statements.
Term Loan Credit Facility
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-Term Loan Credit Facility” to our consolidated financial statements.
A/R Programs
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-A/R Programs” to our consolidated financial statements.
Notes
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-Notes” to our consolidated financial statements.
Variable Interest Entity Debt
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-Variable Interest Entity Debt” to our consolidated financial statements.
Note Payable from Huntsman International to Huntsman Corporation
See “Note 15. Debt-Direct and Subsidiary Debt-Note Payable from Huntsman International to Huntsman Corporation” to our consolidated financial statements.
Compliance With Covenants
See “Note 15. Debt-Compliance with Covenants” to our consolidated financial statements.
Maturities
See “Note 15. Debt-Maturities” to our consolidated financial statements.
Short-Term Liquidity
We depend upon our cash, Revolving Credit Facility, U.S. accounts receivable securitization program (“U.S. A/R Program”) and European accounts receivable securitization program (“EU A/R Program” and collectively with the U.S. A/R Program, “A/R Programs”) and other debt instruments to provide liquidity for our operations and working capital needs. As of December 31, 2020, we had $2,952 million of combined cash and unused borrowing capacity, consisting of $1,593 million in cash, $1,194 million in availability under our Revolving Credit Facility and $165 million in availability under our A/R Programs. Our liquidity can be significantly impacted by various factors. The following matters had, or are expected to have, a significant impact on our liquidity:
●
Cash proceeds from our accounts receivable and inventory, net of accounts payable, were approximately $277 million for 2020, as reflected in our consolidated statements of cash flows. We expect volatility in our working capital components to continue.
●
During 2021, we expect to spend between approximately $320 million to $330 million on capital expenditures, including spending of approximately $80 million on a new MDI splitter in Geismar, Louisiana. We expect to fund spending on all capital expenditures with cash provided by operations, including proceeds received from the sale of the Basel, Switzerland properties. See "Note 1. General-Recent Developments-Sale of Assets at our Basel, Switzerland Site" to our consolidated financial statements.
●
During 2020, we made contributions to our pension and postretirement benefit plans of $101 million. During 2021, we expect to contribute an additional amount of approximately $60 million to these plans.
●
On February 7, 2018 and on May 3, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized our Company to repurchase up to an additional $950 million in shares of our common stock in addition to the $50 million remaining under our September 2015 share repurchase authorization. Repurchases may be made through the open market, including through accelerated share repurchase programs, or in privately negotiated transactions, and repurchases may be commenced or suspended from time to time without prior notice. Shares of common stock acquired through the repurchase program are held in treasury at cost. During the first quarter of 2020, we repurchased 5,364,519 shares of our common stock for approximately $96 million, excluding commissions, under the repurchase program. Subsequent to the end of the first quarter of 2020, we suspended share repurchases under our existing share repurchase program in order to enhance our liquidity position in response to COVID-19.
● During 2020, management implemented cost realignment and synergy plans. In connection with these plans, we expect to achieve annualized cost savings and synergy benefits of more than $120 million by the end of 2023 with associated net cash restructuring and integration costs of approximately $100 million. See "Note 13. Restructuring, Impairment and Plant Closing Costs (Credits)" to our consolidated financial statements.
● In November 2020, we entered into a sale and leaseback agreement to sell certain properties in Basel, Switzerland for approximately CHF 67 (approximately $73 million) and to lease those properties back for five years.
● On November 3, 2020, we completed the sale of the India-based DIY business, part of the Advanced Materials segment, to Pidilite Industries Ltd. and received cash of approximately $257 million. Under the terms of the agreement, we may receive up to approximately $28 million of additional cash under an earnout within 18 months if the business achieves certain sales revenue targets in line with the DIY business' 2019 performance.
●
On December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of approximately 42.4 million ordinary shares of Venator and received approximately $99 million in cash, which includes $8 million for a 30-month option for the sale of the remaining approximate 9.7 million ordinary shares we hold in Venator at $2.15 per share. See “Part I. Item 1. Business-Recent Developments-Sale of Venator Interest.”
● On January 15, 2021, we redeemed in full €445 million (approximately $541 million) in aggregate principal amount of our 2021 Senior Notes at the redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. Upon the redemption of the 2021 Senior Notes, we expect to incur an incremental cash tax liability of approximately $15 million in the first quarter of 2021 due to the U.S. tax foreign currency exchange gains recognized at redemption of the notes.
● On January 15, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Gabriel, a North American specialty chemical manufacturer of specialty additives and epoxy curing agents for the coatings, adhesives, sealants and composite end-markets, from funds affiliated with Audax Private Equity in an all-cash transaction of approximately $250 million, subject to customary closing adjustments, funded from available liquidity. The acquired business will be integrated into our Advanced Materials segment.
Long-Term Liquidity
●
We have deferred a portion of capital spending on a new MDI splitter in Geismar, Louisiana leaving approximately $115 million in 2021 and 2022. We expect to fund spending on all capital expenditures with cash provided by operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $593 million classified as current portion of debt, including $545 million on our 2021 Senior Notes, which we redeemed in full on January 15, 2021, debt at our variable interest entities of $47 million and certain other short-term facilities and scheduled amortization payments totaling $1 million. We intend to renew, repay or extend the majority of these short-term facilities in the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $491 million of cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, held by our foreign subsidiaries, including our variable interest entities. With the exception of certain amounts that we expect to repatriate in the foreseeable future, we intend to use cash held in our foreign subsidiaries to fund our local operations. Nevertheless, we could repatriate additional cash as dividends and the repatriation of cash as a dividend would generally not be subject to U.S. taxation. However, such repatriation may potentially be subject to limited foreign withholding taxes.
Restructuring, Impairment and Plant Closing Costs
For a discussion of restructuring plans and the costs involved, see “Note 13. Restructuring, Impairment and Plant Closing Costs” to our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements, see “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that involve a significant level of estimation and uncertainty and are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and/or results of operations. Summarized below are our critical accounting estimates.
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes reflect the net effects of temporary differences between assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. We evaluate deferred tax assets to determine whether it is more likely than not that they will be realized; valuation allowances are recorded to offset deferred tax assets unlikely to be realized. Valuation allowances are reviewed on a tax jurisdiction basis to analyze whether there is sufficient positive or negative evidence to support a change in judgment about the realizability of the related deferred tax assets. These conclusions require significant judgments. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider the cyclicality of businesses and cumulative income or losses. Cumulative historical losses incurred over periods of time limit our ability to consider more subjective projections of future taxable income. Changes in expected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in applicable jurisdictions affect our assessment of the realization of deferred tax assets. Our judgments regarding valuation allowances are also influenced by factors outside of business results that could impact our ability to utilize a deferred tax asset. As of December 31, 2020, we had total valuation allowances of $206 million, which represents a decrease of $25 million from the prior year, and we have recognized net deferred tax assets of $76 million. See “Note 20. Income Taxes” to our consolidated financial statements for more information regarding our deferred tax assets and valuation allowances.
Employee Benefit Programs
We sponsor several contributory and non-contributory defined benefit plans, covering employees primarily in the U.S., the U.K., The Netherlands, Belgium and Switzerland, but also covering employees in a number of other countries. We fund the material plans through trust arrangements (or local equivalents) where the assets are held separately from us. We also sponsor unfunded postretirement plans which provide medical and, in some cases, life insurance benefits covering certain employees in the U.S. and Canada. Amounts recorded in our consolidated financial statements are recorded based upon actuarial valuations performed by various independent actuaries. Inherent in these valuations are numerous assumptions regarding expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, discount rates, compensation increases, mortality rates and health care cost trends. Each of these critical estimates are subject to uncertainty and are assessed by us using historical data, as well as projections of future conditions. These assumptions and changes during the period are described in “Note 19. Employee Benefit Plans” to our consolidated financial statements.
We retain third party actuaries to assist us with judgments necessary to make assumptions on which our employee pension and postretirement benefit plan obligations and expenses are based. The effect of a 1% change in three key assumptions is summarized as follows (dollars in millions):
(1)
Estimated (decrease) increase on 2020 net periodic benefit cost
(2)
Estimated (decrease) increase on December 31, 2020 pension and postretirement liabilities and accumulated other comprehensive loss