ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Industry
The retail residential furniture industry's results are influenced by the overall strength of the economy, new and existing housing sales, consumer confidence, spending on large ticket items, interest rates, and availability of credit. These factors remain tempered by rising consumer debt, home inventory constraints, and tight access to home mortgage credit, all of which provide impediments to industry growth.
Our Business
We sell home furnishings in our retail stores and via our website and record revenue when the products are delivered to our customer. Our products are selected to appeal to a middle to upper-middle income consumer across a variety of styles. Our commissioned sales team members receive a high level of product training and are provided a number of tools with which to serve our customers. We also have over 120 in-home designers serving most of our stores. These individuals work with our sales team members to provide customers additional confidence and inspiration in their furniture purchase journey. We do not outsource the delivery function, something common in the industry, but instead ensure that the “last contact” is handled by a customer-oriented Havertys delivery team. We are recognized as a provider of high-quality fashionable products and exceptional service in the markets we serve.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant economic disruption and impacted our business. We closed our stores and ceased delivery operations in the second half of March 2020. Affected team members were paid during this period and most corporate personnel transitioned to working remotely. On April 1, we extended our store closure for another 30 days and furloughed 3,033 team members or approximately 87% of our workforce. During this period, we paid the cost of enrolled health benefits of those furloughed. Given the dramatic shock to the economy caused by the pandemic and uncertainty of the ongoing impact, we made a permanent reduction in our workforce of approximately 1,200 team members effective April 30 and extended the furlough of approximately 730 team members until June 1. We reopened 103 of our stores on May 1 and the remaining 17 were opened by June 20 and deliveries restarted on May 5.
We took several steps in April and May to strengthen our financial position and maintain financial flexibility by reviewing operating expenses, evaluating merchandise purchases, reducing capital expenditures, temporarily borrowing $43.8 million on our credit facility (which has since been repaid), and completing a $70.0 million sale-leaseback transaction in May.
Our business has been very strong since reopening. Consumers not negatively impacted financially are spending on their homes. Our online shopping and chat surged during the second quarter and continues to outpace our first quarter activity. Store traffic has increased as customers shop online but want to touch, see, and comfort test before purchasing. Consumers are also favoring quality over price and our average ticket has risen. We continue to work closely with local authorities and follow the guidance of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”), implementing enhanced cleaning measures, social distancing, and the utilization of face masks for the safety of our team members, customers, and communities.
Demand is outpacing product availability in many categories. Manufacturers are challenged to ensure safe work environments and have encountered raw material shortages and transportation capacity issues. Our supply chain and sales teams, supported by a strong IT infrastructure, are working to communicate with customers and manage delivery expectations.
The COVID-19 pandemic is complex and continues to evolve with the vaccine rollout. At this point, we cannot reasonably estimate the duration of the pandemic’s influence on consumers and the “nesting” economy.
Management Objectives
Management is focused on capturing more market share and increasing sales per square foot of showroom space. This organic growth will be driven by concentrating our efforts on our customers with improved interactions highlighted by new products, high touch service and better technology. The Company’s strategies for profitability include gross margin focus, targeted marketing initiatives, productivity and process improvements, and efficiency and cost-saving measures. Our focus is to serve our customers better and distinguish ourselves in the marketplace.
Key Performance Indicators
We evaluate our performance based on several key metrics which include net sales, comparable store sales, written comparable store sales, sales per square foot, gross profit, operating costs as a percentage of sales, EBITDA, cash flow, and earnings per share. The goal of utilizing these measurements is to provide tools in economic decision-making such as store growth, capital allocation and product pricing. We also employ metrics that are customer focused (customer satisfaction score, on-time-delivery and quality), and internal effectiveness and efficiency metrics (average sale per ticket, closing ratios per customer store visit, inventory out-of-stock, exceptions per deliveries, and lost time incident rate). These measurements aid us in determining areas of our operations that are in need of additional attention but are not evaluated in isolation from others, so as not to conflict with our company goals.
Comparable-store or “comp-store” sales is a measure which indicates the performance of our existing stores and website by comparing the growth in sales in store and online for a particular month over the corresponding month in the prior year. Stores are considered non-comparable if they were not open during the corresponding month in the prior year or if the selling square footage has been changed significantly. Large clearance sales events from warehouses or temporary locations are also excluded from comparable store sales. Stores closed during March, April, May and June were excluded from comp-store sales. The method we use to compute comp-store sales may not be the same method used by other retailers. We record our sales when the merchandise is delivered to the customer. We also track “written sales” and “written comp-store sales” which represents customer orders prior to delivery. The lag time between customers placing orders and delivery has grown in 2020 due to demand outpacing merchandise supply. As a retailer, comp-store sales and written comp-store sales are an indicator of relative customer spending and store performance. Comp-store sales, total written sales and written comp-store sales is intended only as supplemental information and is not a substitute for net sales presented in accordance with US GAAP.
Net Sales
The following outlines our sales and comp-store sales increases and decreases for the periods indicated. (Amounts and percentages may not always add to totals due to rounding.)
Sales in 2020 were impacted by COVID-19. Our written sales suffered during the first weeks of March as information and news coverage concerning the pandemic increased. We closed our stores and paused operations mid-March. We enacted our business continuity plan in April which anticipated continued low levels of sales. Most stores reopened on May 1 with approximately 76% of their original staff, store hours were reduced 17%, and delivery capacity was also reduced. Our business was very strong upon reopening, total written sales for the two months ended June 30, 2020 were up 13.9% and written comparable store sales were up 17.5% compared to the same two-month period in 2019. Our written sales remained strong during the third quarter of 2020 with total written sales up 22.8% and written comparable store sales rose 22.6% over the same period in 2019. Our written sales in the fourth quarter were up 16.7% and written comp-store sales rose 17.5%.
Our delivery capacity was reduced as part of our business continuity plan. Deliveries resumed on May 5 with reduced personnel and capacity and total sales from May 5 through June 30, 2020 were down 13.4% compared with the same period of 2019. Demand quickly began to outpace supply and we worked during the third quarter to increase our inventory levels and delivery capacity. We adjusted our operations during the third quarter, adding additional personnel and worked with our vendors to accelerate orders. Total sales for the third quarter of 2020 were up 3.9% and comparable-store sales were up 4.0% over the same period in 2019. Manufacturers remain challenged by raw material shortages, production changes to meet safety needs, and transportation logistics. Sales for the fourth quarter were up 12.9% and comp-store sales rose 13.7%.
Revenues by product category as a percentage of net sales in 2020 increased over 2019 by 220 basis points in upholstery sales and by 60 basis points in home office due to “nesting” buying, and our mattress business declined 160 basis points due to supply-chain disruption caused by COVID-19. Our in-home designer sales were hampered during 2020 but were 22.8% of our total sales compared to 25.3% in 2019. Total sales for 2020 decreased $54.0 million or 6.7% compared to 2019. Our comp-store sales, which includes online sales, increased 5.0% or $32.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The remaining $86.8 million of the change was primarily from our store closures in March through April and from new, closed and otherwise non-comparable stores.
Sales in 2019 declined for the year due to severe supply-chain disruptions as we moved several product lines out of China due to the increased tariffs. Although these changes were not fully resolved until the first quarter of 2020, we did see improvement late in the third quarter of 2019. Revenues by product category reflected the supply-chain disruption with a drop in case goods sales. Our mattress business saw an increase of 6.5% over 2018 due to customer purchases of new higher price point offerings. We offer a number of custom upholstery items and sales in this category rose 6.8% in 2019 over 2018. Total sales for 2019 decreased $15.4 million or 1.9% compared to 2018. Comp-store sales decreased 1.4% or $11.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018 and the remaining $3.8 million of the change was from closed, new and otherwise non-comparable stores.
Sales in 2018 declined for the year as business slowed markedly in the last half of the fourth quarter. Our revenues by category remained relatively consistent with prior years with increases in our accessories sales and delivery revenue. Our average ticket increased 4.4% which helped offset the decline in the number of transactions. Our in-home designers were part of 21.5% of our sales and their average ticket was double the average.
2021 Outlook
We cannot predict the impact of consumer spending on home furnishings post-pandemic. We believe the strengthening housing market will benefit our business as our footprint covers many of the fastest growing markets. We have an appealing online presence and well positioned stores, and we offer on-trend merchandise, knowledgeable salespeople, free in-home design service, and special-order capabilities.
Gross Profit
Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of the purchase price of the merchandise together with inbound freight, handling within our distribution centers and transportation costs to the local markets we serve. Our gross profit is primarily dependent upon vendor pricing, the mix of products sold and promotional pricing activity. Substantially all of our occupancy and home delivery costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses as is a portion of our warehousing expenses. Accordingly, our gross profit may not be comparable to those entities that include some of these expenses in cost of goods sold.
Year-to-Year Comparisons
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 56.0% in 2020 compared to 54.2% in 2019. The increase was primarily due to less discounting and sales promotions and product mix. The use of the LIFO method generated a $0.6 million charge in 2020 versus $1.8 million in 2019. The impact of changes in reserves, including LIFO, contributed approximately 23 basis points to the total gross profit improvement.
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 54.2% in 2019 compared to 54.6% in 2018. This decrease was driven by higher product and freight costs. Tariffs on products imported from China began in September 2018 and increased to 25% in March 2019. The use of the LIFO method generated a $1.8 million charge in 2019 versus $0.8 million in 2018. These negative impacts were partly offset by the increasing sales generated by our in-home designers. These sales generally have a higher margin driven by custom upholstery and accessories sales.
2021 Outlook
Our expectations for 2021 are for annual gross profit margins of approximately 55.3% to 55.8%. This assumes changes in merchandise and freight costs and its impact on the LIFO reserve.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses are comprised of five categories: selling, occupancy, delivery and certain warehousing costs, advertising, and administrative. Selling expenses primarily are comprised of compensation of sales team members and sales support staff, and fees paid to credit card and third-party finance companies. Occupancy costs include rents, depreciation charges, insurance and property taxes, repairs and maintenance expense and utility costs. Delivery costs include personnel, fuel costs, and depreciation and rental charges for rolling stock. Warehouse costs include supplies, depreciation, and rental charges for equipment. Advertising expenses are primarily media production and space, direct mail costs, market research expenses and agency fees. Administrative expenses are comprised of compensation costs for store personnel exclusive of sales team members, information systems, executive, accounting, merchandising, advertising, supply chain, real estate and human resource departments.
We classify our SG&A expenses as either variable or fixed and discretionary. Our variable expenses include the costs in the selling and delivery categories and certain warehouse expenses as these amounts will generally move in tandem with our level of sales. The remaining categories and expenses are classified as fixed and discretionary because these costs do not fluctuate with sales. The following table outlines our SG&A expenses by classification:
Year-to-Year Comparisons
Our SG&A dollars as a percent of sales decreased 40 basis points to 50.4% in 2020 from 50.8% in 2019. Our fixed and discretionary expenses fell $18.0 million or 6.9% in 2020 over 2019. This drop was due to actions taken as part of our business continuity plan. Advertising expenditures decreased approximately $9.4 million. Our occupancy costs were down $5.4 million in 2020 versus 2019 due to rent abatements in 2020 and a $2.4 million impairment charge in 2019. The workforce reduction in April also contributed to the reduction in our fixed and discretionary costs. Our variable expenses decreased 30 basis points as a percent of sales due to reduced third-party financing costs.
Our SG&A dollars as a percent of sales increased 130 basis points to 50.8% in 2019 from 49.5% in 2018. Our fixed and discretionary expenses increased $5.2 million or 2% in 2019 over 2018. This change was primarily due to an impairment loss of $2.4 million for a retail store and increases in our advertising and marketing expenses of $1.5 million. Our administrative costs rose $1.4 million driven primarily by increases in benefit costs including group medical expenses partly offset by lower incentive compensation. Our variable expenses increased slightly as a percent of sales due to higher selling costs.
2021 Outlook
Fixed and discretionary type expenses within SG&A are expected to be in the $261.0 to $263.0 million range for 2021. We anticipate higher advertising and marketing costs in 2021, increased compensation and incentive expense, and additional costs associated with new stores. Fixed and discretionary type expenses are expected to be at similar quarterly levels in 2021 as in 2020, as adjusted for the overall increases.
Variable costs within SG&A for 2021 are expected to be between 18.2% and 18.4% as a percent of sales.
Interest (Income) Expense, Net
We earned $0.9 million less interest income in 2020 than in 2019 due to lower rates and incurred $0.02 million more interest expense under our credit agreement.
Our interest expense for the year 2018 is primarily driven by amounts related to our lease obligations. For leases accounted for as capital and financing lease obligations under prior lease guidance, we recorded straight-line rent expense for the land portion in occupancy costs in SG&A along with amortization on the additional asset recorded. Rental payments were recognized as a reduction of the obligations and as interest expense during 2018.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 22.9% in 2020, 23.9% in 2019 and 25.0% in 2018. The rates vary from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to state income taxes. The rate in 2020 also benefitted from the recognition of state quality jobs credits of $1,527,000. See Note 7, “Income Taxes” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents at End of Year
At December 31, 2020, we had $200.1 million in cash and cash equivalents, and $6.7 million in restricted cash equivalents. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our restricted cash equivalents. We believe that our current cash position, cash flow generated from operations, funds available from our credit agreement, and access to the long-term debt capital markets should be sufficient for our operating requirements and to enable us to fund our capital expenditures, dividend payments, and lease obligations through the next several years. In addition, we believe we have the ability to obtain alternative sources of financing. We expect capital expenditures of approximately $23.0 million in 2021. Given the current uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we may adjust our capital expenditures as necessary or appropriate to support the operations of the business.
Long-Term Debt
In May 2020, we entered into the Third Amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”) with a bank. The Credit Agreement, which matures September 27, 2024, provides for a $60.0 million revolving credit facility. See Note 5, “Credit Arrangement” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our Credit Agreement.
Leases
We use operating leases to fund a portion of our real estate, including our stores, distribution centers, and store support space.
On May 18, 2020, we completed a sale and leaseback transaction of three facilities which we initiated in April as part of our business continuity plan. The total sales price for these properties, excluding costs and taxes, was $70.0 million and their net book value was approximately $37.9 million. See Note 8, “Leases” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our operating leases.
Share Repurchases
In February 2020, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $30.0 million to the $5.4 million remaining under a share repurchase program. We suspended the program between March and August of 2020. We made cash payments of $19.7 million for repurchases of our common stock through open market purchases during 2020 and there is approximately $16.8 million at December 31, 2020 that may yet be purchased under the existing authorization.
Cash Flows Summary
Operating Activities. Cash flow generated from operations provides us with a significant source of liquidity. Our operating cash flows result primarily from cash received from our customers, offset by cash payments we make for products and services, employee compensation, operations, and occupancy costs.
Cash provided by or used in operating activities is also subject to changes in working capital. Working capital at any specific point in time is subject to many variables, including seasonality, inventory selection, the timing of cash receipts and payments, and vendor payment terms.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $130.2 million driven primarily by net income of $59.1 million and non-cash adjustments to net income of $14.0 million, consisting of gains from sales of property and equipment, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense and changes in deferred income taxes, and by working capital inflows driven primarily by customer deposits, inventory turnover and timing of inventory purchases.
Net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 was $63.4 million driven primarily by net income of $21.9 million and non-cash adjustments to net income of $24.4 million, consisting of depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, impairment loss and changes in deferred income taxes, partially offset by net cash inflows associated with changes in working capital driven primarily by customer deposits and timing of inventory purchases.
Investing Activities. Cash provided by investing activities in 2020 reflects $76.3 million of proceeds from sale of property and equipment, primarily from the sale-leaseback transaction, net of $10.9 million of capital expenditures.
Cash used in investing activities in 2019 primarily reflected $16.8 million in capital expenditures.
Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities in 2020 primarily reflected $50.5 million of cash dividends paid and $19.7 million of share repurchases.
Cash used in financing activities in 2019 primarily reflected $29.8 million of share repurchases and $15.1 million of cash dividends paid.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into agreements which meet the SEC’s definition of an off-balance sheet arrangement other than operating leases and have made no financial commitments to or guarantees with respect to any unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships or special purpose entities.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of
December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
These amounts are for our undiscounted lease obligations recorded in our consolidated balance sheets, as lease liabilities. For additional information about our leases, refer to Note 8, “Leases” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)
Lease concessions related to the impact of COVID-19. For additional information about our leases, refer to Note 8, “Leases” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3)
The contractual obligations do not include any amounts related to retirement benefits. For additional information about our plans, refer to Note 10, “Benefit Plans” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Store Expansion and Capital Expenditures
We have entered new markets and made continued improvements and relocations of our store base. The following outlines the change in our selling square footage for each of the three years ended December 31 (square footage in thousands):
The following table summarizes our store activity in 2020 and plans for 2021.
These plans and other changes should increase net selling space in 2021 approximately 1% over 2020 assuming the new stores open and existing stores close as planned.
Our investing activities in stores and operations in 2020, 2019 and 2018 and planned outlays for 2021 are categorized in the table below. Capital expenditures for stores in the years noted do not necessarily coincide with the years in which the stores open.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
Our discussion and analysis is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, and evaluate our estimates and judgments required by our policies on an ongoing basis and update them as appropriate based on changing conditions.
Accounting estimates are considered critical if both of the following conditions are met: (a) the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material because of the levels of subjectivity and judgment needed to account for matters that are highly uncertain and susceptible to change and (2) the effect of the estimates and assumptions is material to the financial statements.
We have reviewed our accounting estimates, and none were deemed to be considered critical for the accounting periods presented.