Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
Pursuant to General Instruction G(2) to Form 10-K, the information required by this Item is incorporated herein by reference to the information under the caption "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the Company's 2020 Annual Report to Shareholders.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, including information included or incorporated by reference in this report, contains certain forward-looking statements with respect to the financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, strategy, future performance and business of the Company and its subsidiaries, including, without limitation:
● statements that are not historical in nature, and
● statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words "believes," "expects," "may," "will," "should," "could," "anticipates," "estimates," "intends" or similar expressions.
Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance or results. They involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements due to, among others, the following factors:
● competitive pressures among financial services companies may increase significantly,
● changes in the interest rate environment may reduce interest margins,
● general economic conditions, either nationally or in Missouri, may be less favorable than expected and may adversely affect the quality of the Company's loans and other assets,
● increases in non-performing assets in the Company's loan portfolios and adverse economic conditions may necessitate increases to the provisions for loan losses,
● costs or difficulties related to the integration of the business of Hawthorn and its acquisition targets may be greater than expected,
● legislative, regulatory, or tax law changes may adversely affect the business in which Hawthorn and its subsidiaries are engaged, and
● changes may occur in the securities markets.
We have described additional factors that could cause actual results to be materially different from those described in the forward-looking statements, which factors are identified in Item 1A of this report under the heading "Risk Factors." Other factors that we have not identified in this report could also have this effect. You are cautioned not to put undue reliance on any forward-looking statement, which speak only as of the date such statement is made. Except as otherwise required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.