Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion relates to the historical operations and financial statements of Hawkeye Systems, Inc. for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect,” and the like, and/or future-tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this Annual Report. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences in results and outcomes include, without limitation, those specifically addressed under the heading "Risks Factors" in our various filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report.
Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We have incurred recurring losses to date. Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
We expect we will require additional capital to meet our long-term operating requirements. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity or debt securities.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2019
We have had no operating revenues in our fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. Our activities have been financed by the proceeds of share subscriptions and loans. During our fiscal year ended June 30, 2019, we raised approximately $775,000 from private offerings of our common stock and raised an additional $400,000 during the period in connection with two promissory notes issued to accredited investors.
Total operating expenses in the year ended June 30, 2019 were $1,356,340 which is also the Company’s operating loss. The operating loss for this period is a result of legal and professional fees required to form the Company, for business development and regulatory filing expenses and fees. Our loss also reflect an other expense of $510,568 in interest with is based on the value of securities issued in lieu of interest payments.
Net loss for the year ended June 30, 2019 was $1,866,998.
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
We had operating revenues of $3,020,672 in our fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Cost of sales was $1,992,809 resulting in gross profit of $1,027,863, or 34%. These revenues are from the sale of PPE products. During our fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, we raised approximately $512,500 from private offerings of our common stock and an additional $221,000 from exercise of warrants. We raised additional funds of $277,000 from a related party, paid directly for the purchase of PPE, which is included in common stock payable, as of June 30, 2020. We raised an additional $383,500 from convertible notes.
Total operating expenses in the year ended June 30, 2020 were $2,217,981 compared to $1,356,340 for the same period in 2019. The increase in operating expenses is primarily a result of increased compensation, professional fees and a result of write down of inventory. The Company’s net loss was $2,600,468 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 compared to $1,866,998 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019. The net loss for this period is a result of general and administrative costs, professional fees, management compensation and significant cost of sales.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash balance at June 30, 2020 was $911,747 compared to $18,372 at June 30, 2019. We do not believe these cash reserves are sufficient to cover our expenses for our operations for fiscal year ending June 30, 2021. We will require additional funding for our PPE purchases and ongoing operations. While we have a loan payable from Radiant Systems of $1,305,800 and interest due from Radiant of $154,042, those amounts are reflected impaired on our balance sheet as a result of the litigation with Radiant. Nevertheless, we intend to vigorously pursue that litigation and expect to fully recover those amounts.
In addition, we intend to raise funds through the sale of equity and the exercise of warrants issued in private placements. Although to date we have had some warrant exercises for cash, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise money through this offering or through the exercise of warrants. If we cannot raise any additional financing prior to the expiration of the first quarter of 2021, we believe we will be able to obtain loans from management in the future, if necessary, but have no agreement in writing.
We are an emerging growth company and although we have begun to generate revenue from our PPE transactions, we have limited revenue to date. Under a limited operations scenario to maintain our corporate existence, we believe we will require additional funds over the next 12 months to complete our regulatory reporting and filings. However, we will require maximum participation through private placements, warrant exercises or alternative financings to implement our complete business plan.
There are no assurances that we will be able to obtain further funds required for our continued operations. Even if additional financing is available, it may not be available on terms we find favorable. Failure to secure the needed additional financing will have an adverse effect on our ability to remain in business.
Plan of Operation and Funding
We expect that working capital requirements will continue to be funded through equity offerings, warrant exercises, and related party advances in the near term. We have no guarantees or firm commitments that the related party advances will continue in the near term. Our working capital requirements are expected to increase with the growth of our business and sales of PPE.
Existing working capital, further advances, together with anticipated capital raises and anticipated cash flow are expected to be adequate to fund our operations over the next twelve months. We have no lines of credit or other bank financing arrangements. Generally, we have financed operations to date through proceeds from the sale of our common stock, warrant exercises and convertible loans.
Management anticipates additional increases in operating expenses relating to: (i) funding PPE purchases and sales; (ii) developmental expenses; and (iii) marketing expenses. We intend to finance these expenses with issuances of securities and through the exercise of outstanding warrants.
Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current shareholders. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.
Material Commitments
As of the date of this Current Report, we do not have any material commitments.
Purchase of Significant Equipment
We do not intend to purchase any significant equipment during the next twelve months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of the date of this Current Report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Going Concern
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $4,509,841 at June 30, 2020 and net loss from operations of $1,190,118.
The Company does not yet have a history of financial stability. Historically, the principal source of liquidity has been the issuance of equity securities and related party advances. In addition, the Company is in the development stage and has generated limited revenues since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The ability of the Company to continue operations is dependent on the success of Management’s plans, which include the sale of significant PPE products, raising of capital through the issuance of equity securities, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements.
The Company will require additional funding to finance the growth of its current and expected future operations as well as to achieve its strategic objectives. The Company believes its current available cash may be insufficient to meet its cash needs for the near future. There can be no assurance that financing will be available in amounts or terms acceptable to the Company, if at all.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
For a discussion of our accounting policies and related items, please see the Notes to the Financial Statements, included in Item 8.