Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
(dollars in millions, except per-share amounts)
Overview
Our Business
Howmet is a global leader in lightweight metals engineering and manufacturing. Howmet’s innovative, multi-material products, which include nickel, titanium, aluminum, and cobalt, are used worldwide in the aerospace (commercial and defense), commercial transportation, and industrial and other end markets.
Howmet is a global company operating in 20 countries. Based upon the country where the point of shipment occurred, the United States and Europe generated 68% and 21%, respectively, of Howmet’s sales in 2020. In addition, Howmet has operating activities in numerous countries and regions outside the United States and Europe, including Canada, Mexico, China and Japan. Governmental policies, laws and regulations, and other economic factors, including inflation and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates, affect the results of operations in countries with such operating activities.
Management Review of 2020 and Outlook for the Future
In 2020, Sales decreased 26% over 2019 primarily as a result of lower volumes in the commercial aerospace and commercial transportation markets driven by the impacts of COVID-19 and 737 MAX and 787 production declines along with a decrease in sales of $116 due to the divestiture of the forgings business in the United Kingdom in December 2019, all partially offset by 14% and 28% sales growth in the defense aerospace and industrial gas turbine markets, respectively, as well as favorable product pricing.
In the segments, Segment operating profit decreased 36% from 2019 due to lower volumes in the commercial aerospace and commercial transportation markets driven by the impacts of COVID-19 and 737 MAX and 787 production declines and unfavorable product mix, partially offset by favorable product pricing, net cost savings and 14% and 28% sales growth in the defense aerospace and industrial gas turbine markets, respectively.
Management continued its focus on liquidity and cash flows as well as improving its operating performance through cost reductions, streamlined organizational structures, margin enhancement, and profitable revenue generation. Management has continued its intensified focus on capital efficiency. This focus and the related results enabled Howmet to end 2020 with a solid financial position.
The following financial information reflects certain key highlights of Howmet’s 2020 results:
•Sales of $5,259 down 26% from 2019, with significant reductions in sales in commercial aerospace and commercial transportation markets, driven by COVID-19 and 737 MAX and 787 production declines;
•Net income from continuing operations of $211, or $0.48 per diluted share;
•Income from continuing operations before income taxes of $171, a decrease of $39, or 19%, from 2019;
•Total segment operating profit of $890, a decrease of $500, or 36%, from 2019(1);
•Cash provided from operations of $9; cash used for financing activities of $369; and cash provided from investing activities of $271;
•Cash on hand at the end of the year of $1,610; and
•Total debt of $5,075, primarily due to a decrease of $865 from 2019, reflecting repayments of $2,040 along with $20 of other debt, partially offset by issuance of debt during the second quarter of 2020 of $1,200 notes due 2025.
(1) See below in Results of Operations for the reconciliation of Total segment operating profit to Income from continuing operations before income taxes.
The Company rapidly executed on the separation plan that was announced during February 2019 with completion of the separation on April 1, 2020. The Company separated into two independent, publicly-traded companies, Howmet Aerospace Inc. and Arconic Corporation (the “Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction”). Howmet Aerospace is comprised of the Engineered Products and Forgings businesses (engine products, fastening systems, engineered structures, and forged wheels) and is listed under the stock ticker of “HWM.” Arconic Corporation is comprised of the former Global Rolled Products segment (global rolled products, aluminum extrusions, and building and construction systems) and is under the new company name Arconic Corporation, listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “ARNC.”
Results of Operations
Earnings Summary
Sales. Sales for 2020 were $5,259 compared with $7,098 in 2019, a decrease of $1,839, or 26%. The decrease was primarily a result of lower volumes in the commercial aerospace and commercial transportation markets driven by the impacts of
COVID-19 and 737 MAX and 787 production declines along with a decrease in sales of $116 due to the divestiture of the forgings business in the U.K. in December 2019, all partially offset by growth in the defense aerospace and industrial gas turbine markets and favorable product pricing.
Sales for 2019 were $7,098 compared with $6,778 in 2018, an increase of $320, or 5%. The increase was primarily due to volume growth in aerospace, commercial transportation, and industrial end markets; and favorable pricing when fulfilling volume above contractual share and renewing contracts; partially offset by lower sales from the divestitures of forgings businesses in the United Kingdom (divested in December 2019) and Hungary (divested in December 2018); and unfavorable foreign currency movements.
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS). COGS as a percentage of Sales was 73.7% in 2020 compared with 73.5% in 2019. The increase was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 and lower volumes, partially offset by net cost savings, favorable product pricing, intentional product exits, and the impairment of energy business assets of $10 in the second quarter of 2019. In 2019, the Company sustained a fire at a fasteners plant in France. Additionally, in mid-February 2020, a fire occurred at the Company's forged wheels plant located in Barberton, Ohio. The Company submitted insurance claims related to these plant fires and received partial settlements of $39 in 2020 compared to $25 in 2019, which were in excess of the insurance deductible. In 2020, the Company recorded charges of $41 related to plant fires compared to $26 in 2019. The downtime reduced production levels and affected productivity at the plants.
COGS as a percentage of Sales was 73.5% in 2019 compared with 75.4% in 2018. The decrease was primarily due to lower raw material costs; net costs savings; favorable product pricing; and costs incurred in 2018 that did not recur in 2019 related to settlements of certain customer claims, partially offset by an unfavorable product mix and the impairment of energy business assets of $10. Additionally, in 2019, the Company sustained a fire at a fasteners plant in France and recorded charges of $26 for higher operating costs, equipment and inventory damage, and repairs and cleanup costs. The Company submitted an insurance claim and received partial settlement of $25, which was in excess of its $10 insurance deductible. The insurance claim included $8 of margin not recognized from lost revenue due to the fire.
Selling, General Administrative, and Other Expenses (SG&A). SG&A expenses were $277, or 5.3% of Sales, in 2020 compared with $400, or 5.6% of Sales, in 2019. The decrease in SG&A of $123, or 31%, was primarily due to overhead cost reductions and lower net legal and other advisory costs related to Grenfell Tower of $20, partially offset by higher costs associated with the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction through June 30, 2020 of $2.
SG&A expenses were $400, or 5.6% of Sales, in 2019 compared with $371, or 5.5% of Sales, in 2018. The increase in SG&A of $29, or 8%, was primarily due to costs associated with the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction of $5 and higher annual incentive compensation accruals and executive compensation costs, partially offset by lower costs driven by overhead cost reductions and lower net legal and other advisory costs related to Grenfell Tower of $10, primarily due to insurance reimbursements.
Research and Development Expenses (R&D). R&D expenses were $17 in 2020 compared with $28 in 2019. The decrease of $11, or 39%, was primarily due to the continued consolidation of the Company's primary R&D facility in conjunction with ongoing cost reduction efforts.
R&D expenses were $28 in 2019 compared with $41 in 2018. The decrease of $13, or 32%, was primarily due to the consolidation of the Company's primary R&D facility in conjunction with ongoing cost reduction efforts.
Provision for Depreciation and Amortization (D&A). The provision for D&A was $279 in 2020 compared with $295 in 2019. The decrease of $16, or 5%, was primarily driven by asset impairments of the Disks long-lived assets group during the second quarter of 2019 (see Notes O and P to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-K) and the impact of divestitures as well as lower corporate software amortization and research center depreciation, which were partially offset by increased Forged Wheels D&A due to the capacity expansion in Hungary, capacity expansions at two U.S. facilities and an additional $6 D&A related to the Barberton fire.
The provision for D&A was $295 in 2019 compared with $314 in 2018. The decrease of $19, or 6% was primarily due to the impact of divestitures, as well as asset impairments of the Disks long-lived asset group during the second quarter of 2019 (see Note O and P to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-K).
Restructuring and Other Charges. Restructuring and other charges were $182 in 2020 compared with $582 in 2019 and $163 in 2018.
Restructuring and other charges in 2020 consisted primarily of a $113 charge for layoff costs, a $74 charge for U.K. and U.S. pension plans' settlement accounting; a $5 post-closing adjustment related to the sale of the Company’s U.K. forgings business; a $5 charge for impairment of assets associated with an agreement to sell an aerospace components business in the U.K that did not occur and the business was returned to held for use; $5 charge related to the impairment of a cost method investment, which were partially offset by a benefit of $21 related to the reversal of a number of prior period programs;
Restructuring and other charges in 2019 consisted primarily of a $428 charge for impairment of the Disks long-lived asset group; a $69 charge for layoff costs; a $46 charge for impairment of assets associated with an agreement to sell the U.K. forgings business; a $14 charge for impairment of properties, plants, and equipment related to the Company’s primary research and development facility; a $13 loss on sale of assets primarily related to a small additive business; a $12 charge for other exit costs from lease terminations primarily related to the exit of the corporate aircraft; a $9 settlement accounting charge for U.S. pension plans; a $5 charge for impairment of a cost method investment; and a $7 charge for other exit costs; which were partially offset by a benefit of $16 related to the elimination of the life insurance benefit for the U.S. salaried and non-bargaining hourly retirees of the Company and its subsidiaries.
Restructuring and other charges in 2018 consisted primarily of a $96 charge for pension plan settlement accounting; a $23 charge for pension curtailment; a $43 loss on sale of a Hungary forgings business; a $18 charge for layoff costs; a $12 charge for contract termination costs and asset impairments associated with the shutdown of a facility in Acuna, Mexico; which were offset partially by a $28 postretirement curtailment benefit.
See Note E to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-K.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $381 in 2020 compared with $338 in 2019. The increase of $43, or 13%, was primarily due to premiums paid on the early redemption of debt of $59 which was offset by lower debt outstanding in 2020 driven by the early redemption of $1,000, $889 and $151 of the principal amount of the 6.150% Notes, 5.400% Notes due in 2021 and 5.870% Notes due in 2022, respectively, in April and May 2020, which was offset by the issuance on April 24, 2020 of the 6.875% Notes due 2025 in the aggregate principal amount of $1,200.
Interest expense was $338 in 2019 compared with $377 in 2018. The decrease of $39, or 10%, was primarily due to lower debt outstanding, driven by the repayment of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the 1.63% Convertible Notes of approximately $403 on October 15, 2019, as well as costs incurred of $19 in 2018 related to the premium paid on the early redemption of the Company’s then outstanding 5.72% Senior Notes due in 2019 that did not recur in 2019.
On January 15, 2021, the Company completed the early redemption of all of the remaining $361 aggregate principal amount of the 5.400% Notes due in April 2021 (the "5.400% Notes") as well as $5 in accrued interest. The redemption of these 5.400% Notes will save approximately $5 in Interest expense, net in the first quarter of 2021 and $19 annually.
Other Expense (Income), Net. Other expense (income), net was $74 in 2020 compared with $31 in 2019. The increase in expense of $43 was primarily driven by the write-off of an indemnification receivable related to a Spanish tax reserve reflecting Alcoa Corporation's 49% share and Arconic Corporation's 33.66% share of a Spanish tax reserve of $53 and lower interest income of $19, which were partially offset by lower deferred compensation expense of $14 and favorable foreign currency movements of $16.
Other expense (income), net was $31 in 2019 compared with Other expense (income), net of $(30) in 2018. The increase in Other expense, net of $61 was primarily due to an increase in deferred compensation expense of $32 and the benefit recognized in 2018 from establishing a tax indemnification receivable reflecting Alcoa Corporation’s 49% share of a Spanish tax reserve of $29.
Income Taxes. Howmet’s effective tax rate was 23.4% (benefit on pre-tax income) in 2020 compared with the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%. The effective rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily as a result of a $64 benefit related to the release of an income tax reserve following a favorable Spanish tax case decision, a $30 benefit related to the recognition of a previously uncertain U.S. tax position, and a $30 benefit for a U.S. tax law change related to the issuance of final regulations that provide for an exclusion of certain high-taxed foreign earnings from the calculation of Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income ("GILTI"), partially offset by U.S. tax on foreign earnings, $8 of charges related to the remeasurement of deferred tax balances as a result of the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction, the tax impact of $49 of nondeductible loss related to the reversal of indemnification receivables associated with the favorable Spanish tax case decision, and the tax impact of other nondeductible expenses.
Howmet’s effective tax rate was 40.0% (provision on pre-tax income) in 2019 compared with the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%. The effective rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily as a result of foreign income taxed in higher rate
jurisdictions and subject to U.S. taxes including GILTI, foreign losses with no tax benefit, and other nondeductible expenses, partially offset by a $24 benefit associated with the deduction of foreign taxes that were previously claimed as a U.S. foreign tax credit, and a $12 benefit for a foreign tax rate change.
Howmet’s effective tax rate was 27.8% (provision on pre-tax income) in 2018 compared with the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%. The effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily as a result of a $60 charge to establish a tax reserve in Spain, a $59 net charge resulting from the Company's finalized analysis of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the "2017 Act"), and foreign income taxed in higher rate jurisdictions and subject to U.S. taxes including GILTI, partially offset by a $74 benefit related to the reversal of a foreign recapture obligation, a $38 benefit to reverse a foreign tax reserve that was effectively settled, and a $10 benefit for the release of U.S. valuation allowances.
Howmet anticipates that the effective tax rate in 2021 will be between 26.5% and 28.5%. However, changes in the current economic environment, tax legislation or rate changes, currency fluctuations, ability to realize deferred tax assets, movements in stock price impacting tax benefits or deficiencies on stock-based payment awards, and the results of operations in certain taxing jurisdictions may cause this estimated rate to fluctuate.
Net Income from Continuing Operations. Net income from continuing operations was $211, or $0.48 per diluted share, for 2020 compared to $126, or $0.27 per diluted share, in 2019. The increase in results of $85, or 67%, was primarily due to the non-recurring 2019 impact of the $428 charge for impairment of the Disks long-lived asset group included in Restructuring and other charges, a decrease of $123 due to lower SG&A costs, favorable product pricing, and a net $10 related to the settlement of the Spanish corporate income tax audit, partially offset by a decrease in volumes in the commercial aerospace and commercial transportation markets, the impact of COVID-19, and an increase in premiums paid on the early redemption of debt of $59.
Net income from continuing operations was $126, or $0.27 per diluted share, for 2019 compared to $309, or $0.63 per diluted share, for 2018. The decrease in results of $183, or 59%, was primarily due to higher Restructuring charges primarily due to the non-recurring 2019 impact of the $428 charge for impairment of the Disks long-lived asset group, higher SG&A costs related primarily to annual incentive compensation accruals and executive compensation costs, higher Other expense, net due to an increase in deferred compensation expense, and the benefit recognized in 2018 from establishing a tax indemnification receivable reflecting Alcoa Corporation’s 49% share of a Spanish tax reserve of $29 that did not recur in 2019, partially offset by volume growth, favorable product pricing, net cost savings, lower D&A due to the impact of divestitures as well as asset impairments related to the Disks long-lived asset group, lower Interest expense due to lower debt outstanding and costs incurred of $19 in 2018 related to the premium paid on the early redemption of debt that did not recur in 2019, and lower Income taxes primarily as a result of a benefit related to a U.S. tax election which caused the deemed liquidation of a foreign subsidiary’s assets into its U.S. tax parent.
Net Income. Net income was $261 for 2020 composed of $211 of income from continuing operations and $50 from discontinued operations, or $0.48 and $0.11 per diluted share, respectively.
Net income was $470 for 2019 composed of $126 of income from continuing operations and $344 from discontinued operations, or $0.27 and $0.76 per diluted share, respectively.
Net income was $642 for 2018 composed of $309 of income from continuing operations and $333 from discontinued operations, or $0.63 and $0.67 per diluted share, respectively.
See details of discontinued operations in Note C to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-K.
Segment Information
The Company’s operations consist of four worldwide reportable segments: Engine Products, Fastening Systems, Engineered Structures and Forged Wheels. Segment performance under Howmet’s management reporting system is evaluated based on a number of factors; however, the primary measure of performance is Segment operating profit. Howmet’s definition of Segment operating profit is Operating income excluding Special items. Special items include Restructuring and Other charges and Impairment of Goodwill. Segment operating profit may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Differences between segment totals and consolidated Howmet are in Corporate.
In the second quarter of 2020, the Company realigned its operations consistent with how the Co-Chief Executive Officers assess operating performance and allocating capital in conjunction with the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction (see Note C to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K). Prior period financial information has been recast to conform to current year presentation.
The Company produces aerospace engine parts and components and aerospace fastening systems for Boeing 737 MAX airplanes. In late December 2019, Boeing announced a temporary suspension of production of the 737 MAX airplanes. This decline in production had a negative impact on sales and segment operating profit in the Engine Products, Fastening Systems and Engineered Structures segments for the full year ended December 31, 2020. While regulatory authorities in the United
States and certain other jurisdictions lifted grounding orders beginning in late 2020, our sales could continue to be negatively affected from the residual impacts of the 737 MAX grounding.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes totaled $171 in 2020, $210 in 2019, and $428 in 2018. Segment operating profit for all reportable segments totaled $890 in 2020, $1,390 in 2019, and $1,105 in 2018. The following information provides Sales and Segment operating profit for each reportable segment for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020. See below for the reconciliation of Income from continuing operations before income taxes to Total segment operating profit.
Engine Products
Engine Products produces investment castings, including airfoils, and seamless rolled rings primarily for aircraft engines (aerospace commercial and defense) and industrial gas turbines. Engine Products produces rotating parts as well as structural parts, which are sold directly to customers. Generally, the sales and costs and expenses of this segment are transacted in the local currency of the respective operations, which are mostly the U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro.
Third-party sales for the Engine Products segment decreased $914 or 28% in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower volumes in the commercial aerospace end market driven by the impact of COVID-19 and the suspension of 737 MAX production, along with a decrease in sales of $116 from the divestiture of the forgings business in the U.K. (December 2019) (see Note U to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K), partially offset by higher volumes in the defense aerospace and industrial gas turbines end markets as well as favorable product pricing.
Third-party sales for the Engine Products segment increased $228 or 7% in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily as a result of higher commercial and defense aerospace volumes and favorable product pricing, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency movements and lower sales of $47 from divestitures of forgings businesses in the United Kingdom (divested in December 2019) and Hungary (divested in December 2018).
Operating profit for the Engine Products segment decreased $204, or 33%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower commercial aerospace sales volumes from the suspension of 737 MAX production, and COVID-19 productivity impacts, partially offset by cost reductions, favorable product pricing, and favorable sales volumes in the defense aerospace and industrial gas turbines end markets.
Operating profit for the Engine Products segment increased $157 or 34% in 2019 compared with 2018, due to net cost savings, higher sales volumes as noted previously, favorable product pricing, and lower raw material costs, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of new product introductions in aerospace engines and unfavorable product mix.
On December 1, 2019, the Company completed the divestiture of its forgings business in the United Kingdom. The forgings business primarily produces steel, titanium, and nickel based forged components for aerospace, mining, and off-highway markets. This business generated third-party sales of $116 and $131 in 2019 and 2018, respectively, and had 540 employees at the time of the divestiture.
On December 31, 2018, as part of the Company’s then ongoing strategy and portfolio review, the Company completed the sale of its forgings business in Hungary that manufactured high volume steel forgings for drivetrain components in the European heavy-duty truck and automotive market. This business generated third-party sales of $32 in 2018, and had 180 employees at the time of the divestiture.
In 2021 compared to 2020, demand in industrial gas turbines and defense aerospace end markets is expected to increase while the commercial aerospace end market is expected to be down driven by the impact of COVID-19. Favorable product pricing and cost reductions are expected to continue.
Fastening Systems
Fastening Systems produces aerospace fastening systems, as well as commercial transportation fasteners. The business’s high-tech, multi-material fastening systems are found nose to tail on aircraft and aero engines. The business’s products are also critical components of automobiles, commercial transportation vehicles, and construction and industrial equipment. Fastening Systems are sold directly to customers and through distributors. Generally, the sales and costs and expenses of this segment are transacted in the local currency of the respective operations, which are mostly the U.S. dollar, British pound and euro.
Third-party sales for the Fastening Systems segment decreased $316 or 20% in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower sales volumes in the commercial aerospace end market driven by the impact of COVID-19 and the suspension of 737 MAX production, along with lower volumes in the commercial transportation end market also impacted by the effects of COVID-19, only slightly offset by volume growth in the Industrial end market and favorable product pricing.
Third-party sales for this segment increased $30, or 2%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily attributable to higher volumes in the aerospace and commercial transportation end markets, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency movements.
Operating profit for the Fastening Systems segment decreased $149, or 38%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower commercial aerospace and commercial transportation sales volumes and COVID-19 productivity impacts, partially offset by cost reductions and favorable product pricing.
Operating profit for the Fastening Systems segment increased $39, or 11%, in 2019 compared with 2018, due to net cost savings and higher volumes as noted previously, partially offset by an unfavorable product mix.
In 2021 compared to 2020, demand in the commercial aerospace end market is expected to be down driven by the impact of COVID-19. Favorable cost reductions are expected to continue.
Engineered Structures
Engineered Structures produces titanium ingots and mill products for aerospace and defense applications and is vertically integrated to produce titanium forgings, extrusions forming and machining services for airframe, wing, aero-engine, and landing gear components. Engineered Structures also produces aluminum forgings, nickel forgings, and aluminum machined components and assemblies for aerospace and defense applications. The segments products are sold directly to customers and through distributors and sales, costs, and expenses of this segment are generally transacted in the local currency of the respective operations, which are mostly the U.S. dollar, British pound and the euro.
Third-party sales for the Engineered Structures segment decreased $328, or 26%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower sales volumes in the commercial aerospace end market driven by COVID-19, Boeing 787 production declines and 737 MAX production suspension, partially offset by an increase in the defense aerospace sales volume and favorable product pricing.
Third-party sales for the Engineered Structures segment increased $46, or 4%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily the result of higher aerospace end market sales volumes and favorable product pricing, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency movements.
Operating profit for the Engineered Structures segment decreased $47, or 39%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower commercial aerospace sales volumes and COVID-19 productivity impacts, partially offset by cost reductions, and favorable product pricing.
Operating profit for the Engineered Structures segment increased $56 or 88%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to net cost savings, favorable product pricing, lower raw material costs, and higher aerospace end market sales volumes, partially offset by unfavorable product mix.
In 2021 compared to 2020, demand in the commercial aerospace end market is expected to be down driven by the impact of COVID-19. Favorable cost reductions are expected to continue.
Forged Wheels
Forged Wheels provides forged aluminum wheels and related products for heavy-duty trucks, trailers, and buses globally. Forged Wheels' products are sold directly to OEMs and through distributors with the sales and costs and expenses of this segment transacted in local currency.
Third-party sales for the Forged Wheels segment decreased $290, or 30%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower volumes in the commercial transportation end market driven by COVID-19 and production downtime related to the Barberton plant fire (discussed below).
Third-party sales for the Forged Wheels segment increased $3, effectively flat in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily the result of stable volumes in the commercial transportation end market.
Operating profit for the Forged Wheels segment decreased $100, or 40%, in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower commercial transportation sales volumes and COVID-19 productivity impacts, partially offset by cost reductions.
Operating profit for the Forged Wheels segment increased $33 or 15%, in 2019 compared with 2018, primarily due to net cost savings and lower raw material costs.
In mid-February 2020, a fire occurred at the Company’s forged wheels plant located in Barberton, Ohio. The downtime reduced production levels and affected productivity at the plant. The Company has insurance with a deductible of $10.
In 2021 compared to 2020, demand in the commercial transportation markets served by Forged Wheels is expected to increase in most regions. Commercial transportation OEMs are expected to increase output as global economies recover from 2020 COVID-19 lows.
Reconciliation of Total segment operating profit to Income from continuing operations before income taxes
Total segment operating profit is a non-GAAP financial measure. Management believes that this measure is meaningful to investors because management reviews the operating results of the segments of the Company excluding Corporate results.
See Restructuring and Other Charges, Interest Expense, and Other Expense (Income), Net, discussions above under Results of Operations for reference.
Corporate expense decreased $147, or 64%, in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to lower annual incentive compensation accruals and executive compensation costs, lower costs driven by overhead cost reductions, lower contract services and outsourcing costs; lower research and development expenses; and lower net legal and other advisory costs along with costs incurred in 2019 that did not recur in 2020, including the impacts of facility fires, net of insurance of $6 and collective bargaining agreement negotiation costs of $9. Costs associated with the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction of $7, were an increase of $2 compared to 2019.
Corporate expense increased $62, or 37%, in 2019 compared with 2018 primarily due to costs associated with the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction of $5; higher annual incentive compensation accruals and executive compensation costs; net impacts associated with a fire at a fasteners plant of $9 (net of insurance reimbursements); and collective bargaining agreement negotiation costs of $9; partially offset by costs incurred in 2018 that did not recur in 2019 related to settlements of certain customer claims of $38; lower costs driven by overhead cost reductions; lower research and development expenses; and lower net legal and other advisory costs related to Grenfell Tower of $10.
Environmental Matters
See the Environmental Matters section of Note V to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Howmet maintains a disciplined approach to cash management and strengthening of its balance sheet. Management continued to focus on actions to improve Howmet’s cost structure and liquidity, providing the Company with the ability to operate effectively. Such actions included procurement efficiencies and overhead rationalization to reduce costs, working capital initiatives, and maintaining a sustainable level of capital expenditures.
Cash provided from operations and financing activities is expected to be adequate to cover Howmet's operational and business needs over the next 12 months. For an analysis of long-term liquidity, see Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements below.
At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents of Howmet were $1,610, of which $253 was held by Howmet's non-U.S. subsidiaries. If the cash held by non-U.S. subsidiaries were to be repatriated to the U.S., the company does not expect there to be additional material income tax consequences.
The cash flows related to Arconic Corporation have not been segregated and are included in the Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows for all periods prior to the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction.
During 2020 the Company identified a misclassification in the presentation of changes in accounts payable and capital expenditures in its previously issued Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows, and has revised its Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows for 2019. See Note A to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional detail.
Operating Activities
Cash provided from operations in 2020 was $9 compared with $461 in 2019 and $217 in 2018.
The decrease in cash used for operations of $452, or 98%, between 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to lower operating results of $874, partially offset by lower working capital of $355 and lower noncurrent assets of $46, noncurrent liabilities of $10 and pension contributions of $11. The components of the change in working capital included favorable changes in receivables of $739, inventories of $77, and taxes, including income taxes of $100, offset by accounts payable of $380, accrued expenses of $175 and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $6.
The increase of $244, or 112%, between 2019 and 2018 was primarily due to higher operating results of $279 and lower pension contributions of $30 and noncurrent assets of $13, partially offset by higher working capital of $57 and noncurrent liabilities of $21. The components of the change in working capital included unfavorable changes in accounts payable of $340 and taxes, including income taxes of $106, partially offset by favorable changes in receivables of $165 accrued expenses of $148, inventories of $71 and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $5.
Financing Activities
Cash used for financing activities was $369 in 2020 compared with $1,568 in 2019 and $649 in 2018.
The use of cash in 2020 was primarily related to the repayments on borrowings under certain revolving credit facilities (see below) and repayments on debt, primarily the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the 6.15% Notes due 2020 of approximately $2,040 (see Note R to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data), cash distributed to Arconic Corporation at the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction of $500, repurchase of common stock of $73 (see Note J to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data), debt issuance costs of $61, premiums paid on the redemption of debt of $59, and dividends paid to shareholders of $11. These items were partially offset by long-term debt issuance of $2,400 (of which $1,200 went with Arconic Corporation at the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction) and proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options of $33.
The use of cash in 2019 was primarily related to the repurchase of $1,150 of common stock (see Note J to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data); repayments on borrowings under certain revolving credit facilities (see below) and repayments on debt, primarily the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the 1.63% Convertible Notes of approximately $403 (see Note R to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data)); and dividends paid to shareholders of $57. These items were partially offset by proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options of $56.
The use of cash in 2018 was principally the result of $1,103 in repayments on borrowings under certain revolving credit facilities (see below) and repayments on debt, primarily related to the early redemption of the then remaining outstanding 5.72% Notes due in 2019 (see Note R to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and
Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K)) and $119 in dividends to shareholders. These items were partially offset by $600 in additions to debt, primarily from borrowings under certain revolving credit facilities.
The Company maintains a Five-Year Revolving Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with a syndicate of lenders and issuers named therein. On June 26, 2020, the Company entered into an amendment to its Credit Agreement to modify certain terms which provided relief from its existing financial covenant through December 31, 2021 and reduced total commitment available from $1,500 to $1,000. See Note R to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. In addition to the Credit Agreement, the Company has other credit facilities from time to time.
The Company may in the future repurchase additional portions of its debt or equity securities from time to time, in either the open market or through privately negotiated transactions, in accordance with applicable SEC and other legal requirements. The timing, prices, and sizes of purchases depend upon prevailing trading prices, general economic and market conditions, and other factors, including applicable securities laws.
The Company’s costs of borrowing and ability to access the capital markets are affected not only by market conditions but also by the short- and long-term debt ratings assigned to the Company by the major credit rating agencies.
The Company's credit ratings from the three major credit rating agencies are as follows:
Investing Activities
Cash provided from investing activities was $271 in 2020 compared with $528 in 2019 and $565 in 2018.
The source of cash in 2020 was primarily cash receipts from sold receivables of $422 and proceeds from the sale a rolling mill business in Itapissuma, Brazil for $50 and a hard alloy extrusions plant in South Korea for $62 which were related to Arconic Corporation (see Notes C and U to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data)), partially offset by capital expenditures of $267.
The source of cash in 2019 was primarily cash receipts from sold receivables of $995, proceeds from the sale of assets and businesses of $103 primarily from the sale of a forgings business in the U.K. for $64 and the sale of inventories and properties, plants, and equipment related to a small energy business for $13 as well as contingent consideration of $20 related to the sale of the Texarkana, Texas rolling mill (which was part of Arconic Corporation at the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction) (see Notes C and U to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data)), and the sale of fixed income securities of $73, partially offset by capital expenditures of $641, including expansion of a wheels plant in Hungary, expansion of aerospace airfoils capacity in the United States, and transition of the Tennessee plant to industrial production (which was part of Arconic Corporation at the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction).
The source of cash in 2018 was primarily cash receipts from sold receivables of $1,016 and proceeds from the sale of the Texarkana, Texas rolling mill and cast house of $302 which was related to Arconic Corporation, partially offset by capital expenditures of $768, including the horizontal heat treat furnace at the Davenport, Iowa plant (which was part of Arconic Corporation at the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction) and an expansion of a wheels plant in Székesfehérvár, Hungary.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
Howmet is required to make future payments under various contracts, including long-term purchase obligations, financing arrangements, and lease agreements. Howmet also has commitments to fund its pension plans, provide payments for other postretirement benefit plans, and fund capital projects.
As of December 31, 2020, a summary of Howmet’s outstanding contractual obligations is as follows (these contractual obligations are grouped in the same manner as they are classified in the Statement of Consolidated Cash Flows in order to provide a better understanding of the nature of the obligations and to provide a basis for comparison to historical information):
Obligations for Operating Activities
Raw material purchase obligations consist mostly of aluminum, cobalt, nickel, and various other metals with expiration dates ranging from less than one year to five years. Many of these purchase obligations contain variable pricing components, and, as a result, actual cash payments may differ from the estimates provided in the preceding table. The Company generally passes through metal costs in customer contracts with limited exceptions. In connection with the Arconic Inc. Separation Transaction, the Company entered into several agreements with Arconic Corporation that govern the relationship between the Company and Arconic Corporation following the separation, including Raw Material Supply Agreements.
Operating leases represent multi-year obligations for certain land and buildings, plant equipment, vehicles, and computer equipment.
Interest related to total debt is based on interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020 and is calculated on debt with maturities that extend to 2042.
Estimated minimum required pension funding and postretirement benefit payments are based on actuarial estimates using current assumptions for discount rates, long-term rate of return on plan assets, and health care cost trend rates, among others. It is Howmet’s policy to fund amounts for pension plans sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable country benefits laws and tax laws. Periodically, Howmet contributes additional amounts as deemed appropriate. The estimates reported in the preceding table include amounts sufficient to meet the minimum required. Howmet has determined that it is not practicable to present pension funding and other postretirement benefit payments beyond 2024 and 2029, respectively.
Layoff and other restructuring payments to be paid within one year primarily relate to severance costs, special layoff benefit payments, and lease termination costs.
Uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return may result in additional payments to tax authorities. The amount in the preceding table includes interest and penalties accrued related to such positions as of December 31, 2020. The total amount of uncertain tax positions is included in the “Thereafter” column as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of potential future payments. If a tax authority agrees with the tax position taken or expected to be taken or the applicable statute of limitations expires, then additional payments will not be necessary.
Obligations for Financing Activities
Howmet has historically paid quarterly dividends on its preferred and common stock. Including dividends on preferred stock, the Company paid $11 in dividends to shareholders during 2020. Because all dividends are subject to approval by Howmet’s Board of Directors, amounts are not included in the preceding table unless such authorization has occurred. As of December 31, 2020, there were 432,906,377 shares of outstanding common stock and 546,024 shares of outstanding Class A preferred stock. In 2020, the preferred stock dividend was $3.75 per share. Dividend of $0.02 per share on the Company's common stock was paid in the first quarter of 2020. As the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain, the Company is taking a series of actions to address the financial impact, including the suspension of dividends on common stock in April 2020. See Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors).
Obligations for Investing Activities
Capital projects in the preceding table only include amounts approved by management as of December 31, 2020. Funding levels may vary in future years based on anticipated construction schedules of the projects. It is expected that significant expansion projects will be funded through various sources, including cash provided from operations. Total capital expenditures are anticipated to be approximately 4% of sales in 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding bank guarantees related to tax matters, outstanding debt, workers’ compensation, environmental obligations, energy contracts, and customs duties, among others. The total amount committed under these guarantees, which expire at various dates between 2021 and 2040 was $44 at December 31, 2020.
Pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreement between the Company and Alcoa Corporation, the Company is required to provide certain guarantees for Alcoa Corporation, which had a combined fair value of $12 and $9 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and were included in Other noncurrent liabilities and deferred credits on the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheet. For a long-term supply agreement, the Company is required to provide a guarantee up to an estimated present value amount of approximately $1,398 and $1,353 at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, in the event of an Alcoa Corporation payment default. This guarantee expires in 2047. For this guarantee, subject to its provisions, the Company is secondarily liable in the event of a payment default by Alcoa Corporation. The Company currently views the risk of an Alcoa Corporation payment default on its obligations under the contract to be remote. In December 2019, Arconic Inc. entered into a one-year insurance policy with a limit of $80 relating to the long-term energy supply agreement. The premium is expected to be paid by Alcoa Corporation. In December 2020, a surety bond with a limit of $80 relating to the long-term energy supply agreement was obtained by Alcoa Corporation to protect Howmet's obligation. This surety bond will be renewed on an annual basis.
Howmet has outstanding letters of credit primarily related to workers’ compensation, environmental obligations, and leasing obligations. The total amount committed under these letters of credit, which automatically renew or expire at various dates, mostly in 2021, was $105 at December 31, 2020.
Pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreements between the Company and Arconic Corporation and between the Company and Alcoa Corporation, the Company is required to retain letters of credit of $53 that had previously been provided related to the Company, Arconic Corporation, and Alcoa Corporation workers’ compensation claims which occurred prior to the respective separation transactions of April 1, 2020 and November 1, 2016. Arconic Corporation and Alcoa Corporation workers’ compensation claims and letter of credit fees paid by the Company are being proportionally billed to and are being reimbursed by Arconic Corporation and Alcoa Corporation. Also, the Company was required to provide letters of credit for certain Arconic Corporation environmental obligations and, as a result, the Company has $29 of outstanding letters of credit relating to liabilities (which are included in the $105 in the above paragraph). $13 of these outstanding letters of credit are pending cancellation and will be deemed cancelled once returned by the beneficiary. Arconic Corporation has issued surety bonds to cover these environmental obligations. Arconic Corporation is being billed for these letter of credit fees paid by the Company and will reimburse the Company for any payments made under these letters of credit.
Howmet has outstanding surety bonds primarily related to tax matters, contract performance, workers’ compensation, environmental-related matters, and customs duties. The total amount committed under these surety bonds, which expire at various dates, primarily in 2021, was $43 at December 31, 2020.
Pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreements between the Company and Arconic Corporation and between the Company and Alcoa Corporation, the Company was required to provide surety bonds of $26 (which are included in the $43 in the above paragraph) that had previously been provided, related to the Company, Arconic Corporation and Alcoa Corporation workers’ compensation claims which occurred prior to the respective separation transactions of April 1, 2020 and November 1, 2016. Arconic Corporation and Alcoa Corporation workers’ compensation letters of credit and surety bond fees paid by the Company are being proportionally billed to and are being reimbursed by Arconic Corporation and Alcoa Corporation.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make certain judgments, estimates, and assumptions regarding uncertainties that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and disclosed in the accompanying Notes. These estimates are based on historical experience and, in some cases, assumptions based on current and future market experience, including considerations relating to the impact of COVID-19. The impact of COVID-19 is rapidly changing and of unknown duration and macroeconomic impact and as a result, these considerations remain highly uncertain. Areas that require significant judgments, estimates, and assumptions include the testing of goodwill, other intangible assets, and properties, plants, and equipment for impairment; estimating fair value of businesses acquired or divested; pension plans and other postretirement benefits obligations; stock-based compensation; and income taxes.
Management uses historical experience and all available information to make these judgments, estimates, and assumptions, and actual results may differ from those used to prepare the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements at any given time. Despite these inherent limitations, management believes that Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes provide a meaningful and fair perspective of the Company.
A summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies is included in Note A to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables the Company to provide the users of the Consolidated Financial Statements with useful and reliable information about the Company’s operating results and financial condition.
Goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized; instead, it is reviewed for impairment annually (in the fourth quarter) or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist or if a decision is made to sell or realign a business. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include deterioration in general economic conditions, negative developments in equity and credit markets, adverse changes in the markets in which an entity operates, increases in input costs that have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows, or a trend of negative or declining cash flows over multiple periods, among others. The fair value that could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from that used to evaluate the impairment of goodwill.
Goodwill is allocated among and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Howmet had four reporting units (Engine Products, Fastening Systems, Engineered Structures, and Forged Wheels) for 2020.
In reviewing goodwill for impairment, an entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (greater than 50%) that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If an entity elects to perform a qualitative assessment and determines that an impairment is more likely than not, the entity is then required to perform the quantitative impairment test (described below), otherwise no further analysis is required. An entity also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. The ultimate outcome of the goodwill impairment review for a reporting unit should be the same whether an entity chooses to perform the qualitative assessment or proceeds directly to the quantitative impairment test.
The Company determines annually, based on facts and circumstances, which of its reporting units will be subject to the qualitative assessment. For those reporting units where a qualitative assessment is either not performed or for which the conclusion is that an impairment is more likely than not, a quantitative impairment test will be performed. Howmet’s policy is that a quantitative impairment test be performed for each reporting unit at least once during every three-year period.
Under the qualitative assessment, various events and circumstances (or factors) that would affect the estimated fair value of a reporting unit are identified (similar to impairment indicators above). These factors are then classified by the type of impact they would have on the estimated fair value using positive, neutral, and adverse categories based on current business conditions. Additionally, an assessment of the level of impact that a particular factor would have on the estimated fair value is determined using high, medium, and low weighting. Furthermore, management considers the results of the most recent quantitative impairment test completed for a reporting unit and compares the weighted average cost of capital ("WACC") between the current and prior years for each reporting unit.
During the first quarter of 2020, Howmet's market capitalization declined significantly compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. Over the same period, the equity value of our peer group companies, and the overall U.S. stock market also declined significantly amid market volatility. In addition, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures designed to contain the spread, sales globally to customers in the aerospace and commercial transportation industries impacted by COVID-19 have been and are expected to be negatively impacted as a result of disruption in demand. As a result of these macroeconomic factors, we performed a qualitative impairment test to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of our
reporting units is less than its carrying value. As a result of this assessment, the Company performed a quantitative impairment test in the first quarter for the Engineered Structures reporting unit and concluded that though the margin between the fair value of the reporting unit and carrying value had declined from approximately 60% to approximately 15%, it was not impaired. Consistent with prior practice, a discounted cash flow model was used to estimate the current fair value of the reporting unit. The significant assumptions and estimates utilized to determine fair value were developed utilizing current market and forecast information reflecting the disruption in demand that has had and is expected to have a negative impact on the Company’s global sales in the aerospace industry. During the second and third quarters of 2020, there were no indicators of impairment identified for the Engineered Structures reporting unit.
During the 2020 annual review of goodwill in the fourth quarter, management proceeded directly to the quantitative impairment test for all four of its reporting units. The estimated fair values for each of the four reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values by 50% or greater; thus, there was no goodwill impairment. The annual goodwill impairment tests performed in the fourth quarter of 2019 and 2018 also indicated that goodwill was not impaired for any of the Company’s reporting units.
Under the quantitative impairment test, the evaluation of impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. Howmet uses a discounted cash flow ("DCF") model to estimate the current fair value of its reporting units when testing for impairment, as management believes forecasted cash flows are the best indicator of such fair value. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows, including sales growth, production costs, capital spending, and discount rate. Most of these assumptions vary significantly among the reporting units. Cash flow forecasts are generally based on approved business unit operating plans for the early years and historical relationships in later years. The WACC rate for the individual reporting units is estimated with the assistance of valuation experts. Howmet would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value without exceeding the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Properties, Plants, and Equipment and Other Intangible Assets. Properties, plants, and equipment and Other intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets (asset group) may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is determined by comparing the estimated undiscounted net cash flows of the operations related to the assets (asset group) to their carrying amount. An impairment loss would be recognized when the carrying amount of the assets (asset group) exceeds the estimated undiscounted net cash flows. The amount of the impairment loss to be recorded is measured as the excess of the carrying value of the assets (asset group) over their fair value, with fair value determined using the best information available, which generally is a DCF model. The determination of what constitutes an asset group, the associated estimated undiscounted net cash flows, and the estimated useful lives of the assets also require significant judgments.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company updated its five-year strategic plan and determined that there was a decline in the forecasted financial performance for the Disks asset group within the Engine Products and Forgings segment at that time. As such, the Company evaluated the recoverability of the Disks asset group long-lived assets by comparing the carrying value to the undiscounted cash flows of the Disks asset group. The carrying value exceeded the undiscounted cash flows and therefore the Disks asset group long-lived assets were deemed to be impaired. The impairment charge was measured as the amount of carrying value in excess of fair value of the long-lived assets, with fair value determined using a DCF model and a combination of sales comparison and cost approach valuation methods including an estimate for economic obsolescence. The impairment charge of $428, of which $247 and $181 related to the Engine Products and Engineered Structures segments, respectively, which was recorded in the second quarter of 2019, impacted properties, plants, and equipment; intangible assets; and certain other noncurrent assets by $198, $197, and $33, respectively. The impairment charge was recorded in Restructuring and other charges in the Statement of Consolidated Operations.
Discontinued Operations and Assets Held for Sale. The fair values of all businesses to be divested are estimated using accepted valuation techniques such as a DCF model, valuations performed by third parties, earnings multiples, or indicative bids, when available. A number of significant estimates and assumptions are involved in the application of these techniques, including the forecasting of markets and market share, sales volumes and prices, costs and expenses, and multiple other factors. Management considers historical experience and all available information at the time the estimates are made; however, the fair value that is ultimately realized upon the divestiture of a business may differ from the estimated fair value reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits. Liabilities and expenses for pension and other postretirement benefits are determined using actuarial methodologies and incorporate significant assumptions, including the interest rate used to discount the future estimated liability, the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, and several assumptions relating to the employee workforce (health care cost trend rates, retirement age, and mortality).
The interest rate used to discount future estimated liabilities for the U.S. is determined using a Company-specific yield curve model (above-median) developed with the assistance of an external actuary, while both the U.K. and Canada utilize models
developed by the respective actuary. The cash flows of the plans’ projected benefit obligations are discounted using a single equivalent rate derived from yields on high quality corporate bonds, which represent a broad diversification of issuers in various sectors, including finance and banking, industrials, transportation, and utilities, among others. The yield curve model parallels the plans’ projected cash flows, which have a global average duration of 12 years. The underlying cash flows of the bonds included in the model exceed the cash flows needed to satisfy the Company’s plans’ obligations multiple times. In 2020, 2019, and 2018, the discount rate used to determine benefit obligations for pension and other postretirement benefit plans was 2.40%, 3.00%, and 4.00%, respectively. The impact on the liabilities of a change in the discount rate of 1/4 of 1% would be approximately $90 and either a charge or credit of approximately $1 to earnings in the following year.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is generally applied to a five-year market-related value of plan assets (a fair value at the plan measurement date is used for certain non-U.S. plans). The process used by management to develop this assumption is one that relies on a combination of historical asset return information and forward-looking returns by asset class. As it relates to historical asset return information, management focuses on various historical moving averages when developing this assumption. While consideration is given to recent performance and historical returns, the assumption represents a long-term, prospective return. Management also incorporates expected future returns on current and planned asset allocations using information from various external investment managers and consultants, as well as management’s own judgment.
For 2020, 2019, and 2018, management used 6.00%, 5.60%, and 5.90%, respectively, as its expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, which was based on the prevailing and planned strategic asset allocations, as well as estimates of future returns by asset class. These rates fell within the respective range of the 20-year moving average of actual performance and the expected future return developed by asset class. For 2021, management anticipates that 6.00% will be the expected long-term rate of return for the plan assets. A change in the assumption for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 1/4 of 1% would impact earnings by approximately $4 for 2021.
In 2020, a net loss of $46 (after-tax) was recorded in other comprehensive loss, primarily due to the decrease in the discount rate, partially offset by the plan asset performance that was greater than expected, and by amortization of actuarial losses. After adjusting for the impact of Arconic Corporation's obligation, the net pension and other postretirement benefit obligation decreased less than 2% during 2020. In 2019, a net loss of $388 (after-tax) was recorded in other comprehensive loss, primarily due to the decrease in the discount rate, which was partially offset by the plan asset performance that was greater than expected, and by the amortization of actuarial losses. In 2018, a net loss of $114 (after-tax) was recorded in other comprehensive loss, primarily due to the impact of the adoption of new accounting guidance that permits a reclassification to Retained earnings for stranded tax effects resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, as well as the plan asset performance that was less than expected, which were partially offset by the increase in the discount rate and the amortization of actuarial losses.
Stock-Based Compensation. Howmet recognizes compensation expense for employee equity grants using the non-substantive vesting period approach, in which the expense is recognized ratably over the requisite service period based on the grant date fair value. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. The fair value of new stock options is estimated on the date of grant using a lattice-pricing model. The fair value of performance awards containing a market condition is valued using a Monte Carlo valuation model. Determining the fair value at the grant date requires judgment, including estimates for the average risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, volatility, and exercise behavior. These assumptions may differ significantly between grant dates because of changes in the actual results of these inputs that occur over time.
Compensation expense recorded in 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $46 ($42 after-tax), $69 ($63 after-tax), and $40 ($31 after-tax), respectively.
Income Taxes. The provision (benefit) for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach of accounting for income taxes. Under this approach, the provision (benefit) for income taxes represents income taxes paid or payable (or received or receivable) based on current year pre-tax income plus the change in deferred taxes during the year. Deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and liabilities are recovered or paid, and result from differences between the financial and tax bases of Howmet’s assets and liabilities and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when enacted.
Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all potential sources of taxable income, including income available in carry-back periods, future reversals of taxable temporary differences, projections of taxable income, and income from tax planning strategies, as well as all available positive and negative evidence. Positive evidence includes factors such as a history of profitable operations, projections of future profitability within the carryforward period, including from tax planning strategies, and Howmet’s experience with similar operations. Existing favorable contracts and the ability to sell products into established markets are additional positive evidence. Negative evidence includes items such as cumulative losses, projections of future losses, or carryforward periods that are not long enough to allow for the utilization of a deferred tax asset based on existing projections of income. Deferred tax assets for which no valuation allowance is recorded may not be realized upon changes in facts and circumstances, resulting in a future charge to establish a valuation allowance.
Existing valuation allowances are re-examined under the same standards of positive and negative evidence. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be realized, the appropriate amount of the valuation allowance, if any, is released. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are also re-measured to reflect changes in underlying tax rates due to law changes and the granting and lapse of tax holidays.
The 2017 Act created a new requirement that certain income earned by foreign subsidiaries, Global Intangible Low Taxed Income ("GILTI"), must be included in the gross income of the U.S. shareholder. In 2018, Howmet made a final accounting policy election to apply a tax law ordering approach when considering the need for a valuation allowance on net operating losses expected to offset GILTI inclusions. Under this approach, reductions in cash tax savings are not considered as part of the valuation allowance assessment. Instead, future GILTI inclusions are considered a source of taxable income that support the realizability of deferred tax assets.
Tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return are recorded when such benefits meet a more likely than not threshold. Otherwise, these tax benefits are recorded when a tax position has been effectively settled, which means that the statute of limitations has expired or the appropriate taxing authority has completed their examination even though the statute of limitations remains open. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized as part of the provision for income taxes and are accrued beginning in the period that such interest and penalties would be applicable under relevant tax law until such time that the related tax benefits are recognized.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance. See the Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance section of Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Guidance. See the Recently Issued Accounting Guidance section of Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-K.