Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information that we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. You should read this analysis in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains statements of a forward-looking nature relating to future events or our future financial performance. These statements are only predictions, and actual events or results may differ materially. In evaluating such statements, you should carefully consider the various factors identified in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, any forward-looking statements, including those set forth in “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Company Overview
We are a leading independent distributor and manufacturer of controlled environment agriculture (“CEA”, principally hydroponics) equipment and supplies, including a broad portfolio of our own innovative portfolio of proprietary branded products. We primarily serve the U.S. and Canadian markets, and believe we are one of the leading competitors by market share in these markets in an otherwise highly fragmented industry. For over 40 years, we have helped growers make growing easier and more productive. Our mission is to empower growers, farmers and cultivators with products that enable greater quality, efficiency, consistency and speed in their grow projects.
Hydroponics is the farming of plants using soilless growing media and often artificial lighting in a controlled indoor or greenhouse environment. Hydroponics is the primary category of CEA and we use the terms CEA and hydroponics interchangeably. Our products are used to grow, farm and cultivate cannabis, flowers, fruits, plants, vegetables, grains and herbs in controlled environment settings that allow end users to control key farming variables including temperature, humidity, CO2, light intensity spectrum, nutrient concentration and pH. Through CEA, growers are able to be more efficient with physical space, water and resources, while enjoying year-round and more rapid grow cycles as well as more predictable and abundant grow yields, when compared to other traditional growing methods.
We reach commercial farmers and consumers through a broad and diversified network of over 2,000 wholesale customer accounts, who we connect with primarily through our proprietary eCommerce marketplace. Over 80% of our net sales are into the specialty hydroponic retailers, through which growers are able to enjoy specialized merchandise assortments and knowledgeable staff. We also distribute our products across the U.S. and Canada to a diversified range of retailers of commercial and home gardening equipment and supplies that include garden centers, hardware stores, eCommerce retailers, commercial greenhouse builders, and commercial resellers.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
On December 14, 2020, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 9,966,667 shares of our common stock, including the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase 1,300,000 additional shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $20.00 per share, which resulted in net proceeds of $182.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. The proceeds from the IPO were used (i) to repay the amounts outstanding under the Term Loan Credit Agreement among our subsidiary obligors, Brightwood Loan Services, LLC and the other lenders party thereto (as amended to date, the “Term Loan Agreement”) of $76.6 million (includes accrued interest and fees of $0.3 million), (ii) to paydown certain amounts outstanding under the Encina Credit Facility of $33.4 million, (iii) to repay $3.3 million under the promissory note to JPMorgan Chase, N.A. through the U.S. Small Business Administrative Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”), and (iv) to pay $2.6 million to settle the Series A Preferred Stock dividend. Our common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on December 10, 2020.
Effects of Coronavirus on Our Business
The World Health Organization recognized COVID-19 as a public health emergency of international concern on January 30, 2020 and as a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. Public health responses have included national pandemic preparedness and response plans, travel restrictions, quarantines, curfews, event postponements and cancellations and closures of facilities including local schools and businesses. While the rollout of vaccines has begun, the timing of vaccinations, herd immunity, and the lifting of shelter in place and similar restrictions and movement restrictions is unknown. The global pandemic and actions taken to contain COVID-19 have adversely affected the global economy and financial markets.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented business continuity plans designed to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, such as restrictions on non-essential business travel, the institution of work-from-home practices and the implementation of strategies for workplace safety at our facilities. In March 2020, the majority of the employees at our headquarters transitioned to working remotely. For several weeks following the initial outbreak of COVID-19, we experienced a material impact to our supply chain that inhibited growth and results of operations. And from time-to-time during the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced delays in the receipt of goods from international and domestic suppliers as well as a general slowdown in freight processing times resulting in shipping delays and higher periodic freight costs. It is difficult to predict the extent to which COVID-19 may continue to spread. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, manufacturers in China and in North America are generally back in operation; however, new waves of the COVID-19 pandemic could result in the re-closure of factories in China and/or in North America. Quarantine orders and travel restrictions within the U.S. and other countries may also adversely impact our supply chains, the manufacturing of our own products and our ability to obtain necessary materials. Consequently, we may be unable to obtain adequate inventory to fill purchase orders or manufacture our own products, which could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. Furthermore, potential suppliers or sources of materials may pass the increase in sourcing costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic to us through price increases, thereby impacting our potential future profit margins.
Our customers reside in countries, primarily the U.S. and Canada that are currently affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Many of these customers have experienced shelter-in-place measures in attempts to contain the spread of COVID-19, including general lockdowns, closure of schools and non-essential businesses, bans on gatherings and travel restrictions. Although we cannot precisely quantify in absolute or relative terms, our accelerated rate of growth in net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 correlates with shelter-in-place orders issued in many locations in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our sales growth for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 46% higher than the same period in 2019. A portion of our net sales during this period could be due to pull-through demand for our products due to higher consumption of CEA products from individuals spending more time at home due to shelter-in-place measures. Although uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic remains, and various state budgets remain under economic pressure creating a greater chance of further cannabis legalization, we cannot assure you that such a rate of growth will continue.
Our business has remained resilient during the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, our manufacturing and distribution operations were viewed as essential services and continued to operate. Our key suppliers, retailers and resellers have been designated as essential services and remain open at this time; however, in certain places they are operating under reduced hours and capacity limitations. The majority of U.S. and Canadian cannabis businesses have been designated as essential by U.S. state and Canadian government authorities.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately impact our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows depends on future developments that are highly uncertain, rapidly evolving and difficult to predict at this time. Depending on the length and severity of COVID-19, we may experience an increase or decrease in customer orders driven by volatility in consumer shopping and consumption behavior. It is difficult to assess or quantify with precision the impact COVID-19 has directly had on our business since we cannot precisely quantify the impacts, if any, that the various effects (e.g. possible positive demand impact from shelter-in-place orders in the U.S., possible negative supply chain impact from workforce disruption at international and domestic suppliers and domestic ports and the possible negative impact on transportation costs) have had on the overall business. And so, while we do not believe that we are experiencing net material adverse impacts at this time, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global supply chains and distribution systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially and adversely affected. While we believe that we are well positioned for the future as we navigate the crisis and prepare for an eventual return to a more normal operating environment, we continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic as we evolve our business continuity plans and response strategy.
Components of Results of Operations
Net sales
We generate net sales from the distribution and manufacturing of hydroponic equipment and supplies to our customers. The hydroponic equipment and supplies that we sell include consumable products, such as growing media, nutrients and supplies that require regular replenishment and durable products, such as lighting and hydroponic equipment. Our scale allows us to provide delivery and service capabilities to a highly diverse group of customers across the U.S. and Canada. We do not sell directly to farmers but rather our customer base consists of specialty hydroponic retailers, garden centers, eCommerce and greenhouse suppliers.
We periodically offer sales incentives to our customers, including early pay discounts, volume-based rebates, temporary price reductions, advertising credits and other trade activities. Net sales reflect our gross sales less sales incentives which are estimated and recorded at the time of sale plus amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling costs. We anticipate that sales incentives could impact our net sales and that changes in such promotional activities could impact period-over-period results.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of material costs, inbound and outbound freight, direct labor costs primarily for production and warehouse personnel and depreciation and amortization of warehouse improvements and equipment. We expect our cost of goods sold to increase in absolute dollars in conjunction with our growth. However, we expect that, over time, cost of goods sold will decrease as a percentage of net revenue as a result of the scaling of our business including a higher proportion of the amount of proprietary and exclusive branded products that we sell.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consists primarily of marketing and advertising, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of all other assets and other selling, general and administrative costs, including but not limited to salaries, benefits, bonuses, professional fees and various costs related to becoming a publicly-traded company. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollar terms as we scale our operations to meet increased demand for our products and operate as a public company with increased costs associated with insurance, finance, legal and accounting functions; however, we also expect that the significant increase in our scale will result in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales decreasing over time.
Results of Operations Data
The results of operations data in the following tables for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 have been derived from the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations - Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, including amounts and percentages of net sales for each year and the year-to-year change in dollars and percent (amounts in thousands):
Net sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $107.1 million or 45.6% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net sales was primarily due to a 42.0% increase in volume of products sold and a 3.6% increase in price of products sold. The increase in volume of products sold was primarily related to (i) higher demand from the end-markets across numerous U.S. states, including but not limited to Michigan, Oklahoma and California, and Canada and (ii) higher demand for our proprietary and preferred branded products which grew at a faster pace than our distributed brands during the period. The increase in price was primarily related to list price increases and more effective sales incentives.
Although we cannot precisely quantify in absolute or relative terms, our accelerated rate of growth in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 correlates with shelter-in-place orders issued in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. A portion of our net sales during this period could be related to pull-through demand for our products due to higher consumption of CEA products from individuals spending more time at home due to shelter-in-place measures. Although uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic remains, and various state budgets remain under economic pressure, creating a greater chance of further cannabis legalization, we cannot assure you that such growth will continue.
Gross profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $36.5 million or 134.9% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit was primarily related to (i) the aforementioned increase in net sales and (ii) a significant increase in our gross profit margin percentage (gross profit as a percent of net sales). Our gross profit margin percentage increased to 18.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 11.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The higher gross profit margin percentage is primarily due to (i) a more favorable sales mix of proprietary and exclusive branded products, which typically carry a higher gross margin, (ii) lower freight cost, and (iii) inventory adjustments and write-downs that impacted the fourth quarter of 2019 primarily associated with our 2019 SKU rationalization.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $14.7 million or 33.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to an increase of $8.7 million in stock-based compensation expense, of which $6.1 million was directly triggered by our IPO in December 2020 (more fully described below). SG&A expense excluding the portion of stock-based compensation expense triggered by the IPO decreased from 18.6% in 2019 to 15.3% in 2020 due to economies of scale as our net sales grew faster than our selling, general and administrative expenses.
To support our long-term growth plan and our IPO, we undertook several initiatives in mid-to-late 2019 and early 2020 which resulted in the aforementioned $14.7 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, including increased stock-based compensation expenses, increased compensation costs (an increase of $3.9 million), and increased professional service fees, including, but not limited to, the hiring of executives such as our new Chief Executive Officer, President and Chief Financial Officer and engaging new third parties such as an IT consulting firm, a new auditor, and several accounting and audit-related consultants (an increase of $4.4 million).
As more fully discussed in Note 11, Stock-based compensation and 401K plan, in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we granted restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to certain officers, former directors and their affiliates which have vesting conditions including a performance-based vesting requirement which was satisfied upon the consummation of our IPO. As a result, our IPO in December 2020 triggered a significant performance-based stock compensation charge of $6.1 million for previously unrecognized time-based vesting prior to the IPO.
Impairment, restructuring and other
Impairment, restructuring and other expenses declined to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $5.4 million in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized expenses related to the impairment of intangible asset for customer relationships; $2.0 million for restructuring costs; and, other similar activities related to our capitalization. We also incurred $1.1 million for a registration statement which was delayed, and accordingly, the third-party costs were expensed. See Note 14, Impairment, restructuring and other, in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased by $3.3 million or 24.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The average balance of our interest bearing debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $2.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was offset by a decrease in the effective interest rate on the Term Loan Agreement, from approximately 13% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to an effective interest rate of approximately 10.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a reduction of the Term Loan Agreement interest rate margin which became effective on January 1, 2020 from LIBOR plus 10.0% to LIBOR plus 8.5% along with a reduction of average LIBOR from 2.5% to 1%. The decrease in interest costs was also slightly impacted by a decrease in the effective interest rate on our revolving credit facilities from approximately 9.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately 9.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on debt extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs associated with the payoff of the Term Loan Agreement in connection with the IPO. Similar costs in 2019 resulted from the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs when the BofA Credit Facility was refinanced with the Encina Credit Facility.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 generally reflects minimum U.S. state income taxes which do not fluctuate with pre-tax income or loss and Canadian taxes in one of our profitable Canadian subsidiaries.
The net income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019 is comprised of two amounts: (i) minimum U.S. state and Canadian provincial taxes which do not fluctuate with pre-tax income or loss; and, (ii) a deferred income tax benefit of $0.7 million primarily generated from the tax consequence of the impairment write-off which is not expected to recur.
Cumulative dividends allocated to Series A convertible preferred stock
Our Series A Preferred Stock accrued a cumulative dividend during 2020 which is presented as a reduction of net loss which results in the net loss attributable to common stockholders. Dividends did not accrue prior to 2020. Upon the consummation of our IPO in December 2020, the Series A Preferred Stock automatically converted into 2,291,469 shares of our common stock and we paid $2.6 million in cash to settle the Series A Preferred Stock dividend.
Results of Operations- Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, including amounts and percentages of net sales for each year and the year-to-year change in dollars and percent (amounts in thousands):
Net sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $23.3 million or 11.0% compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the volume sold during the period. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we realized an approximate 11.6% increase in volume offset by a 0.6% decrease in price. Our sales in certain non-U.S. markets were impacted by IT system challenges experienced during the integration of our Canadian businesses, an issue we do not expect to continue in 2020. The increase in U.S. volume sold was primarily related to (i) higher demand from the end-markets across numerous U.S. states, including but not limited to Oklahoma, Michigan and California and (ii) higher demand for our proprietary and preferred branded products which grew at a faster pace than our distributed brands for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $3.0 million or 12.5% compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in gross profit was primarily related to (i) the 11.0% increase in net sales and (ii) a small increase in gross profit margin percentage (gross profit as a percent of net sales) associated with a more favorable mix of proprietary and exclusive branded products as compared to the prior year. This increase was partially offset by the year-over-year decrease in net sales (as noted above) and associated gross profit in non-U.S. markets.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $1.6 million or 3.7% compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to (i) higher outside accounting and IT consultant expense of $2.0 million related to increased preparation for the IPO and (ii) higher bad debt expenses of $0.4 million primarily attributable to the challenges in the Canadian market in 2019 offset by lower facility expenses of $0.7 million due to adjusting our warehouse footprint.
Impairment, restructuring and other
Certain expenses of $10.0 million for 2019 and $7.2 million for 2018 primarily related to recognition of impairment on intangible assets, several restructuring and recapitalization events, and fees for various statutory filings. The impairment in 2019 related to the impairment of our intangible asset for customer relationships; in 2018, the impairment was for goodwill. Restructuring and recapitalization events refer to our debt refinancing in 2019 and 2018; our Preferred Stock Offering in 2019; the recapitalization and reverse merger in 2018; and, other similar activities related to our capitalization. In 2019, we filed a registration statement which was delayed, and the third-party costs were expensed. See Note 14, Impairment, restructuring and other, in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, reflecting an increase of $1.9 million or 16.0%.
The increase in interest expense was due in part to an increase in the effective interest rate on the Term Loan Agreement to 13.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 12.1% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Additionally, interest payments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 of $7.1 million and $6.8 million, respectively, were deferred and added to principal which resulted in additional interest on the increase in the principal balance.
Similarly, the effective interest rate on the revolving credit facilities increased to 9.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 5.0% to 5.1% for the year ended December 31, 2018 as we transitioned from the BofA Credit Facility in July 2019 to the Encina Credit Facility.
Income tax benefit
Income tax benefit was $0.7 million or 1.7% of loss before tax for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $0.4 million or 1.1% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The net income tax benefit is comprised of two amounts: a current tax expense of $27 thousand and $0.5 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively; and, a deferred income tax benefit of $0.7 million and $0.9 million for 2019 and 2018, respectively. The current portion of the provision (tax expense) generally reflects minimum U.S. state and Canadian provincial taxes which do not fluctuate with pre-tax income or loss. The deferred income tax benefit in each year was primarily generated from the tax consequence of the impairment write-offs; these income tax benefits are not expected to recur.
Net loss attributable to non-controlling interest
In May 2017, Hydrofarm Investment Corp. (“HIC”), acquired, through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Hydrofarm Holdings, LLC, all of the capital stock of Hydrofarm, Inc., in a transaction referred to as the “Formation Transaction.” Concurrently with the acquisition by HIC, Hydrofarm, Inc. converted from an S-Corp to a limited liability company and was renamed Hydrofarm, LLC. At the time of the Formation Transaction in May 2017, an investor in Hydrofarm, LLC retained a 12.5% interest in Hydrofarm Holdings, LLC which was presented as a non-controlling interest and allocated a portion of our losses until it was exchanged for shares in our parent and reclassified to controlling interest. See Note 1, Description of the business, basis of presentation and significant accounting policies - Recapitalization and reverse merger in 2018, in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”). However, management believes that certain non-GAAP financial measures provide investors of our financial information with additional useful information in evaluating our performance and that excluding certain items that may vary substantially in frequency and magnitude period-to-period from net income (loss) provides useful supplemental measures that assist in evaluating our ability to generate earnings and to more readily compare these metrics between past and future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies.
To supplement our audited consolidated financial statements which are prepared in accordance with GAAP, we use “Adjusted EBITDA” and “Adjusted EBITDA as a percent of sales” which are non-GAAP financial measures (collectively referred to as “Adjusted EBITDA”). Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as substitutes for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are several limitations related to the use of our non-GAAP financial measures as compared to the closest comparable GAAP measures. Some of these limitations include:
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the significant interest expense, or the amounts necessary to service interest or principal payments on our indebtedness;
• Adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization, and although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our tax provision that adjusts cash available to us;
• Adjusted EBITDA excludes the non-cash component of stock-based compensation;
• Adjusted EBITDA excludes the amount of employer payroll taxes on stock-based compensation; and
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters we consider not to be reflective, on a recurring basis, of our ongoing operations.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, employer payroll taxes on stock-based compensation and other unusual and/or infrequent costs, which we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing operating performance. The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1) Includes the amount of employer payroll taxes on share-based compensation
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING, INVESTING, AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities - Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting of $20.2 million in non-cash expense addbacks which were largely composed of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization and non-cash operating lease expense, less net loss of $7.3 million, payment of interest capitalized to principal of long-term debt of $13.9 million and a $43.8 million increase in working capital. The change in working capital primarily reflects a $43.2 million increase in accounts receivable and inventory for the period offset by a $10.7 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses. The net change was due to the additional working capital needed to support our growth in net sales.
Net cash used in operating activities was $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisting of net loss of $40.1 million offset by $26.2 million in non-cash addbacks which were largely composed of depreciation and amortization, impairment charges, interest expense added to principal and non-cash operating lease expense, plus a $0.6 million increase in working capital. The small change in working capital primarily reflects a $2.1 million net decrease in accounts receivable and inventories as collections and net sales during 2019 were slowed due to the industry downturn, plus a $1.2 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses as we were able to align payment of our obligations with our cash flow.
Investing Activities
We had minimal investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We made advances on notes receivable to third parties of $3.1 million the year ended December 31, 2019 and were repaid $2.0 million the year ended December 31, 2020. Our business was not capital intensive during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019 and purchases of property and equipment were $1.4 million and $0.8 million, respectively.
We have no material commitments for capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Our IPO was completed in December 2020 generating $182.3 million in net proceeds. We used a portion of the proceeds to pay off our Term Loan Agreement, to payoff our PPP loan and to paydown the outstanding balance under the Encina Credit Facility. Other activity was a net of $1.2 million from transactions with our Series A preferred stock investors and payments of $1.0 million on finance leases. Our net cash provided by these activities was $88.1 million for the period which we will use for our planned business growth and expansion.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our borrowings under the working capital credit facilities marginally exceeded repayments which reflected stable working capital needs for the period. We also received $21.7 million from our Series A Preferred Stock offering including proceeds from the issuance of notes which converted into the Series A Preferred Stock. Net cash provided by these activities was $19.9 million for the period.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities - Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended 2019 and 2018 (amounts in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This consisted of net loss of $40.1 million offset by $26.2 million in non-cash addbacks, which were largely composed of depreciation and amortization, impairment charges, interest expense added to principal and non-cash operating lease expense, plus a $0.6 million increase in working capital. The small change in working capital primarily reflects a $2.1 million net decrease in accounts receivable and inventories as collections and net sales during 2019 were slowed due to the industry downturn, plus a $1.2 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses as we were able to align payment of our obligations with our cash flow.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year was mostly due to the $22.0 million net drawdown of 2017 inventory (inventory purchased and carried in ending inventory at December 31, 2017 and sold in 2018) by the year ended December 31, 2018 as inventory overstock issues from the industry down-turn in late 2017 which continued into 2018 were addressed and rebalanced.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. In 2019, the cash was primarily for a $3.1 million advance on an interest bearing note receivable to a third party secured by equipment; in 2018, cash was used for a similar advance of $2 million to another third party.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $19.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisting primarily of proceeds from the Preferred Stock Offering, net of offering costs, of $21.7 million which includes proceeds from debt eventually converted into the preferred stock. The offering improved our capital and liquidity. The other significant activity was replacement of the BofA Credit Facility with the Encina Credit Facility.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $25.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily consisting of $52.6 million less offering costs of $4.5 million from our offering and concurrent offering of common stock to investors, and a net of $4 million from a related party. The offering improved our capital and liquidity. Our sources of cash provided by financing activities were offset by a $27.4 million net payment on our revolving credit facility.
SEASONALITY
Our net sales tend to be seasonally stronger in our fiscal second and third quarters which corresponds with the more robust in the warmer spring and summer months in North America (US and Canada are our primarily markets). This seasonal trend primarily relates to consumers of our grow media and nutrient products utilizing natural sunlight in their CEA or outdoor grow application.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our liquidity and capital resources were significantly improved by our IPO in December 2020 which resulted in net proceeds of $182.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. The proceeds from the IPO were used to repay $76.6 million (including accrued interest and fees of $0.3 million) outstanding under the Term Loan Agreement, $33.4 million outstanding under the Encina Credit Facility and $3.3 million under the PPP Loan, and to pay $2.6 million to settle the Series A Preferred Stock dividend.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of $75.2 million and restricted cash of $1.8 million; $1.0 million of interest-bearing liabilities; $15.0 million of inventory purchase commitment obligations, of which $3.0 million is due in 2021; and $22.1 million of lease obligations associated with our right-of-use assets of which $4.4 million is due in 2021.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP, we must make decisions that impact the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and the assumptions on which to base accounting estimates. In reaching such decisions, we apply judgments based on our understanding and analysis of the relevant circumstances, historical experience, and business valuations. Actual amounts could differ from those estimated at the time the Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, Description of the business, basis of presentation and significant accounting policies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of those significant accounting policies require us to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments or estimates. An accounting estimate is considered to be critical if it meets both of the following criteria: (i) the estimate requires assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made, and (ii) different estimates reasonably could have been used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period may have a material impact on the presentation of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, or results of operations. Our critical accounting estimates include the following:
Revenue recognition, volume rebates and provision for doubtful accounts
All of our revenue is derived from the sale of inventory and we recognize revenue as control of promised goods or services is transferred to customers. Arrangements have a single performance obligation and revenue is reported net of variable consideration which includes applicable volume rebates, cash discounts and sales returns and allowances. Variable consideration is estimated and recorded at the time of sale. The recognition of variable consideration requires the use of estimates. While we believe these estimates to be reasonable based on the then current facts and circumstances, there can be no assurance that actual amounts realized will not differ materially from estimated amounts recorded.
Provisions for uncollectible receivables due from customers are established based on management’s judgment as to the ultimate collectability of these balances and are recorded net of the receivable. The allowance is based on a combination of factors including the age of the account, the credit worthiness of the customer, payment terms, the customer’s historical payment history and general economic conditions.
Inventories
Inventories are primarily comprised of finished goods and are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value determined by the first-in, first-out method of accounting. Net realizable value represents the estimated selling price for inventories in the ordinary course of business, less all estimated costs of completion and costs necessary to make the sale. The determination of net realizable value requires significant judgment, including consideration of factors such as shrinkage, the aging of and future demand for inventory, expected future selling price we expect to realize by selling the inventory and our contractual arrangements with customers. Reserves for excess and obsolete inventory are based upon quantities on hand, projected volumes from demand forecasts and net realizable value. The estimates are subjective in nature and are made at a point in time, using available information, expected business plans, and expected market conditions. As a result, the actual amount received on sale could differ from the estimated value of inventory. Periodic reviews are performed on the inventory balance. The impact of changes in inventory reserves is reflected in cost of goods sold. The adequacy of our adjustments could be materially affected by changes in the supply and demand for our products.
Long-lived tangible and finite-lived intangible assets including right-of-use assets
Long-lived tangible assets, primarily property and equipment, are stated at cost; right-of-use assets are recorded under Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 842, Leases. Depreciation is provided on the straight-line method and based on the estimated useful economic lives of the assets. Intangible assets with finite lives, and therefore subject to amortization, include customer relationships, enterprise resource software and certain tradenames. These intangible assets are being amortized over their estimated useful economic lives typically ranging from 5 to 18 years.
We qualitatively assess potential indicators of impairment, referred to informally as Step 0, of our long-lived tangible and finite-lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset or asset group’s carrying value may not be recoverable. An asset group is defined as the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows can be associated with groups of assets and related liabilities. If indicators are present, we follow a quantitative two-step process when testing for impairment. In Step 1, we perform a recoverability test by analyzing whether the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from their use over their expected life and eventual disposition. If the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows is greater than the carrying amount, the test is passed and no further work is performed. If the carrying amount is greater than the sum of the future undiscounted cash flows, the recovery test is deemed to have failed, and Step 2 is performed. In Step 2, the fair values of the long-lived tangible and definite-lived intangible assets are determined, and an impairment charge is recognized based on the excess of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset over its respective fair value.
We use assumptions for revenue and expenses such as forecasted growth rates, margin estimates, historical cost ratios, capital additions and working capital needs, which are consistent with internal projections and operating plans. The forecast period is estimated using the remaining useful lives of primary assets in the group which involves judgement about assets to be included in the group subject to the test and to economic and technological obsolesce impacting the term. These and other assumptions are impacted by economic conditions and expectations of management and materially different assumptions in the future regarding the performance of the businesses could impact the useful lives of assets or estimate of future undiscounted cash flows.
Share-based compensation arrangements
Stock-based compensation cost is measured as of the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is expensed ratably over the service period of the award, which is typically the vesting period for time-based awards. Performance-based awards are expensed over the requisite service period based on achievement of performance criteria. We have elected to account for forfeitures when they occur, and any compensation expense previously recognized on unvested shares will be reversed.
The fair value of restricted stock awards is estimated based on the fair value of the common stock underlying the restricted stock awards. We estimated the fair value of option-based awards subject to only a service condition on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the option’s expected term and the price volatility of the underlying stock. The highly subjective and complex assumptions in the Black-Scholes model also include the estimated fair value of our common stock underlying the options.
To measure the value of the underlying common stock, the initial grant-date fair value of shares of common stock underlying the award is determined. Such valuation is the responsibility of, and determined by, the board of directors, with input from management. Until our IPO in December 2020, there was no public market for our common stock. Therefore, the board of directors determined the fair value of common stock at the grant date by considering a number of objective, subjective and highly complex factors including independent third-party valuations of our common stock, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of capital stock and general and industry specific economic outlook, among other factors.
For purposes of determining the fair market value of our common stock during the periods prior to our IPO, we used a third-party valuation service provider to provide support for our analysis. For most of 2019, we primarily relied on valuation methods which included using the discounted cash flow and guideline public company methods. From latter part of 2019 until our IPO, a “probability weighted expected return method” (the “PWERM method”) analysis was used which placed greater emphasis on the Preferred Stock Offering completed in December 2019 to establish the value of our common stock; the PWERM method requires us to develop assumptions and estimates for both the probability of an IPO liquidity event and remaining private outcomes, as well as the values we expect those outcomes could yield. These methods consider operating and financial performance including estimating future cash flows and discounting those cash flows at an appropriate rate, the lack of liquidity of capital stock and general and industry specific economic outlook, among other factors. These estimates will not be necessary to determine the fair value of underlying shares of common stock for new awards once the underlying shares begin trading. Estimates of fair market value for awards grants near our IPO incorporated the offering price in the calculation.
In 2020, we granted a restricted stock award that vest only upon the satisfaction of both performance-based and market-based conditions. In determining the fair value of the award, the “Monte Carlo Simulation Method” (the MCSM) was used to assess the likelihood of vesting of the restricted stock units based on the probability of both a triggering event and qualifying traded share price within the specified time frame. The resulting risk-adjusted probability was then applied to the underlying fair value of common stock incorporating scenarios under which various performance conditions and share price outcomes are modeled over the course of numerous iterations. Importantly, key assumptions in the MSCM included volatility, time horizon corresponding to the vesting measurement period of the award forecasted based on daily trading prices, risk free rate, and number of simulation trials.
For inputs into the Black-Scholes model, the expected stock price volatility for the common stock is estimated by taking the average historic price volatility for industry peers based on daily price observations over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants. Industry peers consist of several public companies in our industry which are of similar size, complexity and stage of development. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury implied yield at the date of grant. We have elected to use the “simplified method” to determine the expected term which is the midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term because it has no history upon which to base an assumption about the term; we believe the simplified method approximates a term if it were to be based on expected life.
We will continue to use the Black-Scholes model for option pricing.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, companies have extended transition periods available for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have elected this exemption to delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Where allowable, we have early adopted certain standards as described in Note 1, Description of the business, basis of presentation and significant accounting policies, in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, we are entitled to rely on certain exemptions as an emerging growth company, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b), (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we no longer meet the requirements of being an emerging growth company, whichever is earlier.
Recent accounting pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 1, Description of the business, basis of presentation and significant accounting policies - Recently issued accounting pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.