ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion, which has been prepared based on information available to us as of March 22, 2021, provides information that we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated operating results and financial condition. As a result of the completion of the Recapitalization Transaction, the financial statements of Seller are now the financial statements of the Company. Prior to the Recapitalization Transaction, the Company had no operating assets but, upon consummation of the Recapitalization Transaction, the business and operating assets of Seller sold to the Company became the sole business and operating assets of the Company. Accordingly, the financial statements of Seller and its subsidiaries as they existed prior to the Recapitalization Transaction and reflecting the sole business and operating assets of the Company going forward, are now the financial statements of the Company. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our other reports filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) as well as our consolidated financial statements (the "Financial Statements") and the notes thereto (the "Notes") included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. Terms not defined herein have the same meaning defined in the Financial Statements and the Notes.
The following MD&A generally discusses our consolidated financial condition and results of operations for 2020 and 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019.
Introduction to the Company
We are a U.S.-based gold producer that is focused on operating and developing our wholly owned Hycroft Mine in a safe, environmentally responsible, and cost-effective manner. Gold and silver sales represent 100% of our operating revenues and the market prices of gold and silver significantly impact our financial position, operating results, and cash flows. The Hycroft Mine is located in the State of Nevada and the corporate office is located in Denver, Colorado. The Hycroft Mine had proven and probable mineral reserves of 11.9 million ounces of gold and 478.5 million ounces of silver at December 31, 2020, as determined by deducting mineral reserves mined through December 31, 2020 from the mineral reserves estimated in the Hycroft Technical Report at July 31, 2019.
Operations restart
During the second quarter of 2019, we restarted open pit mining operations at the Hycroft Mine, and, during the third quarter of 2019, produced and sold gold and silver, which we have continued to do on an approximate weekly basis since restarting. As part of the 2019 restart of mining operations, existing equipment was re-commissioned, including haul trucks, shovels and a loader, upgrades were made to the crushing system and leach pad space was added to the existing leach pads. During 2020, we added mobile equipment through rentals, began construction of additional leach pad space, and increased our total headcount in order to increase our mining rate and also initiated construction of a new leach pad for future production.
As discussed throughout this MD&A, including within the Hycroft Mine section, during the year ended December 31, 2020 we have been unable to fully achieve our internal operating, processing, sales, and production cost targets, which has resulted in net operating losses and negative cash flows before financing activities creating substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Refer to the Going concern subsection of the Recent Developments section of this MD&A for additional details.
2020 Summary
We continued to ramp-up production at the Hycroft Mine in 2020 and to progress and develop our understanding of the requirements for implementing the proprietary two-stage sulfide heap oxidization and leach process on a commercial production scale. Following the May 29, 2020 Recapitalization Transaction, we also implemented a number of changes including hiring a new senior executive team and establishing a new leadership team at the mine with the technical talent and experience for implementing complex processing technologies. Additionally, as we operated pre-commercial test pads in 2020 we identified several important items as we worked to implement this novel processing technology.
•Senior management - We strengthened our executive management team with the addition of Diane R. Garrett, Ph.D., who was appointed as our President and Chief Executive Officer and as a director, effective as of September 8, 2020; Stanton Rideout, who was appointed as our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, effective as of October 20, 2020; Mike Eiselein, who was appointed as our Vice President, General Manager, effective as of October 27, 2020; and Jack Henris, who was appointed as our Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, effective as of January 11, 2021. Refer to Executive management changes of the Recent Developments section for additional details.
•Senior operations management - We realigned our organizational structure and recruited several key individuals mostly in the last three months of 2020 to bolster the on-site technical, financial, and operational teams, including:
◦James Berry, VP Exploration and Geology (former Romarco, Barrick);
◦Kenji Umeno, Process Manager (former Kinross Gold Corp., Fluor, Freeport-McMoRan Inc. (“Freeport”));
◦Jeff Griffin, Sr. Metallurgist (former Phelps Dodge, Freeport);
◦Santiago Garcia, Chief Metallurgist (former Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd., Newmont); and
◦New Mine Manager, Safety Manager, HR Manager, Controller and Project Manager.
•Technical team - We established an independent technical team comprised of Hycroft personnel and industry-leading consultants including John O. Marsden (Metallurgium), Hazen Research Inc. and Forte Dynamics, Inc. (“Forte”) with expertise in metallurgy, mine plan optimization, and heap stacking designs to assist with the development of the mining and process plans and alternatives.
•Recapitalization Transaction - On May 29, 2020, we completed the Recapitalization Transaction, which as of the closing date, among other things, resulted in a cash balance of $68.9 million and 50,160,042 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding. In addition, upon closing, we had 34,289,999 outstanding warrants to purchase an equal number of shares of our common stock and 12,721,623 Seller warrants to purchase 3,210,213 shares of common stock.
•Public offering - During the fourth quarter of 2020, we improved our financial position through an upsized public offering for 9,583,334 units, with each unit consisting of one share of common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock at a price of $10.50 per share. The public offering closed on October 6, 2020, providing us with net proceeds of approximately $83.1 million.
•Ounces and realized prices - During 2020, the Hycroft Mine produced 27,392 ounces of gold and 178,836 ounces of silver and sold 24,892 ounces of gold (average realized price of $1,779) and 136,238 ounces of silver (average realized price of $20.30). Our 2020 production levels have been negatively impacted by mining inefficiencies and an inability to achieve consistent oxidation of sulfide ores consistent with the Hycroft Technical Report's commercial scale.
•Proprietary process - During 2020, we made operational, technical staffing, and reporting improvements for the two-stage, heap oxidation and subsequent leaching of transitional ores, which is discussed further in the Processing section of the Hycroft Mine section. We also continued to enhance our understanding of the results yielded from oxidizing transitional ores, which was the primary type of ore stacked on the pre-commercial leach pads during 2020.
•Leach pad construction - During 2020, we spent $29.3 million on the leach pad expansion project. As discussed in the 2021 Outlook section, due to strategic shifts in our focus for 2021, we have temporarily deferred completing the construction and commissioning of the leach pad expansion. We expect to complete construction to the appropriate point in which we believe there would be minimal risk of adverse impacts to the leach pad. We also plan to complete the purchase of certain long-lead time items and continue to evaluate and apply value engineering for the project in 2021 with completion of construction and commissioning of the project in 2022.
•Cash flows and liquidity - Our available cash balance on December 31, 2020 was $56.4 million, following year-to-date 2020 net operating cash outflows of $110.5 million, cash outflows from investing activities of $31.1 million, and cash inflows from net financing activities of $188.7 million.
•Going concern - As of December 31, 2020, substantial doubt existed about our ability to continue as a going concern as we may need additional capital, which is contemplated based on, among other things, our current estimates of production, costs, metal prices, capital expenditures, and debt service obligations over the next twelve months from the filing date of this 2020 Form 10-K.
Recent Developments
Recapitalization Transaction
As discussed in Note 1 - Company Overview and Note 3 - Recapitalization Transaction to the Notes to the Financial Statements, on May 29, 2020, we consummated the Recapitalization Transaction as contemplated by a purchase agreement dated January 13, 2020, as amended on February 26, 2020 (the “Purchase Agreement”), by and among us, Acquisition Sub and Seller. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Acquisition Sub acquired all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of the direct subsidiaries of Seller and substantially all of the other assets of Seller and assumed substantially all of the liabilities of Seller. In conjunction with the Recapitalization Transaction, Seller’s indebtedness existing prior to the Recapitalization Transaction was either repaid, exchanged for indebtedness of the Company, exchanged for shares of our common stock or converted into shares of Seller common stock, and our post-Recapitalization Transaction indebtedness included amounts drawn under the Sprott Credit Agreement and the assumption of the newly issued Subordinated Notes (as such are defined herein). Upon closing of the Recapitalization Transaction, our unrestricted cash available for use totaled $68.9 million and the number of shares of our common stock issued and outstanding totaled 50,160,042. In addition, upon closing, we had 34,289,999 outstanding warrants to purchase an equal number of shares of our common stock at $11.50 per share and 12,721,623 warrants to purchase 3,210,213 shares of our common stock at a price of $44.82 per share (see Note 12 - Stockholders' Equity to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information). Upon closing of the Recapitalization Transaction and after giving effect to the terms of the business combination, the former holders of Seller’s indebtedness and common stock, including affiliated entities of such former holders, owned approximately 96.5% of our issued and outstanding common stock.
Going concern
As discussed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Notes to the Financial Statements, events and conditions exist that, when considered individually or in the aggregate, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern because without additional funding we may be unable to meet our obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the year-end 2020 financial statements were issued. Although we completed the Recapitalization Transaction during the 2020 second quarter and completed the underwritten public offering on October 6, 2020, for estimated proceeds net of discount and equity issuance costs of $83.1 million, using our internal forecasts and cash flow projection models, we currently project we will likely require additional cash from financing activities in less than 12 months from the date of this report to meet our operating and investing requirements and future obligations as they become due.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon securing additional funding for working capital, capital expenditures and other corporate expenses so that we can increase sales by achieving higher cost-effective operating tonnages and recovery rates and generate positive cash flows.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States. Efforts implemented by local and national governments, as well as businesses, including temporary closures, have had adverse impacts on local, national and global economies. We have implemented health and safety policies for employees, contractors, and visitors that follow guidelines published by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) and the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA). During 2020, especially the fourth quarter, our operations were limited by COVID-19 related absences, however the impact did not significantly adversely affect our operations. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance going forward will depend on certain developments, including but not limited to the duration and continued spread of the outbreak and strand mutations, the availability and use of vaccines, the development of therapeutic drugs and treatments, and the direct and indirect impacts on our employees, vendors, and customers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be fully anticipated or predicted. Since the Hycroft Mine represents the entirety of our operations, any further COVID-19 outbreaks at the mine site or any governmental restrictions implemented to combat the pandemic could result in a partial or an entire shutdown of the Hycroft Mine itself, which would negatively impact our financial position, operating results, and cash flows.
As a result of COVID-19, we have implemented numerous policies and initiatives, including, but not limited to:
•General travel and site access restricted to business-critical needs; discretionary travel strongly discouraged;
•Health and temperature checks required prior to boarding mine site transportation buses and prior to entering the mine site for all other employees and visitors;
•Increased cleaning and disinfecting of common areas, including mobile mining equipment cabs;
•Use of face coverings and social distancing, including limiting meetings to essential people with increased use of conference calls and webinars;
•Communications informing employees of their ability to take paid-leave for COVID-19-related matters;
•Employees who can have been permitted to work remotely; and
•Regularly monitoring local, state, and national publications and guidance for routine discussion among executives and management.
To date, COVID-19 related absences have limited our operations, but this did not materially disrupt our operations. Additionally, we have not experienced any material disruptions to our supply chain because of COVID-19. However, we can provide no assurance that as COVID-19 case spikes continue across the country, including in the vicinity of the Hycroft Mine, that our operations will not be materially adversely affected.
Executive management changes
Diane R. Garrett, Ph.D., was appointed as the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer and as a director, effective as of September 8, 2020, succeeding Stephen Jones, the former interim CEO. Dr. Garrett has over 25 years of senior executive management experience in the mining industry and an exceptional track record for developing projects and building companies and received her Ph.D. in Engineering and her Masters in Mineral Economics from the University of Texas at Austin.
Stanton Rideout was appointed as the Company's Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, effective as of October 20, 2020, succeeding Jeffrey Stieber, as former interim CFO. Mr. Rideout is a seasoned financial executive and has more than 30 years of senior executive experience in the mining and manufacturing industries and earned his Master’s in Business Administration from the University of Evansville and his Bachelor of Science, Business/Finance, from Western Kentucky University. Mr. Rideout is a Certified Public Accountant.
Jack Henris was appointed as the Company's Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, effective as of January 11, 2021. Mr. Henris is a highly experienced mining operations executive with more than 35 years of experience in senior operations positions with major mining firms and holds a Bachelor of Science in Geological Engineering from the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology.
Technical review summary
The new leadership team established at the mine launched into an extensive and detailed review of the Hycroft Mine and took immediate steps to rectify operational shortcomings, significantly reduce costs, and put in place an operating team aligned with the Company’s long-term strategy to establish the Hycroft Mine as a long-life, low-cost gold and silver producer. To date, the team has made significant strides at the Hycroft Mine through elevating the safety performance, improving the culture at Hycroft, establishing operational improvements, reducing spend, and identifying several areas for continued enhancement. The 2020 actions were quickly implemented and, in the fourth quarter alone, we saw significant improvement in costs as we reassigned our workforce to reduce our reliance on contractors as well as improved safety performance with a more than 50% year-over-year reduction in the TRIFR alone. Incident and near miss reporting increased as expected as the team initiated numerous campaigns to recognize, report, and eliminate safety hazards. In 2021, we expect to continue to see additional benefits from these 2020 actions.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we formed a technical team to support the new leadership team in ongoing data analysis, developing processing models for future larger-scale sulfide leach operations and incorporating data and results from the pre-commercial leach pads. The team is comprised of industry leading consultants with expertise in metallurgy, open pit mining and heap leach processing, heap leach stacking and modeling and other process technologies, and the team also has access to a leading research and development laboratory. The mine site’s process team and leadership in conjunction with the technical team focused its efforts on identifying and investigating opportunities for improvements in operating parameters in the sulfide heap oxidation and leach process resulting in additional work plans as described in the following 2021 Outlook section.
2021 Outlook
During 2021, we intend to focus our efforts on placing the Hycroft Mine in a position for a future ramp up of production at the appropriate time. Our focus for 2021 will entail mining and processing run-of-mine oxide and transitional ores aimed at maximizing ounce production and cash flows and preserving our cash. Compared to sulfide ore, run-of-mine oxide and transitional ore can be processed at a lower cost because this material does not require crushing, rehandling, or soda ash reagent application, and the shorter recovery cycle reduces working capital. The run-of-mine operating plan for 2021 will provide us the opportunity to complete and evaluate the results of the ongoing technical and optimization work for the proprietary two-stage heap oxidation and leach process. Based upon the findings and results of this evaluation process, we may update or file a new technical report. We currently have established goals and budgeted estimated costs for this work in 2021 or 2022.
Production outlook
Although the 2021 run-of-mine operating plan reduces annual mining activity from 2020, we expect to increase total annual production to 45,000 - 55,000 ounces of gold and 400,000 - 450,000 ounces of silver by drawing down inventory that has been previously stacked on the leach pads and stacking run-of-mine oxide and transitional material with a shorter recovery cycle. We anticipate that mining in the first four months of 2021 will be performed using the existing Hycroft fleet and a rental fleet, moving approximately 1.5 million tons per month of ore and waste. For the remainder of the year, we intend to mine approximately 500,000 tons of oxide and transitional ore and waste per month with a more cost-effective mining fleet. The run-of-mine operating plan will allow us to maintain our existing workforce while allowing time to optimize the mining plan, take additional steps to define the ore body, and resolve technical issues related to developing processes and procedures for the efficient and effective recovery of gold and silver from the two-stage heap oxidation and leaching of sulfide ore, thereby positioning the mine site for the first phase ramp up and future growth. At current metal prices, our full-year 2021 production costs are expected to exceed gold and silver revenues due to fixed costs and lower planned run-of-mine volumes. The run-of-mine volumes reflect the current processing capacity which is limited until we can complete expenditures necessary to refurbish the North Merrill-Crowe plant and construct the second refinery.
Technical activities
During the last few months of 2020 and into 2021, we have worked alongside our industry leading consultants to identify and investigate opportunities for improvements in operating parameters for the two-stage sulfide heap oxidization and leach process. The result of the work to date has identified a number of items that were not considered or included in the original plan and design but are critical to the success of this process. These findings included:
(1)adding a forced air injection system for the leach pad which is a key component of the oxidation process;
(2)developing a system for segregating solution flows to and from the heap leach pad to avoid co-mingling of solutions among heap lifts and ore processing stages that negatively impact recoveries and conditions on the leach pads;
(3)identifying that the finer crushed material requires agglomeration in order to achieve optimal permeability and gold and silver recoveries;
(4)understanding that higher soda ash, caustic soda, and cyanide consumption will be required which we experienced throughout the 2020 pre-commercial test pad programs and recently confirmed through the review of the test work;
(5)determining that some transitional ores are more economically attractive when processed as direct leach, run-of-mine material; and
(6)concluding that additional variability metallurgical and mineralogy studies will be required to better understand each of the geometallurgical domains in the ore body. While there was some variability work completed in the past, the recent test work has revealed that additional variability test work and compositing is necessary to fully understand the geometallurgy of each domain, and that additional sampling, including sampling below the water table where the predominance of the sulfide resources exist, is required given the complexity and variability of the large ore body.
The additional variability test work will also include detailed mineralogy studies as it is important to understand the role other minerals may play in the overall oxidation process and to enhance our ability to measure oxidation rates accurately and consistently. We have developed an approximate $10.0 million program for drilling and additional metallurgical and mineralogical studies in 2021. This program of work has been approved by our Board of Directors and is expected to be funded from existing cash and our current operating plans.
Based on our recent understanding of the two-stage heap oxidation and leach process, and consistent with our strategy to position the Hycroft Mine for a ramp up at the appropriate time, much of our technical efforts for 2021 will include focusing on achieving the below items:
•Pre-commercial leach pads - We expect to mine and stockpile at least 300,000 tons of sulfide ore in 2021 that, once sufficient additional work on the proprietary two-stage heap oxidation and leach process has been completed, will be available for testing to further refine operating parameters and measure its performance for large scale application of the oxidation heap leach.
•Leach pad expansion - We developed a stacking plan for the 2021 run-of-mine plan that utilizes existing leach pads, preserving the new leach pad for sulfide ores, and facilitates deferring the capital expenditures to complete and commission the new leach pad into 2022. During the upcoming year, in conjunction with the technical team, we plan to engage with engineering firms to assess value engineering opportunities and evaluate potential design changes to the current leach pad plans to better support the sulfide oxidation process.
•Technical analyses - The technical work programs taking place in 2021 may provide information for evaluating enhancements, updates, and opportunities for the novel process, while also considering processing technologies for certain ores that may generate enhanced value.
•Mine planning and exploration - The mining team was expanded to include a professional with expertise in geologic modeling and a track record for establishing successful exploration and geology programs. The mining team, together with Forte and the exploration team, are working to identify additional opportunities to explore areas with higher grade potential and identify mine plan enhancements for improved cash flows.
•Constraints to growth - The Hycroft Mine’s future ramp up is dependent on eliminating current mining and processing constraints. As it relates to mining, when we are ready to ramp up production, we will need to acquire a mining fleet capable of achieving targeted production, and recruit and train operators and maintenance staff. For processing, we will need to: (i) complete planned repairs to the Brimstone Merrill-Crowe plant and refinery; (ii) restore and recommission the North Merrill-Crowe plant, and complete detailed engineering, permitting, and installation for the adjacent refinery; (iii) ensure we have sufficient reagent availability and storage, handling, and application systems; and (iv) evaluate other supporting process plant and equipment required for future growth, namely material handling systems and crusher capacity.
Although the above items set forth our current expectations of focus during 2021, as information, test results, and data becomes available to us during the upcoming year, such findings may modify the scope, nature, and timing of technical, testing, engineering, and growth planning work actually performed.
Hycroft Mine
Operations
The following table provides a summary of operating results for the Hycroft Mine, which was restarted in April 2019:
As shown above, tons mined, ounces produced, and ounces sold significantly increased during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year due to restarting mining and operations in 2019. During the second quarter of 2019, we restarted open pit mining operations at the Hycroft Mine, and, during the third quarter of 2019, we produced and sold gold and silver, which we have continued to produce with sales occurring on an approximate weekly basis since restarting.
Mining
As shown in the table above, tons mined, ounces produced, and ounces sold significantly increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the prior year as we benefited from a full year of operations in 2020 and only eight months of mining in 2019. Operations were restarted in the second quarter of 2019 and, each quarter since restarting, generally there has been an increase in tonnage mined and placed on the leach pads, most notably in the second quarter of 2020 following the arrival and commissioning of mobile mining equipment rentals (nine haul trucks and one loader).
The gold grades of ore mined during 2020 were as planned and decreased from the comparable period of 2019 in which existing higher grade stockpile ore was mined prior to starting any drilling and blasting. During the first quarter of 2020, we commenced in-pit contractor drilling and blasting activities that continued through the fourth quarter of 2020, to provide fresh ore feed for the crusher, run-of-mine hauling, and waste removal in support of the full year plan.
Crushing
The crusher performed well during the second half of 2020, generally meeting internal targets for product fraction size, tonnage rates, and availability, as we continued to improve equipment and operating systems to ensure ongoing reliability. In the fourth quarter of 2020, tons crushed decreased as we moved to processing transitional ore as run-of-mine material and direct leaching.
Processing
During the second half of 2020, we made the following progress on the existing pre-commercial leach pad operations: (1) improved the reagent island including upgrading the agitator system to allow for more soda ash concentration in solution thereby increasing the application rate; (2) technical staffing additions; and (3) improved leach pad data gathering and reporting protocols. These improvements combined with the new technical leadership resulted in improved control and management of the leach pads during the second half of 2020. Accordingly, we did not experience any metallurgical balancing write-downs of recoverable gold ounces on the leach pads, which was an improvement from the first half of 2020 in which we wrote-off 10,492 ounces of gold.
During 2020, a majority of the ore placed on the pre-commercial leach pads was transitional ore, which based on studies and processing results in the second half of 2020, indicate this ore is more amenable to direct leach, as the costs and time associated with oxidizing transitional ore do not yield significantly better recoveries than routing transitional ore as direct leach. We expect a substantial portion of the ore mined over the next twelve months to be run-of-mine oxide ore and transitional ore before entering larger sulfide ore mining phases. Our recent understanding resulted in the decision to route transitional ore as run-of-mine direct leach.
Production and sales
Our 2020 production and sales levels increased over 2019 due to higher operating levels after renting nine haul trucks and a shovel in April 2020. Production and sales in 2020 were negatively impacted by the write-off of 10,492 ounces of gold during the first half of 2020. Average realized gold prices per ounce increased during 2020 and combined with the higher volumes resulted in revenue of $47.0 million as compared to $13.7 million in 2019.
Leach pad expansion project
During the second quarter of 2020, we commenced a leach pad expansion project on the north side of the Hycroft Mine property to provide us with leach pad space required for future operations. The initial stage of the leach pad project is being constructed in two phases by a contractor, with the first phase consisting of approximately 4.0 million square feet of pad space and infrastructure for ponds, pipes, and electrical controls, and the second phase consisting of approximately 4.6 million square feet. With respect to the first phase, we initially expected construction and commissioning to be completed by the end of 2020, but due to shifts in our focus for 2021, we have pushed back completing construction and commissioning of the leach pad expansion project.
During 2020 we spent $29.3 million on the leach pad expansion project, and now expect total phase one leach pad project spending to approximate $41.0 million, which is $5.0 million higher than our previous estimate. The leach pad expansion project represented approximately 87.7% of our total capital spending during the year ended 2020 and is expected to represent the largest percentage of capital spending for the first half of 2021. We expect to complete construction of the leach pad to the appropriate point in which we believe there would be minimal risk of adverse impacts to the leach pad.
2019 Hycroft Technical Report
M3 Engineering and Technology Corporation (“M3 Engineering”), in conjunction with SRK and the Company, completed the Hycroft Technical Report for a two-stage, heap oxidation and subsequent leaching of sulfide ores. The Hycroft Technical Report projects the economic viability and potential future cash flows for the Hycroft Mine when mining operations expand to levels presented in the Hycroft Technical Report.
The Hycroft Technical Report provides the results of the Hycroft Mine heap leach feasibility study that evaluated the possibility of oxidizing and leaching transitional and sulfide ores in a heap leach application. The feasibility analyzes a full-scale operation including construction of new leach pads and expanded mining activities. Key components of the process that currently exist onsite include heap leach pads, a crushing facility consisting of primary, secondary, and tertiary crushing, two Merrill-Crowe plants having a total capacity of 26,000 gallons per minute, and associated support facilities.
The Hycroft Technical Report presents a mineral reserve estimate as of June 30, 2019 of 12.0 million ounces of gold and 481.4 million ounces of silver contained in oxide, transitional and sulfide ores, which is projected to be mined over 34 years using typical truck and shovel open pit mining methods. The mine plan presented in the Hycroft Technical Report requires a range of approximately 85 to 100 million tons per year to be mined (both ore and waste) through the mine life. Over the course of the contemplated mine plan, 1.1 billion tons of ore are mined with a strip ratio of 1.17.
The Hycroft Technical Report outlines the test work done to demonstrate the viability of the two-stage, heap oxidation and subsequent leaching of sulfide ores. As outlined in the Hycroft Technical Report, a significant portion of the ore is crushed to a P80 of ½” and then mixed with soda ash to induce an alkaline oxidation process. After the ore has been oxidized to the desired extent, we will rinse the ore with fresh water and saturated lime solution and then cyanide leach the ore to extract the gold and silver. This process is the subject of a pending patent application.
The crushing system is initially designed to run at nominal capacity of 2.0 million tons per month ramping up to 3.0 million tons per month with the addition of two additional tertiary crushers. Soda ash is added during the crushing circuit to begin the oxidation process. The ore proceeds through three stages of crushing and exits into the fine ore stockpile, which is then hauled to leach pads.
The pH and alkalinity of the ore is managed on the leach pad using a soda ash solution that is applied to the material to achieve alkalinity levels for optimal oxidation characteristics. The process solutions are regularly sampled for reagent addition control and the soda ash solution in the heap is replenished on a regular basis to offset evaporation and carbonate consumption. The duration of the pre-oxidation is expected to take between 30 and 120 days, which is determined by the characteristics of the ore and the measured extent of oxidation based upon sulfate production.
When the pre-oxidation cycle has been completed, we rinse the ore first with fresh water and then with a saturated lime solution prior to the commencement of cyanidation leach. This is necessary to remove sulfate and bicarbonate from the heap and reduce cyanide loss during leaching. The alkalinity of the solution in the heap is monitored to ensure rinse completion prior to the start of cyanidation. The pH is controlled during cyanidation using lime. As the ore has already been oxidized and rinsed, it undergoes a nominal 60-day primary leach cycle.
Due to the high silver content of the pregnant solution, gold and silver are recovered by zinc cementation. We have two existing Merrill-Crowe plants that are used to process pregnant solution from the heap leach operation. The older plant has a capacity of 4,500 gallons per minute. The newer plant is considerably larger, with a nameplate capacity of 21,500 gallons per minute.
Overall, the Hycroft Technical Report shows 7.8 million ounces of payable gold and 344.1 million ounces of payable silver produced and sold.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Gold revenue
The table below summarizes gold sales, ounces sold and average realized prices for the following periods (dollars in thousands, except ounce amounts):
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our gold revenue was $44.3 million, compared to $12.8 million for the comparable period of 2019. The significant increase in revenue during the 2020 period was attributable to the mine operating for the entire period, whereas in 2019 revenue was first recorded in the third quarter following the operations restart. We also benefited from favorable gold prices, which increased $267 per ounce, or 18% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year period. While production increased and we benefited from favorable gold prices, gold revenues were adversely affected during the year ended December 31, 2020 by write-downs of recoverable gold ounces on the leach pads during the first half of 2020.
Silver revenue
The table below summarizes silver sales, ounces sold and average realized prices for the following periods (dollars in thousands, except ounce amounts):
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our silver revenue was $2.8 million compared to $0.9 million for the comparable period of 2019. Similar to gold revenue, the increase in silver revenue during 2020 compared to the 2019 period was primarily attributable to mining operations ongoing for the full year of 2020. We also benefited from favorable silver prices, which increased $2.89 per ounce for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. During 2020, silver revenue was negatively impacted from write-downs of recoverable silver ounces on the leach pads during the first half of 2020.
Total cost of sales
Total cost of sales consists of Production costs, Depreciation and amortization, Mine site period costs, and Write-down of production inventories. The table below summarizes total cost of sales for the following periods (dollars in thousands):
Production costs
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $41.7 million in Production costs, or $1,675 per ounce of gold sold, compared to $11.0 million in Production costs or $1,285 per ounce of gold sold during 2019. The increase in total production costs was due to an increase in gold ounces sold of 16,299 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 in conjunction with higher cost per ounce produced, which was primarily driven by an increase in contracted labor and equipment costs to meet the operational needs of the mine. Throughout 2020, and as discussed below, our high operating cost structure and low levels of production have resulted in write-downs to the inventory value per ounce of gold that approximate the net realizable value per ounce of gold after considering costs to complete and sell as determined in accordance with our accounting policies. Accordingly, our inventory value per ounce has been partially limited for the impact of recognizing Mine site period costs, which lowers the carrying value of leach pad inventories.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization was $2.9 million, or $116 per ounce of gold sold for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.0 million, or $118 per ounce of gold sold for year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in total depreciation and amortization costs was due to an increase in gold ounces sold of 16,299 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019, in which incremental equipment was placed into service during the year, and existing equipment incurred a full year of depreciation, as compared to depreciation in 2019 that was only incurred after the restart of the mine in April of 2019.
Mine site period costs
During the year ended December 31, 2020, inclusive of depreciation and amortization, we recorded $47.1 million of Mine site period costs for costs that were in excess of net realizable value per ounce of gold less costs to complete. During the year ended December 31, 2019, inclusive of depreciation and amortization, we recorded $2.2 million of Mine site period costs. Such period costs are generally the result of recurring or significant downtime or delays, unusually high levels of repairs, inefficient operations, overuse of processing reagents, or other unusual costs and activities.
Write-down of production inventories
As discussed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 - Inventories to the Notes to the Financial Statements, based on metallurgical balancing results, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we determined that 10,492 ounces of gold that had been placed on the leach pads were no longer recoverable and wrote-off these ounces. As a result, during 2020, the Company recognized a Write-down of production inventories on the consolidated statements of operations, which included Production costs of $16.7 million, and capitalized depreciation and amortization costs of $1.3 million. During the first half of 2020, we (1) were unable to consistently maintain leach pad conditions required to produce all of the estimated recoverable ounces placed on the leach pads, and (2) experienced instances of solution mismanagement in which pregnant metal-bearing solutions were circulated to areas of leach pads not currently in operation, thus making such ounces unrecoverable. During the second half of 2020, we did not experience any metallurgical balancing write-downs of recoverable gold ounces on the leach pads.
During the 2019 fourth quarter, based on metallurgical balancing results, the Company determined that 11,680 ounces of gold that had been placed on the leach pads were no longer recoverable and wrote-off these ounces. As a result of the write-off the Company recognized a Write-down of production inventories on the consolidated statements of operations of $16.4 million. Cash production costs written-off were $15.1 million and capitalized depreciation and amortization costs written-off were $1.3 million. The write-off of these ounces was primarily a result of mismanagement of solution flows. The lost gold and silver ounces were leached and captured in solution. However, prior to the solution being processed through the Merrill-Crowe plant, it was inadvertently commingled with barren solution and pumped to leach pads no longer in use, which will prevent it from being recovered in the future.
General and administrative
General and administrative totaled $21.1 million and $6.1 million during year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $15.0 million during 2020 was primarily due to: (1) an increase of $5.4 million in bonus compensation, largely related to the completion of the Recapitalization Transaction; (2) a $3.1 million increase in additional compensation related to salary continuation costs for severance and separation agreements to our former executives; (3) $3.4 million of insurance costs primarily related to a directors and officers run-off policy for Seller as a result of the Recapitalization Transaction; and (4) $3.0 million of additional legal and professional service fees associated with general corporate matters and obligations as a public company.
Accretion
We recorded $0.4 million of Accretion during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which related to our asset retirement obligation and future reclamation costs. Refer to Note 11 - Asset Retirement Obligation within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail.
Project and development
For the year ended December 31, 2019, Project and development was $7.7 million, while no such costs were incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020. In late 2018, the Company began the process of restarting mining operations and restarted active mining at the Hycroft Mine in April 2019. During 2019, project and development costs were incurred related to the restart of the Hycroft Mine, such as maintenance and repair of mobile mining equipment and processing equipment (crusher, and Merrill-Crowe facility), to prepare for use after sitting idle for several years. During 2019, project and development costs also related to the preparation of the feasibility study and metallurgical test work, including costs incurred to prepare the Hycroft Technical Report.
Pre-production depreciation and amortization
Pre-production depreciation and amortization represents expense recognized prior to the restart of mining operations at the Hycroft Mine and for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.1 million. Upon the April 2019 restart of the Hycroft Mine, we began capitalizing to inventory depreciation and amortization for ore on the leach pads. Due to the restart of the Hycroft Mine, no pre-production depreciation and amortization costs were incurred during the second half of 2019 or in 2020.
Care and maintenance
Care and maintenance totaled $3.5 million for the year ended 2019 was incurred from January to March of 2019 prior to the Hycroft Mine’s April 2019 restart, after which we no longer recorded such costs.
Interest expense, net
As discussed and detailed in Note 9 - Debt, Net to the Notes to the Financial Statements, Interest expense, net of capitalized interest totaled $43.5 million and $64.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest expense decreased by $21.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the prior year. The year-over-year decrease was a result of completing the Recapitalization Transaction on May 29, 2020, which caused the exchange or conversion of the majority of Seller's $627.8 million debt outstanding to equity, thus resulting in post-Recapitalization Transaction indebtedness totaling $159.8 million for the Sprott Credit Agreement and Subordinated Notes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our average debt balance was $350.9 million compared to $492.3 million for the prior year period.
Interest income
Interest income totaled approximately $0.2 million and $0.8 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest income was lower in 2020 primarily due to decreases in interest rate yields from the comparable periods of 2019.
Reorganization items
On March 10, 2015, the predecessor to Seller filed voluntary petitions for relief under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States Code with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware (the “Bankruptcy Court”) and incurred legal and professional fees of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to such matters. No such costs were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income taxes
There was no income tax benefit or expense, net, recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. Seller’s gain from the Recapitalization Transaction was fully offset by the use of Seller’s deferred tax assets. We have not recorded any future income tax benefits for net losses generated after the completion of the Recapitalization Transaction, due to a full valuation allowance recorded against our net operating loss carryforward earned after the Recapitalization Transaction. For additional details, refer to Note 15 - Income Taxes to the Notes to the Financial Statements.
Net loss
For the reasons discussed above, we recorded a net loss of $132.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $98.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Prior to the closing of the Recapitalization Transaction, our primary source of liquidity was proceeds received from the issuance of related-party debt instruments, which were used to finance the 2019 restart of mining operations at the Hycroft Mine and all working capital and capital expenditures thereafter. During the second half of 2019, we began to produce and sell gold and silver at the Hycroft Mine that provided a source of revenue and related cash flow. On May 29, 2020, we completed the Recapitalization Transaction that provided cash available for use of $68.9 million. As part of the Recapitalization Transaction, Seller’s indebtedness existing prior to the Recapitalization Transaction was either repaid, exchanged for indebtedness of the Company, exchanged for shares of our common stock or converted into shares of Seller common stock, and our post-Recapitalization Transaction indebtedness included amounts drawn under the Sprott Credit Agreement and the assumption of the newly issued Subordinated Notes. Additionally, on October 6, 2020, the Company issued 9,583,334 units in an underwritten public offering at an offering price to of $9.00 per unit (the "Public Offering"), with each unit consisting of one share of our common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of our common stock at an exercise price of $10.50 per share, for total proceeds net of discount and equity issuance costs of $83.1 million.
Our future liquidity and capital resources management strategy entails a disciplined approach to monitor the timing and amount of any operational tonnage ramp-up of the Hycroft Mine while attempting to remain in a position that allows us to respond to changes in our business environment, such as a decrease in metal prices or lower than forecasted future cash flows, and changes in other factors beyond our control.
Our primary cash requirements during 2020 related to the leach pad expansion project, of which $29.3 million of the revised estimated total cost of $41.0 million has been spent, and $110.5 million of cash was used in the operations of the Hycroft Mine, which was higher than planned due to leach pad inventory write downs and higher production costs, the mechanical limitations for mixing soda ash, and corporate and transactional expenses associated with becoming a public entity and completing the Recapitalization Transaction. We have yet to generate positive cash flow from operations and we do not expect to do so for the full year 2021.
As discussed in the Going concern subsection of the Recent Developments section of this MD&A, using estimates of future production costs, and operational metrics, at current metal spot prices, we do not expect the Hycroft Mine to generate positive net operating monthly cash flows during 2021. However, we have undertaken efforts aimed at managing our liquidity and preserving our capital resources by, among other things: (1) monitoring metal prices and the impacts (near-term and future) they have on our business; (2) developing plans and forecasts that we expect to be reliable and achievable considering historical operational and processing challenges encountered to date; (3) controlling our working capital and managing discretionary spending; and (4) planning the timing and amounts of capital expenditures at the Hycroft Mine and deferring such items that are not expected to benefit our near term operating plans.
Cash and liquidity
We have placed substantially all of our cash in operating accounts with a well-capitalized financial institution, thereby ensuring balances remain readily available. Due to the nature of our operations and the composition of our current assets, our Cash, Accounts receivable, and Metal inventories represent substantially all of our liquid assets on hand. Additionally, we are provided with additional liquidity as ounces are recovered from the Ore on leach pads, current, processed into finished goods, and sold at prevailing spot prices to our customers.
The following table summarizes our projected sources of future liquidity, as recorded within our financial statements (dollars in thousands):
(1)Metal inventories contained approximately 3,463 recoverable ounces of gold that are expected to be sold within the next 12 months. Assuming a gold selling price of $1,888 per ounce (the December 31, 2020 P.M. fix) and excluding any proceeds from silver sales, the sale of all gold ounces estimated to be recovered from our metal inventories would provide us with $6.5 million of revenue. See Note 4 - Inventories to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(2)Ore on leach pads, current contained approximately 21,869 ounces of gold that are expected to be processed into finished goods and then sold within the next 12 months. Assuming a gold selling price of $1,888 per ounce (the December 31, 2020 P.M. fix) and excluding any proceeds from silver sales, the sale of all gold ounces estimated to be recovered from our ore on leach pads would provide us with $41.3 million of revenue. We also have ore on leach pads that is not expected to be processed into finished goods within the next 12 months of $7.9 million; accordingly, we exclude this inventory from our projected sources of future liquidity. See Note 4 - Inventories to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information.
Twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the following periods (dollars in thousands):
Cash used in operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $110.5 million of cash in operating activities primarily attributable to a net loss of $132.7 million, the cash impact of which was equal to $59.6 million, and $50.9 million used for working capital, largely due to the $43.8 million used to increase production related inventories. The largest non-cash items during the year ended December 31, 2020 included the non-cash portion of interest expense of $38.8 million, and write-downs of production inventories of $17.9 million, which is discussed in Note 4 - Inventories to the Notes to the Financial Statements.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $59.8 million of cash for operating activities primarily attributable to a net loss of $98.9 million, a reduction in the asset retirement obligations of $1.9 million, the cash impact of which was equal to $22.8 million, and $37.0 million used for working capital largely due to increases in the following operating assets; production-related inventories ($38.6 million), materials and supplies inventories ($1.0 million) and prepaids and other, current and non-current ($0.5 million). The cash outflows caused by the items described above were partially offset by certain non-cash expenses such as $54.8 million non-cash portion of interest expense, $18.6 million write-down of production inventories, $2.1 million depreciation and amortization, $1.1 million stock-based compensation and $0.4 million of accretion. There were also increases in accounts payable ($3.4 million) that partially offset the cash outflows.
Cash used in investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we used $31.1 million and $12.3 million, respectively, in investing activities. For 2020, expenditures primarily related to construction of a large leach pad expansion project and totaled $29.3 million. For 2019, the vast majority of the costs related to (1) construction of new leach pad space for the restart of $6.2 million, (2) the purchase and installation of four new cone crushers for $4.0 million and (3) replacement and significant repairs of existing processing equipment for $0.8 million.
Cash provided by financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Seller issued $44.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.25 Lien Notes (net of issuance costs) which were used to fund the operations and capital needs through May 29, 2020. The remainder of the financing activities primarily related to the Public Offering of units, which was comprised of one share of our common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of our common stock. The Public Offering was completed on October 6, 2020, and resulted in proceeds net of discount and equity issuance costs of approximately $83.1 million. Additional financing activities primarily related to the Recapitalization Transaction, which provided $210.0 million in net cash flows and was used to repay Seller’s $125.5 million First Lien Agreement, a $6.9 million promissory note, and transaction costs and other issuance costs. See Note 3 - Recapitalization Transaction to the Notes to the Financial Statements for further discussion.
The amount of cash provided by financing activities was $68.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was due to $71.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.25 Lien Notes (net of issuance costs) issued to fund the restart of mining operations. Seller spent $2.9 million for legal and consulting fees related to the Recapitalization Transaction and $0.8 million to extend the maturity of the First Lien Credit Agreement.
Future capital and cash requirements
The following table provides our gross contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020, which are grouped in the same manner as they were classified in the cash flows in order to provide a better understanding of the nature of the obligations and to provide a basis for comparison to historical information. We believe the following provides the most meaningful presentation of near-term obligations expected to be satisfied using current and available sources of liquidity (dollars in thousands):
(1)Under the Sprott Royalty Agreement, we are required to pay a perpetual royalty equal to 1.5% of the Net Smelter Returns from our Hycroft Mine, payable monthly. Amounts presented above incorporate estimates of our current life-of-mine plan, and are based on consensus pricing for gold and silver. See Note 10 - Royalty Obligation to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(2)Mining operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations in the jurisdictions in which they are conducted and we are required, upon cessation of operations, to reclaim and remediate the lands that our operations have disturbed. The estimated undiscounted cash outflows of these remediation and reclamation obligations are reflected here. In the above presentation, no offset has been applied for the $59.9 million of our collateralized reclamation bonds.
(3)Under the Sprott Credit Agreement, we must pay interest beginning in the 13th month after the initial advance on May 29, 2020 to Sprott Private Resource Lending II (Collector), LP. See Note 9 - Debt, Net to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(4)As noted below in the Off-balance sheet arrangements section of this MD&A, we have operating leases for mine equipment and office space.
(5)We are required to pay a 4% net profits royalty, including advance royalty payments of $120,000 in any year where mining occurs on the Crofoot claims and an additional $120,000 if tons mined from the Crofoot claim blocks exceed 5.0 million tons. See Note 21 - Commitments and Contingencies. Amounts shown represent our current estimates of cash payment timing using consensus pricing for gold and silver.
(6)As noted below in the Off-balance sheet arrangements section of this MD&A, and as discussed in Note 5 - Prepaids and Other to the Notes to the Financial Statements, we have future purchase obligation for consignment inventory.
(7)Repayments of principal on debt consists of amounts due under the Sprott Credit Agreement and the Subordinated Notes. Included in the repayment of the Subordinated Notes principal is interest that has been capitalized as payable in-kind on a quarterly basis, and on a monthly basis for the Sprott Credit Agreement for the first 12 months after the initial advance. See Note 9 - Debt, Net to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(8)Additional interest payments consist of repayments of additional interest under the Sprott Credit Agreement, commencing February 28, 2021 and ending on the maturity date. See Note 9 - Debt, Net to the Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information.
Debt covenants
Our debt agreements contain representations and warranties, events of default, restrictions and limitations, reporting requirements, and covenants that are customary for agreements of these types.
The Sprott Credit Agreement (as defined herein) contains covenants that, among other things, restrict or limit the ability of the Company to enter into encumbrances (other than Permitted Encumbrances), incur indebtedness (other than Permitted Indebtedness), dispose of its assets (other than Permitted Disposals), pay dividends, and purchase or redeem shares, as such terms are defined in the Sprott Credit Agreement. The Sprott Credit Agreement requires the Company to ensure that, at all times, both its Working Capital and Unrestricted Cash are at least $10.0 million, as such terms are defined in the Sprott Credit Agreement, and that at least every six months we demonstrate our ability to repay and meet all present and future obligations as they become due with a financial Model that uses consensus gold prices discounted by 5.0%, as such terms are defined in the Sprott Credit Agreement. The Subordinated Notes (as defined herein) include customary events of default, including those relating to a failure to pay principal or interest, a breach of a covenant, representation or warranty, a cross-default to other indebtedness, and non-compliance with security documents.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, our off-balance sheet arrangements consisted of operating lease agreements (see Note 21 - Commitments and Contingencies to our Notes to the Financial Statements), a net profit royalty arrangement (see Note 21 - Commitments and Contingencies to the Notes to the Financial Statements), and a future purchase obligation for consignment inventory (see Note 5 - Prepaids and Other to the Notes to the Financial Statements).
Accounting developments
For a discussion of any recently issued and/or recently adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Notes to the Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
MD&A is based on our Financial Statements, that have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these statements requires us to make assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts. We base our assumptions and estimates on historical experience and various other sources that we believe to be reasonable at the time our estimates are made. Actual results may differ from amounts estimated in these statements, and such difference could be material. As such, future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty.
Although other estimates are used in preparing our financial statements, we believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. For information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Notes to the Financial Statements.
Ore on leach pads
Estimate Required:
The recovery of gold and silver at the Hycroft Mine is accomplished through a proprietary two-stage heap oxidation and leach process, the nature of which limits our ability to precisely determine the recoverable gold ounces in ore on leach pads. We estimate the quantity of recoverable gold ounces in ore on leach pads using surveyed volumes of material, ore grades determined through sampling and assaying of blastholes, and estimated recovery rates based on ore type and domain and level of oxidation actually achieved or expected to be achieved prior to leaching. The quantity of recoverable gold ounces and recovery rates varies based on ore mineralogy, steps in the leach process, ore grade, ore particle sizes and the percentage of cyanide soluble gold. The estimated recoverable gold ounces placed on the leach pads are periodically reconciled by comparing the related ore to the actual gold ounces recovered (metallurgical balancing). The ultimate recoverable gold ounces or life-of-mine recovery rate is unknown until mining operations cease. A change in the recovery rate or the quantity of recoverable gold ounces in our stockpiles or ore on leach pads could materially impact our financial statements.
Impact of Change in Estimate:
Changes in recovery rate estimates or estimated recoverable gold ounces that do not result in write-downs are accounted for on a prospective basis. If a write-down is required, ore on leach pads would be adjusted to market values before prospectively accounting for the remaining costs and revised estimated recoverable gold ounces. During the year ended December 31, 2020, based on our metallurgical balancing results, we determined that 10,492 ounces of gold that had been placed on the leach pads were no longer recoverable and wrote-off these ounces, which resulted in write-downs of production costs of $16.7 million and capitalized depreciation and amortization of $1.3 million. During the second half of 2020, we determined that no metallurgical balancing adjustment was needed and as such did not recognize write-downs of production inventories. The write-off of these ounces in the first and second quarters of 2020 was primarily due to the mismanagement of the oxidation process including inadequately adjusting variables in the oxidation process for changes in the ore type based on domain. As a result, we determined that we would recover fewer ounces than planned from those affected sections of the leach pads.
At December 31, 2020, if our estimate of recoverable gold ounces on the leach pad decreased by 2.5% or 5.0%, recoverable gold ounces in ore on leach pads would decrease by approximately 651 ounces or 1,302 ounces, respectively, which would require a write-down of $1.1 million or $2.3 million, respectively, of our ore on leach pad costs before prospectively accounting for the remaining costs. A 2.5% or 5.0% increase to our estimate of recoverable gold ounces in ore on leach pads would increase the estimated recoverable ounces by the aforementioned amounts and reduce our weighted average cost per ounce by approximately $42 per ounce or $83 per ounce, respectively, which would be accounted for on a prospective basis.
Proven and probable mineral reserves
Estimate Required:
Proven and probable mineral reserves are the part of a mineral deposit that can be economically and legally extracted or produced at the time of the reserve determination. Our mineral reserve estimates are calculated in accordance with subpart 1300 of Regulation S-K under the Modernization of Property Disclosures for Mining Registrants of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"). Estimated recoverable gold ounces in our proven and probable mineral reserves at the Hycroft Mine are used in units-of-production amortization calculations and are the basis for future cash flow estimates utilized in impairment calculations. When determining proven and probable mineral reserves, we must make assumptions and estimates of future commodity prices and demand, the mining methods we use and intend to use in the future, and the related costs incurred to develop, mine, and process our mineral reserves. Our estimates of recoverable gold ounces in proven and probable mineral reserves are prepared by and are the responsibility of our employees. Any change in estimate or assumption used to determine our proven and probable mineral reserves could change our estimated recoverable gold ounces in such mineral reserves, which may have a material impact on our financial statements.
Impact of Change in Estimate:
Our proven and probable mineral reserves are periodically updated, usually on an annual basis. Estimated recoverable gold ounces used in our units-of-production amortization and impairment calculations are based on proven and probable mineral reserves that were determined as of December 31, 2020 using gold and silver selling prices of $1,200 per ounce and $16.50 per ounce, respectively. Resulting changes in estimates of recoverable gold ounces are used in our units-of-production calculations and impairment calculations on a prospective basis.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Estimate Required:
Our long-lived assets consist of plant, equipment, and mine development. We review and evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Events that may trigger a test for recoverability include, but are not limited to, significant adverse changes to projected revenues, costs, or future expansion plans or changes to federal and state regulations (with which we must comply) that may adversely impact our current or future operations. An impairment is determined to exist if the total projected future cash flows on an undiscounted basis are less than the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group. An impairment loss is measured and recorded based on the excess carrying value of the impaired long-lived asset group over fair value.
To determine fair value, we use a discounted cash flow model based on quantities of estimated recoverable minerals and incorporate projections and probabilities involving metal prices (considering current and historical prices, price trends, and related factors), production levels, operating and production costs, and the timing and capital costs of expansion and sustaining projects, all of which are based on life-of-mine plans. The term “recoverable minerals” refers to the estimated amount of gold and silver that will be sold after taking into account losses during ore processing and treatment. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of future cash flows from other asset groups. Our estimates of future cash flows are based on numerous assumptions that are consistent or reasonable in relation to internal budgets and projections, and actual future cash flows may be significantly different than the estimates, as actual future quantities of recoverable gold and silver, metal prices, operating and production costs, and the timing and capital costs of expansion and sustaining projects are each subject to significant risks and uncertainties.
Impact of Change in Estimate:
The estimates and assumptions used in our impairment test as of December 31, 2020 were based on the Hycroft Technical Report. The Hycroft Technical Report was prepared using prices of $1,200 per ounce for gold and $16.50 per ounce for silver, which when using sales prices of $1,300 per ounce for gold and $17.33 per ounce for silver, resulted in an after tax net present value of $2.1 billion. We compared the estimated after tax net present value of $2.1 billion to the carrying value of our plant, equipment, and mine development of $60.2 million, and given the large surplus between the estimated after tax net present value of the Hycroft Mine and the carrying value of our plant, equipment, and mine development a change in the estimates used in the Hycroft Technical Report would be unlikely to result in an impairment as of December 31, 2020.
Asset retirement obligation ("ARO")
Estimate Required:
We will be required to perform reclamation activity at the Hycroft Mine in the future. As a result of this requirement, an ARO has been recorded on our consolidated balance sheets that is based on our expectation of the costs that will be incurred years in the future. Any underestimate or unanticipated reclamation costs or any changes in governmental reclamation requirements could require us to record or incur additional reclamation costs. ARO liabilities are accrued when they become known, are probable and can be reasonably estimated. Whenever a previously unrecognized ARO liability becomes known, or a previously estimated reclamation cost is increased, the amount of that liability and additional cost will be recorded at that time and could materially reduce our consolidated net income attributable to stockholders.
Impact of Change in Estimate:
Based on our current proposed 34-year mine plan set forth in the Hycroft Technical Report, no significant reclamation activity will be made until 2047. However, if the significant reclamation activity were to begin in 2042 or 2045 our reclamation liability would increase by approximately $1.8 million and approximately $0.7 million, respectively.