Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, include forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review “Risk Factors” for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Our Company
We operate in the car sharing marketplace for ride sharing and delivery through our proprietary platform. The Company has established a leading presence in Transportation as a Service (TaaS) through vehicle owners and institutions, such as franchise car dealerships, independent car dealerships and rental car companies, who have been disrupted by automotive asset sharing. We are based in Los Angeles, California and car owners and drivers can currently use the platform nationwide. Our unique revenue opportunity for both owners (“Owners”) and drivers (“Drivers”) are providing a flexible, secure and reliable marketplace. We categorize our operations into one reportable business segment: Rental, consisting primarily of our vehicle rental operations in the United States.
Business and Trends
We generate revenue by taking a fee from out of each rental processed on our platform. Each rental transaction represents a Driver renting a car from an Owner. Drivers pay a daily rental rate set by the Car Owner, plus a 10% HyreCar Driver Fee and direct daily insurance costs. Owners receive their daily rental rate minus a 15-25% HyreCar Owner Fee. The net revenue is currently approximately $24.16 per rental day to HyreCar. We have expanded the rental days serviced by our platform at a compound annual growth rate in excess of 63.3% to an annual level of more than 1,000,000 rental days in 2020 as displayed below:
Gross billings are an important measure by which we evaluate and manage our business. We define gross billings as the amount billed to Drivers, without any adjustments for amounts paid to Owners, refunds or rebates. Gross billings include transactions from both our revenues recorded on a net and a gross basis. It is important to note that gross billings is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and as such, is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements as revenue. However, we use gross billings to asses our business growth, scale of operations and our ability to generate gross billings is strongly correlated to our ability to generate revenues. Gross billings may also be used to calculate net revenue margin, defined as the Company’s U.S. GAAP reportable revenue over gross billings. Using the definition of net revenue margin, HyreCar’s net revenue margin has increased to approximately 45.2% ($25,231,741 HyreCar’s 2020 U.S. GAAP revenue over $55,761,917 Total Gross Billings).
Our operating results are subject to variability due to seasonality, macroeconomic conditions such as the coronavirus outbreak (“COVID-19”) and other factors. Car rental volumes tend to be associated with travel and driving holidays, where there is an influx of Uber and Lyft demand. In 2020, we continued to operate in an uncertain and uneven economic environment marked by heightened economic and geopolitical risks due to the COVID-19 situation.
Our objective is to focus on strategically accelerating our growth, strengthening our position as a leading provider of vehicle rental services to ridesharing (Lyft and Uber) and delivery (Door Dash, Instacart, Postmates) drivers, continuing to enhance our customers’ rental experience, and controlling costs and driving efficiency throughout the organization. We operate in a high growth industry and we expect to continue to face challenges and risks. We seek to mitigate our exposure to risks in numerous ways, including delivering upon our core strategic initiatives, continued growth of fleet levels to match changes in demand for vehicle rentals, and appropriate investments in technology.
Some highlights from 2020 include:
●
Net rental days totaled approximately 1,014,000 rental days for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately 393,000 rental days or 63.3% over the 621,000 rental days recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019, as the Company continued to expand its presence in key markets.
●
Net revenues totaled $25,231,741 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $9,376,817 or 59.1% over the $15,854,924 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the higher net rental days year over year.
●
Cost of Sales totaled $16,961,450 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $7,118,907 or 72.3% over $9,842,543 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributed to increase in net rental days revenues and insurance costs.
●
Gross profit totaled $8,270,291 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2,257,910 or 37.6% over the $6,012,381 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit was primarily attributed to higher rental days and partially offset by insurance costs.
●
Operating expenses, consisting of general and administrative, sales and marketing, and research and development expenses totaled $23,522,980 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4,821,041 or 25.8% over $18,701,939 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in operating expenses was related to the scaling of our business across all functional areas and non-cash stock-based compensation expense.
●
Net loss totaled $15,220,901 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2,702,524 or 21.6% over $12,518,377 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net loss was driven by the higher operating costs and non-cash stock-based compensation expense noted above, partially offset by the higher net revenues recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
●
Adjusted EBITDA totaled ($11,015,194) or the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1,369,112 or 14.2% from ($9,646,082) recognized for the prior year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of increase in operating costs, but on a per share basis this represented an improvement to ($0.87) per share from ($0.90) per share the prior year.
Management’s Plan
We have incurred operating losses since Inception and historically relied on debt and equity financing for working capital. Going forward the Company intends to fund its operations through increased revenue from operations and the funds raised through prior and recent public securities offerings. On February 9, 2021, the Company completed underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 2,530,000 million shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $11.75 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $29.7 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses, which includes the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 330,000 additional shares. Our annualized rental day run rate increased to over 1,100,000 as we set a new all-time high three-month average for the Company with over 90,000 monthly rental days in the fourth quarter of 2020. Our business model and platform allowed us to leverage new opportunities within this crisis and create a larger market with ridesharing, food and package delivery. As states continue to reopen, we expect to see steady revenue growth in 2021.
On November 4, 2020, California voters passed Proposition 22 which protects the ability of app-based ridesharing and delivery drivers to continue working as independent contractors, while adding important new benefits and protections. We believe this establishes an important legal precedent that will continue to provide significant
opportunities will continue for vehicle rentals from ridesharing and delivery drivers in the state of California and beyond, and for HyreCar, this will be incremental business as ridesharing and delivery continues to recover.
The company announced new an expanded strategic partnership with AmeriDrive Holdings to create a national network of vehicle supply and fleet maintenance operations in January 2021, and is in the process of expanding operations starting in the Southeast United States in the first half of 2021.
We completed an equity financing in February of 2021 which provided approximately $29.7 million in gross proceeds to the company, before underwriting expenses and other costs. This will provide additional capital to support initiatives to drive rental day and Net revenue growth and make our vehicle platform more automated and scalable.
Finally, on February 10, 2021, TrueCar announced a partnership with HyreCar to provide its car sharing marketplace with a modern digital car buying and trade-in solution. The TrueCar partnership offers a seamless way to address this significant market in a relevant and effective manner for dealers and customers. TrueCar helps create awareness that vehicle dealers can benefit from serving the Transportation -as-a-Service ("TaaS") industry via Company's platform.
Based on generally increasing revenues through the normal course of business and a high relative amount of variable costs as well as capital currently on hand, we believe the Company’s has sufficient resources to continue to operate its business for at least the next 12 months.
Below is our nationwide footprint with volumes of quarterly rental days and net revenues from the quarters ended December 31, 2018 through December 31, 2020.
Components of Our Results of Operations
The following describes the various components that make up our results of operations, discussed below:
Revenue is earned from fees associated with matching Drivers to Owners of cars that meet the strict requirements imposed by ride-sharing services such as Uber and Lyft with Drivers. A Driver will typically rent a car through one transaction via our on-line marketplace. We recognize GAAP reportable revenue primarily from a transaction fee and an insurance fee when a car is rented on our platform when the Company 1) identifies the contract with the customer 2) identifies the performance obligations in the contract 3) determines the transaction price, 4) determines if an allocation of that transaction price is required to the performance obligations in the contract, and 5) recognizes revenue when or as the companies satisfies a performance obligation.
Cost of revenues primarily include direct fees paid for driver insurance, insurance claim payments based on the policy in effect at the time of loss, merchant processing fees, technology and hosting costs, and motor vehicle record fees incurred for paid driver applications.
General and administrative costs include all corporate and administrative functions that support our business. These costs also include payroll for officers and operational staff, stock-based compensation expense, consulting costs, professional fees, and other costs that are not included in cost of revenues. Research and development costs are related to activities such as user experience and user interface development, database development and maintenance, and technology related expenses to research, improve, implement, or maintain technology and systems utilized throughout our enterprise. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel-related compensation costs, commissions expenses, advertising expenses, and marketing partnerships with third parties. Sales and marketing costs are expensed as incurred.
Other income/expense includes non-operating income and expenses including interest income and expense.
Results of Operations
December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
Revenues and Gross Profit. Revenues totaled $25,231,741 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $9,376,817 or 59.1% over the $15,854,924 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit totaled $8,270,291 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2,257,910 or 37.6% over the $6,012,381 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenues and gross profit were primarily attributed to the higher rental days partially offset by increase in insurance costs particularly on the insurance premium and claims expenses.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses, consisting of general and administrative, sales and marketing, and research and development expenses totaled $23,522,980 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4,821,041 or 25.8% over $18,701,939 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in operating expenses was related to the scaling of our business across all functional areas and stock-based compensation expense. General and administrative totaled $12,332,147 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3,770,392 or 44.0% over $8,561,755 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributed to increase in stock-based compensation expense, headcount and salaries, legal, operations and support functions. Sales and marketing totaled $8,141,675 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $497,656 or 6.5% over $7,644,019 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributed to increase in commissions expense and offset by decrease in digital advertising. Research and development totaled $3,049,158 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $552,993 or 22.2% over $2,496,165 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributed to the growth in the technology team related to the enhancement and maintenance of our digital marketplace technology platform.
Loss from Operations. Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $15,252,689 as compared to a loss from operations of 12,689,558 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in loss from operations was driven by the higher operating costs and non-cash stock-based compensation expense described above, partially offset by the higher net revenues recognized during the year.
Other (Income) Expense. Other (income) expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $32,588 in net other income, a decrease of $139,393 or 81.1% over $171,981 of net income for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decrease in interest income and increase in non-operational expenses and loan interest expense.
Net Loss. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $15,220,901 as compared to a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019of $12,518,377. The increase in net loss was primarily driven by the higher operating costs and non-cash stock-based compensation expense described above, partially offset by the higher net revenues recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Gross Billings
We believe gross billings is an important measure by which we evaluate and manage our business. We define gross billings as the amount billed to Drivers, without any adjustments for amounts paid to Owners or refunds. Gross billings include transactions from both our revenues recorded on a net and a gross basis. It is important to note that gross billings is a non-GAAP measure and as such, is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements as revenue. However, we use gross billings to asses our business growth, scale of operations and our ability to generate gross billings is strongly correlated to our ability to generate revenues. Gross billings may also be used to calculate net revenue margin, defined as the company’s GAAP reportable revenue over gross billings.
The table below sets forth a reconciliation of our GAAP reported revenues to gross billings for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a key performance measure that our management uses to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage in our business. Because Adjusted EBITDA facilitate internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use these measures for business planning purposes. We expect Adjusted EBITDA will increase over the long term as we continue to scale our business and achieve greater efficiencies in our operating expenses.
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted to exclude:
●
other income (expense), net;
●
provision for income taxes;
●
depreciation and amortization;
●
stock-based compensation expense;
●
payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation expense; and
●
changes to the liabilities for insurance required by regulatory agencies attributable to historical periods.
For more information regarding the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA, see the section titled “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Our definitions may differ from the definitions used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish these or similar metrics. Furthermore, these measures have certain limitations in that they do not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations that are necessary to run our business. Thus, our Adjusted EBITDA should be considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We compensate for these limitations by providing a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the related GAAP financial measures, revenue and net loss, respectively. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with their respective related GAAP financial measures.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $4,923,515 compared to $10,657,140 as of December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents consisted of money market deposit accounts denominated in U.S. dollars.
In July 2019, we received net proceeds of $11,321,250 upon the completion of our secondary public offering. Further, in February 9, 2021, we received net proceeds of $27.6 million upon the completion an underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 2,530,000 million shares of common stock at a public offering price of $11.75 per share, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses.
We have primarily financed our operations through our IPO and recent public offerings, and proceeds of the PPP Loan, in addition to payments received through our platform. In February 2021, we completed an equity offering which provided approximately $29.7 million in gross proceeds to the Company to support continued growth of the business in 2021 and beyond. As a result we believe our existing cash and cash equivalent and proceeds from revenue generating activities will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditures needs over at least the next 12 months more fully described in Management's Plan above.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our growth, our ability to attract and retain drivers and car owners on our platform, the continuing market acceptance of our offerings, the timing and extent of spending to support our efforts to improve our customer experience, actual insurance payments for which we have made reserves, the timing and extent of investment we are making in policy, government relations, and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. Further, we may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, products, services and technologies. We may decide to, or be required to, seek additional equity or debt financing for any of these reasons, or others that may arise. If we are unable to raise capital in the future, we may need to curtail expenditures by scaling back certain sales and marketing expenses.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities was $7,804,704 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This consisted primarily of a net loss of $15,220,901 offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $3,303,211 largely driven by the recognition of costs related to stock options, RSUs, and shares issued for services. Additionally, there was an increase in accrued liabilities of $3,548,162, and insurance reserves of $780,147, offset by insurance deposits of $749,454. The increase in accrued liabilities was primarily driven by increases in insurance premiums accrual due to increased revenue activity and a revised contract that allowed deferral of payment for approximately six months.
Net cash used in operating activities was for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted in cash outflows of $8,113,762. This consisted primarily of a net loss of $12,518,377 offset by non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $1,988,626 and non-cash amortization of debt discount of $1,515,191. Additionally, there were an increase in accrued liabilities of $128,055 and insurance reserve of $984,450.
Net cash used in investing activities was $2,247 from purchase of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $6,207 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consists of deposits.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,073,326 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consists of net proceeds received from the PPP loan and proceeds from the exercise of options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $12,012,239 for the year ended December 31, 2019, which primarily consists of gross proceeds of sale of common stock in our July 2019 secondary public offering of $12,075,000, exercise of warrants of $873,403, partially offset by offering costs of $1,017,623.
Capital Management
We aim to manage capital so that we will maintain optimal returns to shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders. We also aim to maintain a capital structure that ensures the lowest cost of capital available to the Company. We regularly review the Company’s capital structure and seek to take advantage of available opportunities to improve outcomes for the Company and its shareholders.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no dividends paid and we have no plans to commence the payment of dividends. We have no current plans to issue further shares on the market but will continue to assess market conditions and the company’s cash flow requirements to ensure the Company is appropriately funded.
There is no significant external borrowing at the reporting date. Neither the Company nor any of the subsidiaries are subject to externally imposed capital requirement.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could materially differ from these estimates. It is reasonably possible that changes in estimates will occur in the near term.
The Company’s most significant estimates and judgments involve recognition of revenue and estimates for future contingent customer incentive obligations, calculating insurance reserves, and the measurement of the Company’s stock-based compensation.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock awards issued under ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Under ASC 718, share-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award. Stock-based compensation is recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite vesting period and over the nonemployee’s period of providing goods or services. The fair value of each stock option or warrant award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. Restricted shares are measured based on the fair market value of the underlying stock on the grant date.
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates the majority of its revenue from its ridesharing marketplace that connects vehicle owners and drivers and the related insurance issued for each rental. Vehicle owners and drivers enter into terms of service with the Company in order to use the HyreCar platform and enter into a rental contract that governs each rental. In entering into a rental agreement, the driver is charged in a single transaction: the base rental fee as agreed upon between the driver and vehicle owner, a 10% HyreCar fee on the base rental fee, and a daily insurance charge (“Insurance and administrative fees”), all based on the number of days the vehicle is to be rented within the contract. HyreCar retains 15-25% of the base rental fee and remits the remaining portion to the vehicle owner. The 10% fee collected from the driver and 15-25% retained from the owner are considered “Transaction Fees” and the recorded on a net basis as described below. The Company recognizes revenue daily during the rental periods as the Company is required to maintain insurance underlying the transaction and as a customary business practice, a driver can return a vehicle early for a refund of the unused rental period. Insurance and transaction fees are charged to a driver in a single transaction. Drivers currently do not have an option to decline insurance at any point during the transaction.
The Company also recognizes revenue from other sources such as referrals, motor vehicle record fees (application fees), late rental fees, and other fees charged to drivers in specific situations.
In applying the guidance of ASC 606, the Company 1) identifies the contract with the customer 2) identifies the performance obligations in the contract 3) determines the transaction price, 4) determines if an allocation of that transaction price is required to the performance obligations in the contract, and 5) recognizes revenue when or as the companies satisfies a performance obligation.
Refunds may occur when the driver returns the owner vehicle early based on the terms of the original contract or cancels the rental prior to completing the exchange. In limited circumstances, the Company provides contingent consideration in the form of a rebate that is redeemable only if the customer completes a specific level of transaction over a specific time period. In such cases, the rebate or refund obligation is recognized as a reduction of revenues. The Company defers revenue in all instances when the earnings process is not yet complete.
The following is a breakout of revenue components by subcategory for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Principal Agent Considerations
The Company evaluates our service offerings to determine if we are acting as the principal or as an agent, which we consider in determining if revenue should be reported gross or net. One of our primary revenue sources is a transaction fee made from a confirmed booking of a vehicle on our platform. Key indicators that we evaluate to reach this determination include:
●
the terms and conditions of our contracts;
●
whether we are paid a fixed percentage of the arrangement’s consideration or a fixed fee for each transaction;
●
the party which sets the pricing with the end-user, has the credit risk and provides customer support; and
●
the party responsible for delivery/fulfillment of the product or service to the end consumer.
We have determined that we act as the agent in the transaction for vehicle bookings, as we are not the primarily obligor of the arrangement and receive a fixed percentage of the transaction. Therefore, revenue is recognized on a net basis.
For other fees such as insurance, referrals, motor vehicle records (application fees), and dealer subscription we have determined revenue should be recorded on a gross basis. In such arrangements, the Company sets pricing, has risk of economic loss, has certain credit risk, provides support services related to these transactions, and has decision making ability about service providers used .
Income Taxes
The company applies ASC 740 “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”). Deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their consolidated financial statements reported amounts at each period end, based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The provision for income taxes represents the tax expense for the period, if any, and the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the company has established a full allowance against all deferred tax assets.
ASC 740 also provides criteria for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of uncertain tax positions. A tax benefit from an uncertain position is recognized only if it is “more likely than not” that the position is sustainable upon examination by the relevant taxing authority based on its technical merit.
Internal Use Software
We incur software development costs to develop software programs to be used solely to meet our internal needs and cloud-based applications used to deliver our services. In accordance with ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software, we capitalize development costs related to these software applications once the preliminary project stage is complete and it is probable that the project will be completed, and the software will be used to perform the function intended.
Insurance Reserve
The Company records a loss reserve for physical damage and other liability coverage caused to owner vehicles up to the Company's insurance deductibles. This reserve represents an estimate for both reported accidents claims not yet paid, and claims incurred but not yet reported and are recorded on a non-discounted basis. The lag time in reported claims is minimal and as such represents a low risk of unreported claims being excluded from the loss reserve assessment. The adequacy of the reserve is monitored quarterly and is subject to adjustment in the future based upon changes in claims experience, including the number of incidents for which the Company is ultimately responsible and changes in the cost per claim, or changes to the Company’s policy as to what amounts of the deductible or claim will be paid by the Company.
While certain liability insurance claims may take several years to completely settle, the Company's liability exposure limit is generally met in the near term. Due to our limited operational history, the Company makes certain assumptions based on both currently available information to estimate the insurance reserves as well as third party claims adjuster data provided on existing claims. A number of factors can affect the actual cost of a claim, including the length of time the claim remains open, economic and healthcare cost trends and the results of related litigation. Furthermore, claims may emerge in future periods for events that occurred in a prior period that differs from expectations. Accordingly, actual losses may vary significantly from the estimated amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. Reserves are reviewed quarterly and adjusted as necessary as experience develops or new information becomes known. However, ultimate results may differ from the Company’s estimates, which could result in losses over the Company’s reserved amounts. Such adjustments are recorded in costs of revenues.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC) that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material investors.