Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Our Sponsor is Decarbonization Plus Acquisition Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and an affiliate of Riverstone. Although we may pursue an acquisition opportunity in any business or industry, we intend to capitalize on the Riverstone platform to identify, acquire and operate a business in industries that may provide opportunities for attractive risk-adjusted returns in one of the multiple sectors that may advance the objectives of global decarbonization. This includes the energy and agriculture, industrials, transportation and commercial and residential sectors.
The Registration Statement for our Public Offering was declared effective on October 19, 2020. On October 22, 2020, we consummated the Public Offering of 20,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200.0 million, and incurring transaction costs of approximately $11.7 million, consisting of $4.0 million of underwriting fees, $7.0 million of deferred underwriting fees and approximately $700,000 of other offering costs. The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Public Offering to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per unit, less underwriting discounts and commissions. On November 9, 2020, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and, on November 12, 2020, the underwriters purchased an additional 2,572,502 of the Over-allotment Units, generating gross proceeds of $25,725,020. In connection with the sale of the Over-allotment Units, we incurred an additional $514,500 of underwriting fees and $900,376 of deferred underwriting fees. The remaining over-allotment option subsequently expired.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the sale (the “Private Placement”) of 6,000,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor, our independent directors and WRG, generating gross proceeds of $6.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the sale of the Over-allotment Units, our Sponsor and WRG purchased an additional 514,500 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $514,500.
Approximately $225.7 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Public Offering (including the Over-allotment Units) and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account located in the United States with the Trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as otherwise permitted under our amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Public Offering, or October 22, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
Business Combination Agreement
On February 8, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Sub and Hyzon, pursuant to which Merger Sub will be merged with and into Hyzon, with Hyzon surviving the Merger as our wholly owned subsidiary. The parties expect the Proposed Transactions to be completed in the second quarter of 2021, subject to, among other things, the approval of the Proposed Transactions by our stockholders, satisfaction of the conditions stated in the Business Combination Agreement and other customary closing conditions.
Lock-Up Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on February 8, 2021, certain stockholders of Hyzon, whose ownership interests collectively represent approximately 90% of the outstanding Hyzon Common Stock on a fully diluted basis, entered into the Lock-Up Agreement with us and Hyzon pursuant to which they agreed, subject to certain customary exceptions, not to effect any direct or indirect sale, assignment, encumbrance, pledge, hypothecation, disposition, loan or other transfer, or entry into any agreement with respect to any sale, assignment, encumbrance, pledge, hypothecation, disposition, loan or other transfer, with respect to any shares of our Class A common stock held by them immediately after the effective time of the Merger, including any shares of our Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of any warrants or other rights to purchase shares of our Class A common stock held by them immediately following the Closing, for six months after the Closing.
Founder Warrant Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on February 8, 2021, our Sponsor and the Founder Warrant Holders entered into the Founder Warrant Agreement with us pursuant to which each of the Founder Warrant Holders agreed that, following the Closing, such Founder Warrant Holder will not transfer 75% of its Private Placement Warrants until the earlier of (a) one year after the Closing and (b) subsequent to the Closing, (x) the date on which the last sale price of our Class A common stock quoted on NASDAQ (or the exchange on which the shares of our Class A common stock are then listed) equals or exceeds $11.50 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30 consecutive trading day period or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of our Class A common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Upon and subject to the Closing, 12.5% of each Founder Warrant Holder’s Private Placement Warrants will become subject to potential forfeiture, and each Founder Warrant Holder agrees not to exercise such $12.00 Warrants unless and until the occurrence of a date on which the last reported sales price of one share of our Class A common stock quoted on NASDAQ (or the exchange on which the shares of our Class A common stock are then listed) is greater to or equal to $12.00 (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30 consecutive trading day period within the five year period commencing on the one year anniversary of the Closing.
Upon and subject to the Closing, 12.5% of each Founder Warrant Holder’s Private Placement Warrants will become subject to potential forfeiture, and each Founder Warrant Holder agrees not to exercise such $14.00 Warrants unless and until the occurrence of a date on which the last reported sales price of one share of our Class A common stock quoted on NASDAQ (or the exchange on which the shares of our Class A common stock are then listed) is greater to or equal to $14.00 (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30 consecutive trading day period within the five year period commencing on the one year anniversary of the Closing.
Subscription Agreements
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on February 8, 2021, the Company and Hyzon entered into the Subscription Agreements with the Subscribers, pursuant to which the Subscribers agreed to purchase, and we agreed to sell to the Subscribers, an aggregate of 40,500,000 PIPE Shares for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $400,000,000, in the PIPE.
The closing of the sale of the PIPE Shares pursuant to the Subscription Agreements is contingent upon, among other customary closing conditions, the concurrent consummation of the Proposed Transactions. The purpose of the PIPE is to raise additional capital for use by the combined company following the Closing.
Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, we agreed that, within 15 calendar days after the consummation of the Proposed Transactions, we will file with the SEC (at our sole cost and expense) the PIPE Resale Registration Statement, and we will use our reasonable best efforts to have the PIPE Resale Registration Statement declared effective as soon as practicable after the filing thereof.
Ardour Subscription Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on February 8, 2021, the Company, Ardour Capital, ACP Mgmt Corp. and Hyzon entered into the Ardour Subscription Agreement, pursuant to which ACP Mgmt Corp. agreed, in full satisfaction of Ardour Capital’s right to receive a warrant to purchase shares of Hyzon Common Stock for its services as a financial advisor to Hyzon, to purchase, and we agreed to sell to ACP Mgmt Corp., warrants exercisable for one share of our Class A common stock at an exercise price of $2.20, subject to the terms of a Warrant Agreement, to be entered into by and between the Company and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company in connection with Closing. Such warrants will be governed by and exercisable subject to the terms and conditions of the Ardour Warrant Agreement.
The foregoing descriptions of the Business Combination Agreement, the Lock-Up Agreement, the Founder Warrant Agreement, the Subscription Agreements and the Ardour Subscription Agreement are qualified in their entirety by reference to the full text of the Business Combination Agreement, the Lock-Up Agreement, the Founder Warrant Agreement, the form of the Subscription Agreement and the Ardour Subscription Agreement, copies of which are included as exhibits to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 9, 2021, and incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from Inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation and the Public Offering, as well as due diligence costs incurred. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of approximately $0.2 million, which consisted of approximately $0.2 million in expensed offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $5.5 million, which consisted of approximately $5.5 million in general and administrative expenses, including due diligence costs incurred in the pursuit of our acquisition plans.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs up to the Public Offering were satisfied through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of Founder Shares to our Sponsor and a loan from our Sponsor for an aggregate amount of $300,000 to cover organizational expenses and expenses related to the Public Offering pursuant to the Note. On September 13, 2017, we drew down $300,000 on the Note. We repaid the Note in full to our Sponsor on October 21, 2020. Subsequent to the consummation of the Public Offering, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the net proceeds of approximately $2.0 million from the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $4.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon closing of the Public Offering. An additional fee of approximately $514,500 in the aggregate was due in connection with the closing of the sale of the Over-allotment Units.
In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $7.90 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies; Impact of COVID-19
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Our Sponsor continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.