Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition contains forward-looking statements regarding industry outlook and our expectations regarding the performance of our business. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements,” at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
You should read the following discussion together with Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Headquartered in Plymouth, Michigan, Horizon Global Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries (“Horizon,” “Horizon Global,” “we,” or the “Company”) are a leading designer, manufacturer and distributor of a wide variety of high-quality, custom-engineered towing, trailering, cargo management and other related accessory products on a global basis, primarily servicing the aftermarket, retail, e-commerce, automotive original equipment manufacturers (“automotive OEMs”) and automotive original equipment servicers (“automotive OESs”) (collectively, “OEs”) channels, supporting our customers generally through a regional service and delivery model.
Critical factors affecting our ability to succeed include:
•Our ability to realize the expected future economic benefits resulting from the changes made to our manufacturing operations, distribution footprint and management team in recent years, including the operational improvement initiatives implemented in 2019-2020, which are continuously ongoing to support margin expansion;
•Our ability to continue to manage our liquidity, including continuing to deleverage our balance sheet and service our debt obligations and the applicable financial covenants thereto, especially given our recent debt refinancing and capital structure alignment to support business growth and the Company’s long-term strategic plan;
•Our ability to quickly and cost-effectively introduce new products to our customers and end-user market with a resulting streamlined customer service model and improved operating margins;
•Our ability to continue to successfully launch new products and customer programs to expand or realign our geographic coverage or distribution channels and realize desired operating efficiencies and product line or customer content penetration;
•Our ability to manage our cost structure more efficiently via global supply base management, internal sourcing and/or purchasing of materials, selective outsourcing of support functions, working capital management and a global approach to leverage our administrative functions; and
•Our ability to manage any future business disruption and the operational and financial impacts, including temporary facility closures, liquidity and other economic and business uncertainties related to the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic as further detailed below.
If we are unable to do any of the foregoing successfully, our financial condition and results of operations could be materially and adversely impacted.
In December 2019, an outbreak of COVID-19 occurred in China, spread throughout the world and was declared a pandemic. In connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been adhering to mandates and other guidance from local governments and health authorities, as well as the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control. As a result of the pandemic, we experienced temporary decreases in demand and customer orders for our products in one or more of our sales channels, as well as temporary disruptions and closures of some of our facilities as we flexed our operations in response to changes in customer demand or government mandates. The COVID-19 pandemic also impacted various aspects of the supply chain as our suppliers experienced similar business disruptions due to operating restrictions from government mandates. We continue to monitor the procurement of raw materials and components used in the manufacturing, distribution and sale of our products, but future disruptions in the supply chain due to the COVID-19 pandemic may cause difficulty in sourcing materials or unexpected shortages or delays in delivery of raw materials and components, and may result in increased costs in our supply chain.
As government mandates and operating restrictions began to abate, the demand for our products responded and our facilities returned to full operational status early in the third quarter of 2020. Although we have taken decisive actions to enhance our financial flexibility, minimize the impact to the business and ensure the health and safety of our employees and other individuals of the communities where we conduct business, the extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain and could adversely impact our results of operations in future periods. The actions taken are further summarized in the Liquidity and Capital Resources and Outlook sections below.
Horizon Global reports its business in two operating segments: Horizon Americas and Horizon Europe-Africa. The Company previously had a third operating segment, Horizon Asia-Pacific (“APAC”), which was sold in the third quarter of 2019. See Note 4, Discontinued Operations, and Note 18, Segment Information, each included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding discontinued operations and the Company’s operating segments, respectively.
Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of sales in our consolidated statements of operations. Other shipping and handling expenses, which primarily relate to Horizon Americas’ distribution network, are included in selling, general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations.
Supplemental Analysis and Segment Information
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company’s management utilizes Adjusted EBITDA as the key measure of company and segment performance and for planning and forecasting purposes, as management believes this measure is most reflective of the operational profitability or loss of the Company and its operating segments and provides management and investors with information to evaluate the operating performance of its business and is representative of its performance used to measure certain of its financial covenants, further discussed in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered a substitute for results prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered an alternative to net income attributable to Horizon Global, which is the most directly comparable financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA that is prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA, as determined and measured by Horizon Global, should also not be compared to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. The Company also uses operating profit (loss) to measure stand-alone segment performance.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income attributable to Horizon Global before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, and before certain items, as applicable, such as severance, restructuring, relocation and related business disruption costs, impairment of goodwill and other intangibles, non-cash stock compensation, certain product liability and litigation claims, acquisition and integration costs, gains (losses) on business divestitures and other assets, board transition support and non-cash unrealized foreign currency remeasurement costs.
Adjusted EBITDA for our operating segments for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Adjusted EBITDA for our operating segments for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 is as follows:
Segment Information
As a result of the Company’s sale of its APAC segment in 2019, the Company’s operating segments are Horizon Americas and Horizon Europe-Africa. APAC results are reported separately as a discontinued operation in our consolidated financial statements for all periods presented. See Note 4, Discontinued Operations, and Note 18, Segment Information, included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for additional information.
Financial information for our operating segments for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Results of Operations
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated net sales decreased $29.3 million, or 4.2%, to $661.2 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $690.5 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was attributable to the impacts of economic uncertainty and business disruptions of the COVID-19 pandemic that began to impact the Company near the end of the first quarter of 2020, and significantly impacted the Company during the second quarter of 2020. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net sales for Horizon Europe-Africa decreased $38.8 million, driven primarily by declines in sales volumes in the automotive OEM and automotive OES sales channels, including a decrease of $37.3 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020, primarily caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The $29.3 million decrease in consolidated net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was partially offset by an increase in net sales within Horizon Americas of $9.7 million driven by higher sales volumes in the aftermarket and e-commerce sales channels, which more than offset the lower volumes in the automotive OEM and retail sales channels. Net sales increased for Horizon Americas during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 despite a $34.8 million decrease in net sales across all sales channels of Horizon Americas during the three months ended June 30, 2020, the period most significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit margin (gross profit as a percentage of net sales) was 18.2% and 13.9% during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The improved gross margin was primarily due to improved operating efficiencies and favorable sales mix, which more than offset the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related declines in sales volume and impacts on operational performance.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses decreased $26.8 million, primarily attributable to lower distribution center lease, operating and support costs in Horizon Americas, as a result of a prior-year $6.5 million charge related to the abandonment of leased equipment. In Horizon Europe-Africa, lower administrative and personnel costs were realized as a result of prior-year restructuring and business rationalization projects, and the reimbursement of certain payroll costs as part of government payroll reimbursement programs. Additionally, lower Corporate expenses were primarily attributable to a prior-year $5.3 million charge related to lease abandonment and leasehold improvements for the Company’s departure of its former headquarters lease and $2.1 million of prior-year charges related to the separation agreement reached with our former chief executive officer and other severance costs.
Operating margin (operating profit (loss) as a percentage of net sales) was (1.0)% and (8.3)% during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Operating profit improved $50.3 million, or 87.9%, to an operating loss of $(6.9) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an operating loss of $(57.2) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the operational results detailed above.
Other expense, net decreased $4.9 million to $0.5 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $5.4 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to the $3.6 million loss on sale related to the Company’s divestiture of its non-automotive business in Horizon Europe-Africa in the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, as well as $0.9 million of higher foreign currency gain in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Interest expense decreased $26.6 million, to $31.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $58.3 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense decreased primarily as a result of the pay down of principal on the Company’s first lien term loan in September 2019, which resulted in lower borrowings as well as lower interest rates compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. In addition, the Company recorded a charge of $8.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 as compared to a charge of $0.8 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, related to the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs due to debt refinancing and modifications completed during the respective periods.
The effective income tax rate for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was 4.0% and 9.0%, respectively. The lower effective tax rate compared to the statutory tax rate for both periods is attributable to the valuation allowance recorded in the U.S. and several foreign jurisdictions, which resulted in no income tax benefit recognized for jurisdictional pretax losses, coupled with jurisdictional income mix. In addition, the prior-year included a $6.6 million benefit related to the release of uncertain tax positions, and the corresponding accrued interest and penalties, in certain jurisdictions that did not recur.
Net loss from continuing operations decreased $72.5 million, to a net loss of $37.5 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $110.0 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the results detailed above.
(Loss) income from discontinued operations, net of tax is attributable to the sale of the Company’s former APAC operating segment, which was sold in September 2019 and resulted in a $180.5 million gain recognized and included in income from discontinued operations, net of tax during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the remaining post-closing conditions of the sale were completed, including a true up to net cash proceeds, which resulted in a loss on sale of discontinued operations of $(0.5) million. APAC has been presented as discontinued operations in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 205, “Discontinued Operations.” See Note 4, Discontinued Operations, included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further description of the Company’s discontinued operations.
See below for a discussion of operating results by segment.
Horizon Americas
Net sales by sales channel, in thousands, for Horizon Americas are as follows:
Net sales increased $9.7 million, or 2.6%, to $382.4 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $372.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to higher volumes in the aftermarket and e-commerce sales channels despite the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase was also due to a $3.1 million reduction in sales returns and allowances in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase was partially offset by lower sales volumes in the automotive OEM and retail sales channels, which were more negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Horizon Americas’ gross profit increased $24.3 million, or 33.9%, to $95.9 million, or 25.1% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $71.6 million, or 19.2% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit was impacted by the changes in sales detailed above, as well as the following:
-$13.3 million lower scrap costs and inventory reserves as a result of more effective inventory management; and
-$8.9 million favorable manufacturing costs; partially offset by:
-$1.2 million higher outbound freight costs.
SG&A expenses decreased $13.7 million to $67.8 million, or 17.7% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $81.5 million, or 21.9% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in SG&A expenses was attributable to the following:
-$6.5 million prior-year charge related to the abandonment of leased equipment in its Kansas City location;
-$4.8 million lower litigation and other administrative costs; and
-$3.6 million lower distribution center lease, operating and support costs; partially offset by:
-$2.6 million higher personnel and other variable compensation costs.
Horizon Americas’ operating profit increased $38.4 million to an operating profit of $28.0 million, or 7.3% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an operating loss of $(10.4) million, or (2.8)% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Operating margin increased primarily due to the operational results detailed above.
Horizon Americas’ Adjusted EBITDA increased $30.0 million to $38.4 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $8.4 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to the operational results detailed above.
Horizon Europe-Africa
Net sales by sales channel, in thousands, for Horizon Europe-Africa are as follows:
Net sales decreased $38.8 million, or 12.2%, to $278.9 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $317.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to lower volumes in the automotive OEM, automotive OES and industrial sales channels, which were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Net sales of Horizon Europe-Africa were also negatively impacted by $2.1 million related to the sale of its non-automotive business in the first quarter 2019. Partially offsetting the decrease in sales were increased sales in the aftermarket sales channel despite the COVID-19 pandemic as well as $5.5 million of favorable currency translation.
Horizon Europe-Africa’s gross profit increased $0.1 million, or 0.4%, to $24.7 million, or 8.9% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, from $24.6 million, or 7.7% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit margin reflects the changes in sales detailed above. Additionally, gross profit was impacted by the following:
-$6.5 million favorable labor costs, including the payroll reimbursement costs received in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 under terms of government payroll reimbursement programs, which includes the KUG (as defined in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below);
-$5.0 million lower scrap costs and inventory reserves as a result of more effective inventory management;
-$4.0 million favorable manufacturing costs;
-$2.5 million lower freight costs; and
-$0.9 million of favorable currency translation.
SG&A expenses decreased $5.0 million to $33.1 million, or 11.9% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $38.1 million, or 12.0% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily attributable to the following:
-$2.6 million lower personnel and variable compensation costs, including the payroll reimbursement costs received in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 under terms of government payroll reimbursement programs, which includes the KUG;
-$1.3 million lower warehouse expense, litigation and other administrative costs;
-$0.6 million lower bad debt expense; and
-$0.5 million of favorable currency translation.
Horizon Europe-Africa’s operating profit improved $3.7 million to an operating loss of $(8.4) million, or (3.0)% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an operating loss of $(12.1) million, or (3.8)% of net sales, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Operating margin improved primarily due to the operational results described above.
Horizon Europe-Africa’s Adjusted EBITDA increased $5.9 million to $8.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $2.8 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA increased primarily due to the operational results described above.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses included in operating loss decreased $8.2 million to $26.5 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $34.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to the following:
-$5.3 million prior-year charge related to lease abandonment and leasehold improvements for the Company’s departure of its headquarters lease;
-$2.1 million of prior-year charges related to the separation agreement reached with our former chief executive officer and other severance costs;
-$3.8 million of additional costs incurred in the prior-year comparable period related to professional service fees and other costs associated with new debt issuance, amendments, and modifications and related structure changes; and
-$2.2 million lower discretionary and administrative support costs; partially offset by:
-$4.0 million higher personnel and variable compensation costs.
Corporate Adjusted EBITDA was $(20.7) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, which was lower by $1.2 million, as compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $(19.5) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA declined primarily due to the higher personnel and variable compensation costs, partially offset by the lower discretionary and administrative support costs, as described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our capital and working capital requirements are funded through a combination of cash on hand, cash flows from operations and various borrowings and factoring arrangements described below, including our asset-based Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below). As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $18.2 million and $8.7 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents held at foreign subsidiaries. There may be country specific regulations which may restrict or result in increased costs in the repatriation of these funds.
In March 2020, the Company, as guarantor, entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Encina Business Credit, LLC (“Encina”), as agent for the lenders party thereto, and Horizon Global Americas Inc. and Cequent Towing Products of Canada Ltd., as borrowers (the “ABL Borrowers”). The Loan Agreement provides for an asset-based revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $75.0 million subject to customary borrowing base limitations contained therein, and may be increased at the ABL Borrowers’ request in increments of $5.0 million, up to a maximum of five times over the life of the Revolving Credit Facility, for a total increase of up to $25.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had availability of $38.4 million under the Revolving Credit Facility and $26.8 million of cash and cash equivalents in the United States.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, total cash and availability was $83.4 million and $44.9 million, respectively. The Company defines cash and availability as cash and cash equivalents and amounts of cash accessible but undrawn from credit facilities.
In response to the uncertain economic environment caused in part from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company pursued funding from available government programs and other sources of liquidity designed to strengthen its balance sheet and enhance financial flexibility. These sources included short-term loans, some of which are forgivable if certain conditions are met as well as entering into or modifying other arrangements. A summary of these actions is described below.
In April 2020, Horizon Global Company LLC (the “U.S. Borrower”), a direct U.S.-based subsidiary of the Company, received a loan from PNC Bank, National Association for $8.7 million, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) under Division A, Title I of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. The PPP Loan, which is in the form of a Note dated April 18, 2020 issued by the U.S. Borrower, matures on April 18, 2022. Funds from the PPP Loan may be used for payroll, costs used to continue group health care benefits, rent and utilities. Under the terms of the PPP Loan, certain amounts may be forgiven if they are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act.
The Company submitted its PPP Loan application in good faith in accordance with the CARES Act and the guidance issued by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”), including the SBA’s Paycheck Protection Program’s Frequently Asked Questions. During 2020, the Company, in accordance with the final guidance issued by the United States Department of the Treasury (the “Treasury”), met the need and sized based criteria of the program.
In December 2020, the Company filed its application of loan forgiveness with PNC Bank, National Association. The potential loan forgiveness for all or a portion of the PPP Loan is determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for payment of qualifying expenses over the 24 weeks after the loan proceeds were disbursed. The unforgiven portion of our PPP Loan, if any, is payable monthly over two years at an interest rate of 1.0% per annum. The Company has deferred any interest payments until after the Company’s application for forgiveness is completed in accordance with the guidance issued by the SBA and Treasury and the terms of the Company’s PPP Loan. While we currently believe that our use of the loan proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness of our PPP loan, there can be no assurance that forgiveness for any portion of the PPP Loan will be obtained.
In April 2020, S.I.A.R.R. SAS (the “French Borrower”), an indirect subsidiary of the Company, received a loan from BNP Paribas (the “French Loan”) for $5.5 million. The French Loan, issued pursuant to an agreement dated April 9, 2020, between the French Borrower and BNP Paribas, matures on April 9, 2021. The French Loan bears interest at a rate of 0.5% per annum. The French Borrower, at its election, may repay the French Loan in full on April 9, 2021 or in monthly installments for a period of five years from the date of election.
In March 2020, Westfalia-Automotive GmbH (“Westfalia”), an indirect subsidiary of the Company, was approved for a government payroll reimbursement program in Germany under the Kurzarbeitergeld (the “KUG”). The KUG is designed to reimburse employers for payroll costs incurred and paid to employees affected by the business disruption and government mandated operating restrictions in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic for the period March 1, 2020 through August 31, 2020. Westfalia was approved to receive reimbursement of certain costs for the period March 19, 2020 through August 31, 2020. The Company was reimbursed $3.3 million for qualifying payroll costs under terms of the KUG for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
The Company also proactively took the following measures to reduce costs and ensure appropriate liquidity:
-pursued additional governmental grant or loan programs in the jurisdictions in which it operates;
-participated in payroll or payroll tax deferral programs such as those enacted by the CARES Act;
-successfully negotiated with certain landlords to defer short-term rent payments;
-assessed its supplier base and related payment terms and amended, extended and/or retimed supplier payments;
-reduced or retimed investments, including capital expenditures, that did not materially impact future business opportunities or our organic growth; and
-reduced reliance on temporary employees in both administrative and operations functions.
Additionally, in the United States, the Company did not furlough or otherwise voluntarily reduce its workforce. To protect the continued employment of its U.S.-based employees, the Company, in addition to the other cost savings measures described above, implemented a temporary 20% wage reduction for all employees in the United States. In some cases, employees outside of the United States were furloughed in response to government mandated operational restrictions and fluctuations in customer demand. To the extent available, the Company availed itself of local government programs to support furloughed employees, such as those described above.
We believe the combination of these sources, as well as the changes to our capital structure following our recent refinancing activities and fully summarized below, will enable us to meet our working capital, capital expenditures and other funding requirements. Our ability to fund our working capital needs, debt payments and other obligations, and to comply with financial covenants, including borrowing base limitations under our Revolving Credit Facility, depends on our future operating performance and cash flow and many factors outside of our control, including the costs of raw materials, the state of the automotive accessories market, financial and economic conditions and the extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows - Operating Activities
Net cash provided by and used for operating activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $39.1 million and $(68.5) million, respectively.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated $7.4 million in cash flows, based on the reported net loss of $(37.5) million and after considering the effects of non-cash items related to gains and losses on dispositions of property and equipment, depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, amortization of original issuance discount and debt issuance costs, deferred income taxes, stock compensation, paid-in-kind interest, and other, net. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, the Company used $(63.0) million based on the reported net loss of $(110.0) million and after considering the effects of similar non-cash items, as well as write-off of certain operating lease assets.
Changes in operating assets and liabilities sourced $31.7 million and used $(5.5) million of cash during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Increases in accounts receivable resulted in a net use of cash of $(12.2) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in accounts receivable during 2020 resulted from higher sales activity in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, partially offset by pull ahead collection efforts in the fourth quarter of 2020. The decrease in accounts receivables resulted in a net source of cash of $19.3 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in accounts receivable during 2019 was primarily driven by pull ahead collection efforts in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Changes in inventory resulted in a net source of cash of $24.2 million and $8.4 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in inventory during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was due to improved inventory management in addition to an extension of our traditional selling season in the last half of the year. The decrease in inventory during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 was due to higher inventory scrap and reserves as well as improved inventory management.
Changes in prepaid expenses and other assets resulted in a net use of cash of $(4.9) million and $(3.0) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in prepaid expenses and other assets during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily due to the mix of invoicing from vendors and subsequent payment.
Changes in accounts payable and accrued liabilities resulted in a source of cash of $24.6 million and a use of cash $(30.1) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The source of cash for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the use of cash for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, is primarily due to the mix of payments made to suppliers and vendors and the related terms coupled with improved working capital management during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows - Investing Activities
Net cash used for investing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $(13.2) million, as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $206.5 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, net proceeds from the sale of business were $214.6 million, related to the sale of the APAC operating segment and the non-automotive business in Horizon Europe-Africa. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, capital expenditure needs increased to $(13.3) million as compared to $(9.7) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, which related to growth, capacity and productivity-related capital projects, primarily within Horizon Europe-Africa for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
We expect our capital spending in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 to be $23.2 million, primarily related to support for product development, growth and maintenance for the business.
Cash Flows - Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $12.7 million and net cash used for financing activities was $(164.7) million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net proceeds from the Revolving Credit Facility, net of issuance costs, were $21.9 million and proceeds from the PPP Loan were $8.7 million. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net repayments on the ABL Facility totaled $(19.9) million and $(43.5) million, respectively. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, net proceeds from borrowings on under our second lien term loan were $35.5 million, net of issuance costs and a use cash of $(173.4) million for repayments on our first lien term loan, including transaction costs. Additionally, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, proceeds from the issuance of Series A Preferred Stock and warrants totaled $10.6 million.
Factoring Arrangements
The Company has factoring arrangements with financial institutions to sell certain accounts receivable. Total receivables sold under certain non-recourse factoring arrangements was $237.1 million and $258.4 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We utilize factoring arrangements as part of our working capital needs. The costs of participating in these arrangements are immaterial to our results. Refer to Note 3, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our Debt and Other Commitments
We and certain of our subsidiaries are party to the asset-based Revolving Credit Facility, as defined and described above. The Revolving Credit Facility provides for $75.0 million of funding on a revolving basis, subject to borrowing base availability, and matures in fiscal year 2022. As of December 31, 2020, there was $24.2 million outstanding on the Revolving Credit Facility bearing interest at a weighted average rate of 5.0%.
In addition, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries, have been or are parties to other long-term credit agreements, including the Replacement Term Loan, as defined and described below. As of December 31, 2020, there was $90.2 million outstanding on the Replacement Term Loan bearing cash interest at 4.00% and paid-in-kind interest at 7.75%.
In February 2017, the Company completed a public offering of 2.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2022 (the “Convertible Notes”) in an aggregate principal amount of $125.0 million. Interest is payable on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
First Lien Term Loan Agreement
In February 2019, the Company amended and restated the existing term loan agreement (the “First Lien Term Loan Agreement”) to permit the Company to enter into the Senior Term Loan Agreement, as defined and described below, and tightened certain indebtedness, asset sale, investment and restricted payment baskets.
In March 2019, the Company amended the existing term loan agreement (“Sixth Term Amendment”) to permit the Company to enter into the Second Lien Term Loan Agreement, as defined and described below, amend certain financial covenants to make them less restrictive and make certain other affirmative and negative covenants more restrictive.
In September 2019, the Company amended the existing term loan agreement (the “Eighth Term Amendment”) to provide consent for the sale of APAC, provide consent for the Company to meet its prepayment obligation of the First Lien Term Loan, remove prepayment penalties and make certain negative covenants less restrictive. In September 2019, the Company paid down a portion of its First Lien Term Loan’s outstanding principal plus fees and paid-in-kind interest in the amount of $172.9 million.
In May 2020, the Company entered into amendments, limited waivers and consents in connection with its Loan Agreement and the First Lien Term Loan Agreement (the “Tenth Term Amendment”), with an effective date of April 1, 2020, that, among other things, consented to the Company’s applying for, obtaining and incurring the PPP Loan and French Loan, each as defined and described above.
As a result of the Replacement Term Loan Amendment, as defined and described below, the outstanding balance and any accrued interest has been replaced by the Replacement Term Loan, as defined and described below.
Senior Term Loan Agreement
In February 2019, the Company entered into a credit agreement (the “Senior Term Loan Agreement”) with Cortland Capital Markets Services LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders party thereto. The Senior Term Loan Agreement provided for a short-term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million, all of which was borrowed by the Company. Certain of the lenders under the Company’s First Lien Term Loan Agreement were the lenders under the Senior Term Loan Agreement.
The Senior Term Loan Agreement required the Company to obtain additional financing in amounts and on terms acceptable to the lenders. The Senior Term Loan Agreement was repaid on March 15, 2019, in conjunction with the additional financing further detailed below.
Second Lien Term Loan Agreement
In March 2019, the Company entered into a credit agreement (the “Second Lien Term Loan Agreement”) with Cortland Capital Markets Services LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and Corre Partners Management L.L.C. as representative of the lenders, and the lenders party thereto. The Second Lien Term Loan Agreement provided for a term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of $51.0 million. The Second Lien Term Loan Agreement was secured by a second lien on substantially the same collateral as the First Lien Term Loan, bore an interest rate of LIBOR plus 11.5% payable in kind through an increase in principal balance, and was subject to various affirmative and negative covenants including a secured net leverage ratio tested quarterly, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending on December 31, 2019, which was not to exceed (x) 6.75 to 1.00 as of the last day of any fiscal quarter ending on or prior to June 30, 2020 and (y) 5.25 to 1.00 as of the last day of any fiscal quarter ending on or after September 30, 2020.
Pursuant to the Second Lien Term Loan Agreement, the Company was required to issue detachable warrants to purchase up 6.25 million shares of its common stock, which can be exercised on a cashless basis over a five-year term with an exercise price of $1.50 per share. In March 2019, warrants to purchase 3,601,902 shares of common stock were issued and the Company also issued 90,667 shares of Series A Preferred Stock in the interim that were convertible into additional warrants upon receipt of shareholder approval of the issuance of such additional warrants and the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise thereof. Upon receipt of such shareholder approval on June 25, 2019, the 90,667 shares of Series A Preferred Stock were converted into warrants to purchase 2,952,248 shares of common stock.
In connection with the entry into the Second Lien Term Loan Agreement, we agreed to appoint four new members to our board of directors within seven business days of closing, and that the four new members of our board will constitute a majority of our board of directors.
The proceeds, net of applicable fees, of the Second Lien Term Loan Agreement were used to repay all amounts outstanding under the Senior Term Loan Agreement and to provide additional liquidity and working capital for the Company.
In September 2019, the Company amended the existing Second Lien Term Loan Agreement (“Second Lien Amendment”) to remove the prepayment requirement related to the use of APAC sale proceeds and made certain negative covenants less restrictive.
In May 2020, the Company entered into amendments, limited waivers and consents in connection with its Loan Agreement and the Second Lien Term Loan Agreement (“the Second Lien Third Amendment”), with an effective date of April 1, 2020, that, among other things, consented to the Company’s applying for, obtaining and incurring the PPP Loan and French Loan, each as defined and described above.
As a result of the Replacement Term Loan Amendment, as defined and described below, the outstanding balance and any accrued interest has been replaced by the Replacement Term Loan, as defined and described below.
Replacement Term Loan
On July 3, 2020, the Company entered into a limited consent to the Loan Agreement, that consented to the Company’s entering into the 2020 Replacement Term Loan Amendment, as defined and described below.
On July 6, 2020, the Company entered into the Replacement Term Loan Amendment (the “Eleventh Term Amendment”) to amend the First Lien Term Loan Agreement and Second Lien Term Loan Agreement. The Eleventh Term Amendment provided replacement term loans (the “Replacement Term Loan”) that refinanced and replaced the outstanding balances under the First Lien Term Loan Agreement and Second Lien Term Loan Agreement, plus any accrued interest thereon. The interest on the Replacement Term Loan was payable at LIBOR plus 10.75% per annum, subject to a 1.00% LIBOR floor, of which 4.00% was payable in cash and LIBOR plus 6.75% was payable-in-kind (“PIK”) interest (provided that the Company may elect on not more than one occasion to pay all interest as PIK interest). Borrowings under the Eleventh Term Amendment were to mature on the earlier of: (i) June 30, 2022 and (ii) April 1, 2022 if the Convertible Notes, as defined above, were not repaid or otherwise discharged prior to such date. Additionally, the Eleventh Term Amendment provided for a 1.00% PIK closing fee, which was added to the principal amount of the Replacement Term Loan on the closing date; provided for a prepayment penalty on the entire principal amount of the Replacement Term Loan in an amount equal to 3.0% of the aggregate principal amount prepaid prior to December 31, 2021; and amended the fixed charge coverage ratio covenant beginning with the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2021, as follows:
•June 30, 2021: 1.10 to 1.00
•September 30, 2021: 1.25 to 1.00
•December 31, 2021 and each fiscal quarter ending thereafter: 1.40 to 1.00
Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement
On February 2, 2021, the Company entered into a credit agreement (the “Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement”) with Atlantic Park Strategic Capital Fund, L.P. (“Atlantic Park”), as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders party thereto (collectively, the “Lenders”). The Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement provides for an initial term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million, all of which has been borrowed by the Company, and a delayed draw term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of up to $125.0 million, which may be drawn by the Company in up to three separate borrowings through June 30, 2022. A ticking fee of 25 basis points per annum will accrue on the undrawn portion of the delayed draw term loan facility.
The proceeds received by the Company from the initial borrowings under the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement were used to repay in full all outstanding debt and accrued interest on the Company’s Replacement Term Loan. As a result of the repayment, the credit agreement governing the Company’s Replacement Term Loan has been terminated and is no longer in effect.
Interest on the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement is payable in cash on a quarterly basis at the interest rate of LIBOR plus 7.50% per annum, subject to a 1.00% LIBOR floor, and is subject to various affirmative and negative covenants, including a secured net leverage ratio tested quarterly, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2023, not to exceed: 6.50 to 1.00. The Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement also contains a financial covenant that stipulates the Company will not make Capital Expenditures (as defined in the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement) exceeding $27.5 million during any fiscal year. To the extent that the amount of Capital Expenditures is less than $27.5 million in any fiscal year, up to 50% of the difference may be carried forward and used for Capital Expenditures in the immediately succeeding fiscal year.
Following a one-year no-call period, the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement provides for a 2.5% call premium for years two through five and no premium thereafter. All outstanding borrowings made under the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement mature on February 2, 2027.
All of the indebtedness under the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement is and will be guaranteed by the Company’s existing and future United States, Canadian and Mexican subsidiaries and certain other foreign subsidiaries and is and will be secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and such guarantors.
Pursuant to the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Company issued warrants (the “Senior Term Loan Warrants”) to Atlantic Park to purchase in the aggregate up to 3,905,486 shares of the Company’s common stock, with an exercise price of $9.00 per share, subject to adjustment as provided in the Senior Term Loan Warrants. The Senior Term Loan Warrants are exercisable at any time prior to February 2, 2026.
The Company estimates it incurred $11.4 million of debt issuance costs and fees associated with the above transactions. The transactions will be accounted for in the first quarter of 2021.
Additionally, on February 2, 2021, the Company entered into a limited consent of the Loan Agreement for the Company’s Revolving Credit Facility, that among other modifications, consented to the Company’s entering into the Senior Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Covenant and Liquidity Matters
The Loan Agreement contains various negative and affirmative covenants and other requirements affecting us and our subsidiaries, including restrictions on incurrence of debt, liens, mergers, investments, loans, advances, guarantee obligations, acquisitions, asset dispositions, sale-leaseback transactions, hedging agreements, dividends and other restricted payments, transactions with affiliates, restrictive agreements and amendments to charters, bylaws, and other material documents. The Revolving Credit Facility does not include any financial maintenance covenants other than a financial covenant that stipulates the Company will not make Capital Expenditures (as defined in the Loan Agreement) exceeding $30.0 million during any fiscal year.
We are subject to variable interest rates on our Replacement Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility. At December 31, 2020, 1-Month LIBOR and 3-Month LIBOR approximated 0.14% and 0.24%, respectively.
The Company is in compliance with all of its financial covenants as of December 31, 2020.
In addition to our long-term debt, we have other cash commitments related to leases. We account for these lease transactions as operating leases and annual rent expense related thereto for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $15.0 million and $18.8 million, respectively. We expect to continue to utilize leasing as a financing strategy in the future to meet capital expenditure needs and to reduce debt levels.
Refer to Note 10, Long-term Debt, and Note 13, Leases, in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” included within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Consolidated EBITDA
Consolidated EBITDA (defined as “Consolidated EBITDA” in our Replacement Term Loan Agreement) is a comparable measure to how the Company assesses performance. As discussed further in the Supplemental Analysis and Segment Information section above, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures to assess performance and measure our covenant compliance in accordance with the Replacement Term Loan Agreement, which includes Adjusted EBITDA at the operating segment level. For the measurement of our Replacement Term Loan Agreement financial covenants, the definition of Consolidated EBITDA limits the amount of non-recurring expenses or costs including restructuring, moving and severance that can be excluded to $10 million in any cumulative four fiscal quarter period. Similarly, the definition limits the amount of fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with any proposed asset sale that can be excluded to $5 million in any cumulative four fiscal quarter period.
The reconciliations of net income (loss) attributable to Horizon Global to EBITDA, EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to Consolidated EBITDA are as follows:
(a) Non-recurring expenses or costs including severance, restructuring and relocation are not to, in aggregate, exceed $10 million in adjustments in determining Consolidated EBITDA in any four fiscal quarter period.
(b) Fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with any proposed asset sale are not to, in aggregate, exceed $5 million in adjustments in determining Consolidated EBITDA in any four fiscal quarter period.
Credit Rating
The Company’s debt agreements do not require that we maintain a credit rating.
Outlook
The Company began 2020 with strong performance and our operating results demonstrated strong demand for our products. The COVID-19 pandemic caused significant business and economic disruption globally and resulted in economic uncertainty and challenges, both in the short term and long term. The Company continues to prioritize the health of its employees and others in the communities where it does business and has taken the following decisive actions to ensure the welfare of these groups, based on guidance from local governments and health authorities, as well as the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control, designed to reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19:
-requiring administrative employees to work remotely;
-temporarily eliminating domestic and international travel;
-gating measures defined and implemented for essential workers to enter facilities;
-providing and requiring the use of personal protective equipment by all employees during working hours;
-requiring essential on-site employees to practice social distancing, including refraining from handshaking, hugging or other forms of physical greeting and maintaining 6 feet of distance from coworkers where possible;
-professionally sanitizing each facility on a regular basis;
-sanitizing equipment between uses;
-requiring frequent hand washing, including before and after the use of shared equipment;
-conducting temperature checks on employees at the start of each shift;
-ensuring availability of hand sanitizer at each facility and encouraging frequent application; and
-requiring employees to stay home if they are experiencing cold or flu-like symptoms.
The Company is currently at a full operational status and will continue to fulfill and deliver upon the strong trend in customer orders, as experienced throughout the last half of 2020, signaling increased consumer demand and an extension of our traditional selling season.
We also remain focused on maintaining liquidity to fund our operations, while considering future maturities in our capital structure, which have been addressed and will continue to be addressed as the Company continues to execute upon its business plan and operational improvement initiatives in 2021. These initiatives were put in place to streamline and simplify its operations and provide a roadmap to achieve our strategic priorities of margin expansion, liquidity management and organic business growth.
We believe the unique strategic footprint we enjoy in our market space will benefit us as our OE customers continue to demonstrate a preference for stronger relationships with few suppliers. We believe that our strong brand positions, portfolio of product offerings, and existing customer relationships present a long-term opportunity for us and provide leverage to see balanced growth in OE and aftermarket business. That position and brand recognition allows us flexibility to bring our products to market in various channels that we believe provide us the ability to leverage our current operational footprint to meet or exceed our customer demands.
Impact of New Accounting Standards
See Note 2, New Accounting Pronouncements, included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The following discussion of accounting policies is intended to supplement the accounting policies presented in Note 3, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, our evaluation of business and macroeconomic trends, and information from other outside sources, as appropriate.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer, and excludes any sales incentives and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a customer.
Sales Related Accruals. Net sales are comprised of gross revenues less estimates of expected returns, trade discounts and customer allowances, which include incentives for items such as cooperative advertising agreements, volume discounts and other supply agreements in connection with various customer programs. On at least a quarterly basis, we perform detailed reviews of our sales related accruals by evaluating specific customer contractual commitments, assessing current incentive programs and other relevant information in order to assess the adequacy of the reserve. Reductions to revenue and estimated accruals are recorded in the period in which revenue is recognized.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts to reflect management’s best estimate of probable credit losses inherent in our accounts receivable balances. Determination of the allowances requires management to exercise judgment about the timing, frequency and severity of credit losses that could materially affect the allowances for doubtful accounts and, therefore, net income. The level of the allowance is based on quantitative and qualitative factors including historical loss experience, delinquency trends, economic conditions and customer credit risk. We perform detailed reviews of our accounts receivable portfolio on at least a quarterly basis to assess the adequacy of the allowance. Over the past two years, the allowance for doubtful accounts was 3.0% to 4.3% of gross accounts receivable. We do not believe that significant credit risk exists due to our diverse customer base.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Definite-Lived Intangible Assets. We review the Company’s financial performance for indicators of impairment on at least a quarterly basis. In reviewing for impairment indicators, we also consider events or changes in circumstances such as business prospects, customer retention, market trends, potential product obsolescence, competitive activities and other economic factors. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying value of an asset group exceeds the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset group. The impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the asset group exceeds its fair value.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangibles. We review goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of October 1. More frequent evaluations may be required if we experience changes in our business climate or as a result of other triggering events that take place. We perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If not, no further goodwill impairment testing is performed. If so, then the impairment analysis for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level using a quantitative approach. Our qualitative assessment involves significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, financial performance of the Company, reporting unit specific events and changes in the Company’s share price.
The quantitative test is a comparison of the fair value of the reporting unit, determined using a combination of the income and market approaches, to its recorded amount. If the recorded amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment is recorded to reduce the carrying amount to fair value, but will not exceed the amount of goodwill that is recorded. When performing a quantitative goodwill test, the fair value determination consists primarily of using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) under the fair value measurement standards. We believe the most critical assumptions and estimates in determining the estimated fair value of our reporting units include, but are not limited to, the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows which is largely dependent on expected EBITDA margins, the discount rate applied to those cash flows, and terminal growth rates. The assumptions used in determining our expected future cash flows consider various factors such as historical operating trends and long-term operating strategies and initiatives. The discount rate used by each reporting unit is based on our assumption of a prudent investor’s required rate of return of assuming the risk of investing in a particular company in a specific country. The terminal growth rate reflects the sustainable operating income a reporting unit could generate in a perpetual state as a function of revenue growth, inflation and future margin expectations.
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the assets might be impaired. Similar to the goodwill assessment described above, the Company first performs a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. If necessary, the Company then performs a quantitative impairment test by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset, based upon its forecasted cash flows using the relief from royalty method, to its carrying value.
See Note 6, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Income Taxes. We compute income taxes using the asset and liability method, whereby deferred income taxes are provided for the temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Under this method, changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in income in the period such changes are enacted. We determine valuation allowances based on an assessment of positive and negative evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis and are utilized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount more likely than not to be realized. To make this assessment, we evaluate historical operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent fiscal years, expectations for future pretax operating income, the time period over which our temporary differences will reverse and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. Changes in existing tax laws could also affect actual tax results and the valuation of deferred tax assets over time. We record interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense.
We are also currently subject to tax controversies in various jurisdictions, and these jurisdictions may assess additional income tax liabilities against us. Developments in audits could have a material effect on our operating results or cash flows in the period for which that development occurs, as well as for subsequent periods. We regularly assess the likelihood of an adverse outcome resulting from these proceedings to determine the adequacy of our tax accruals. Although we believe our estimates are reasonable, the final outcome of audits could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals.
Refer to Note 19, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Emerging Growth Company
Under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (“JOBS”) Act, we qualified as an emerging growth company (“EGC”) until December 31, 2020, which allowed us an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards pursuant to Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act. Effective December 31, 2020, we no longer qualify for EGC status following the fifth anniversary of the date of the first sale of our common stock pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities Act.