Item 7.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following should be read in conjunction with Part I, including the matters set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, and our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020. Discussions of fiscal 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Overview
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the outbreak is widespread throughout the United States (including Florida in which we generated approximately 54%, 54%, and 50% of our revenue during fiscal 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively), and in other countries in which we operate. As a result, from March 2020 through June 2020, we temporarily closed certain departments or locations based on guidance from local government or health officials. Currently, all of our stores are fully operational, but the effects of COVID-19 (including the related international, federal, state, and local governmental actions and regulations) remain unpredictable. We are following guidelines to ensure we are safely operating as recommended. Where possible, we are offering private personal showings as well as virtual appointments. Our digital platform is serving as an effective solution in this environment with robust online activity. Our experienced teams continue to engage with customers virtually and in our stores to help customers select their boats and obtain appropriate services.
We believe we are the largest recreational boat and yacht retailer and superyacht services company in the world. Through our current 79 retail locations in 21 states (as of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), we sell new and used recreational boats and related marine products, including engines, trailers, parts, and accessories. We also arrange related boat financing, insurance, and extended service contracts; provide boat repair and maintenance services; offer yacht and boat brokerage sales; and, where available, offer slip and storage accommodations. In the British Virgin Islands we offer the charter of catamarans, through MarineMax Vacations. We also own Fraser Yachts Group, a leading superyacht brokerage and luxury yacht services company with operations in multiple countries. In July 2020, we acquired Northrop & Johnson, another leading superyacht brokerage and services company with operations in multiple countries. In October 2020, we purchased all of the outstanding equity of SkipperBud’s. SkipperBud’s is one of the largest boat sales, brokerage, service and marina/storage groups in the United States. In May 2021, we purchased all of the outstanding equity of Cruisers Yachts. Cruisers Yachts, a wholly-owned MarineMax subsidiary, manufactures sport yacht and yachts with sales through our select retail dealership locations and through independent dealers, and is recognized as one of the world’s premier manufacturers of premium sport yacht and yachts. In July 2021, we acquired Nisswa Marine, a full-service dealer located in Minnesota. In November 2021, we acquired Intrepid, a premier manufacturer of powerboats, and Texas MasterCraft, a premier watersports dealer in Northern Texas.
MarineMax was incorporated in January 1998 (and reincorporated in Florida in March 2015). We commenced operations with the acquisition of five independent recreational boat dealers on March 1, 1998. Since the initial acquisitions in March 1998, we have, as of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, acquired 32 recreational boat dealers, four boat brokerage operations, two full-service yacht repair operations, and two boat and yacht manufacturers. As a part of our acquisition strategy, we frequently engage in discussions with various recreational boat dealers regarding their potential acquisition by us. Potential acquisition discussions frequently take place over a long period of time and involve difficult business integration and other issues, including, in some cases, management succession and related matters. As a result of these and other factors, a number of potential acquisitions that from time to time appear likely to occur do not result in binding legal agreements and are not consummated. We completed two acquisitions in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, two acquisitions in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, and three acquisitions in the fiscal year ending September 30, 2021.
General economic conditions and consumer spending patterns can negatively impact our operating results. Unfavorable local, regional, national or global economic developments or uncertainties regarding future economic prospects could reduce consumer spending in the markets we serve and adversely affect our business. Economic conditions in areas in which we operate dealerships, particularly Florida in which we generated approximately 54%, 54%, and 50% of our revenue during fiscal 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively, can have a major impact on our operations. Local influences, such as corporate downsizing, military base closings, and inclement weather such as hurricanes and other storms, environmental conditions, and specific events, such as the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010, also could adversely affect, and in certain instances have adversely affected, our operations in certain markets.
In an economic downturn, consumer discretionary spending levels generally decline, at times resulting in disproportionately large reductions in the sale of luxury goods. Consumer spending on luxury goods also may decline as a result of lower consumer confidence levels, even if prevailing economic conditions are favorable. As a result, an economic downturn could impact us more than certain of our competitors due to our strategic focus on a higher end of our market. Although we have expanded our operations during
periods of stagnant or modestly declining industry trends, the cyclical nature of the recreational boating industry or the lack of industry growth may adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Any period of adverse economic conditions or low consumer confidence is likely to have a negative effect on our business.
Historically, in periods of lower consumer spending and depressed economic conditions, we have, among other things, substantially reduced our acquisition program, delayed new store openings, reduced our inventory purchases, engaged in inventory reduction efforts, closed a number of our retail locations, reduced our headcount, and amended and replaced our credit facility.
Although past economic conditions have adversely affected our operating results, we believe during and after such conditions we have capitalized on our core strengths to substantially outperform the industry, resulting in market share gains. Our ability to capture such market share supports the alignment of our retailing strategies with the desires of consumers. We believe the steps we have taken to address weak market conditions in the past have yielded, and we believe will yield in the future, an increase in revenue. Acquisitions remain an important strategy for us, and, subject to a number of conditions, including macro-economic conditions and finding attractive acquisition targets, we plan to explore opportunities through this strategy. We expect our core strengths and retailing strategies including our digital platform, will position us to capitalize on growth opportunities as they occur and will allow us to emerge with greater earnings potential.
Effective May 2, 2021, our reportable segments changed as a result of the Company’s acquisition of Cruisers Yachts, which changed management’s reporting structure and operating activities. We now report our operations through two new reportable segments: Retail Operations and Product Manufacturing. See Note 21 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of September 30, 2021, the Retail Operations segment includes the activity of 77 retail locations in Alabama, California, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas, Washington and Wisconsin, where we sell new and used recreational boats, including pleasure and fishing boats, with a focus on premium brands in each segment. We also sell related marine products, including engines, trailers, parts, and accessories. In addition, we provide repair, maintenance, and slip and storage services; we arrange related boat financing, insurance, and extended service contracts; we offer boat and yacht brokerage sales; yacht charter services. In the British Virgin Islands we offer the charter of catamarans, through MarineMax Vacations. Fraser Yachts Group and Northrop & Johnson, leading superyacht brokerage and luxury yacht services companies with operations in multiple countries, are also included in this segment.
As of September 30, 2021, the Product Manufacturing segment includes activity of Cruisers Yachts, a wholly-owned MarineMax subsidiary, manufacturing sport yacht and yachts with sales through our select retail dealership locations and through independent dealers. Cruisers Yachts is recognized as one of the world’s premier manufacturers of premium sport yacht and yachts, producing models from 33’ to 60’ feet.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The impact and risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” when such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
In the ordinary course of business, we make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial condition in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We base our estimates on historical experiences and on various other assumptions (including future earnings) that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities, including contingent assets and liabilities such as contingent consideration liabilities from acquisitions, which are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenue is from contracts with customers for the sale of boats, motors, and trailers. We recognize revenue from boat, motor, and trailer sales upon transfer of control of the boat, motor, or trailer to the customer, which is generally upon acceptance of the boat, motor, and trailer by the customer and the satisfaction of our performance obligations. The transaction price is determined with the customer at the time of sale. Customers may trade in a used boat to apply toward the purchase of a new or used boat. The trade-in is a type of noncash consideration measured at fair value, based on external and internal observable and unobservable market data and applied as payment to the contract price for the purchased boat. At the time of acceptance, the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits of the boat, motor, or trailer. We recognize commissions earned from a brokerage sale when the related brokerage transaction closes upon transfer of control of the boat, motor, or trailer to the customer, which is generally upon acceptance by the customer.
We do not directly finance our customers’ boat, motor, or trailer purchases. In many cases, we assist with third-party financing for boat, motor, and trailer sales. We recognize commissions earned by us for placing notes with financial institutions in connection with customer boat financing when we recognize the related boat sales. Pursuant to negotiated agreements with financial institutions, we are charged back for a portion of these fees should the customer terminate or default on the related finance contract before it is outstanding for a stipulated minimum period of time. We base the chargeback allowance, which was not material to the consolidated financial statements taken as a whole as of September 30, 2020 and 2021, on our experience with repayments or defaults on the related finance contracts. We recognize variable consideration from commissions earned on extended warranty service contracts sold on behalf of third-party insurance companies at generally the later of customer acceptance of the service contract terms as evidenced by contract execution or recognition of the related boat sale. We also recognize variable consideration from marketing fees earned on insurance products sold by third-party insurance companies at the later of customer acceptance of the insurance product as evidenced by contract execution or when the related boat sale is recognized.
We recognize revenue from parts and service operations (boat maintenance and repairs) over time as services are performed. Each boat maintenance and repair service is a single performance obligation that includes both the parts and labor associated with the service. Payment for boat maintenance and repairs is typically due upon the completion of the service, which is generally completed within a short period of time from contract inception. We satisfy our performance obligations, transfer control, and recognize revenue over time for parts and service operations because we are creating a contract asset with no alternative use and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Contract assets primarily relate to our right to consideration for work in process not yet billed at the reporting date associated with maintenance and repair services. We use an input method to recognize revenue and measure progress based on labor hours expended to satisfy the performance obligation at average labor rates. We have determined labor hours expended to be the relevant measure of work performed to complete the maintenance and repair service for the customer. As a practical expedient, because repair and maintenance service contracts have an original duration of one year or less, we do not consider the time value of money, and we do not disclose estimated revenue expected to be recognized in the future for performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) at the end of the reporting period or when we expect to recognize such revenue. Contract assets, recorded in prepaid expenses and other current assets, totaled approximately $2.6 million and $5.7 million as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2021, respectively.
We recognize revenue from the sale of our manufactured yachts when control of the yacht is transferred to the dealer, which is generally upon acceptance by the dealer. At the time of acceptance, the dealer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits of the yacht. We have elected to record shipping and handling activities that occur after the dealer has obtained control of the yacht as a fulfillment activity.
Intersegment revenue represents yachts that were manufactured in our Product Manufacturing segment and were sold to our Retail Operations segment. The Product Manufacturing segment supplies our Retail Operations segment along with various independent dealers.
Contract liabilities primarily consist of customer deposits. We recognize contract liabilities (customer deposits) as revenue at the time of acceptance and the transfer of control to the customers. Total contract liabilities of approximately $24.3 million recorded as of September 30, 2019 were recognized in revenue during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Total contract liabilities of approximately $31.8 million recorded as of September 30, 2020 were recognized in revenue during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
We recognize deferred revenue from service operations and slip and storage services over time on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract as our performance obligations are met. We recognize income from the rentals of chartering power yachts over time on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract as our performance obligations are met.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The cost of inventories purchased from our vendors consist of the amount paid to acquire the inventory, net of vendor consideration and purchase discounts, the cost of equipment added, reconditioning costs, and transportation costs relating to acquiring inventory for sale. Trade-in used boats are initially recorded at fair value and adjusted for reconditioning and other costs. The cost of inventories that are manufactured by the Company consist of material, labor, and manufacturing overhead. Unallocated overhead and abnormal costs are expensed as incurred. New and used boats, motors, and trailers inventories are accounted for on a specific identification basis. Raw materials and parts, accessories, and other inventories are accounted for on an average cost basis. We utilize our historical experience, the aging of the inventories, and our consideration of current market trends as the basis for determining a lower of cost or net realizable value. Our valuation allowance contains uncertainties because the calculation requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment regarding the amount at which the inventory will ultimately be sold which considers forecasted market trends, model changes, and new product introductions. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to calculate our valuation allowance which would result in a material effect on our operating results. As of September 30, 2020 and 2021, our valuation allowance for new and used boat, motor and trailer inventories was $2.4 million and $0.4 million, respectively. If events occur and market conditions change, causing the fair value to fall below carrying value, the valuation allowance could increase.
Goodwill
We account for acquisitions in accordance with FASB ASC 805, “Business Combinations” (“ASC 805”), and goodwill in accordance with ASC 350, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other” (“ASC 350”). For business combinations, the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination is recorded as goodwill. In accordance with ASC 350, we test goodwill for impairment at least annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Our annual impairment test is performed during the third fiscal quarter. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its fair value we recognize an impairment loss in accordance with ASC 350. Based upon our most recent analysis, we determined through our qualitative assessment that it is not “more likely than not” that the fair values of our reporting units are less than their carrying values. As a result, we were not required to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. The qualitative assessment requires us to make judgments and assumptions regarding macroeconomic and industry conditions, our financial performance, and other factors. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a change in the judgments and assumptions used in our qualitative assessment which would result in a material effect on our operating results.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
FASB ASC 360-10-40, “Property, Plant, and Equipment - Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets” (“ASC 360-10-40”), requires that long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and purchased intangibles subject to amortization, be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of the asset (or asset group) is measured by comparison of its carrying amount to undiscounted future net cash flows the asset (or asset group) is expected to generate over the remaining life of the asset (or asset group). If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset (or asset group) exceeds its fair market value. Estimates of expected future cash flows represent our best estimate based on currently available information and reasonable and supportable assumptions. Our impairment loss calculations contain uncertainties because they require us to make assumptions and to apply judgment in order to estimate expected future cash flows. Any impairment recognized in accordance with ASC 360-10-40 is permanent and may not be restored. Based upon our most recent analysis, we believe no impairment of long-lived assets existed as of September 30, 2021. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a change in the future estimates or assumptions used to test for recoverability which would result in a material effect on our operating results.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data as a percentage of revenue for the periods indicated:
Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021, Compared with Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2020
Revenue. Revenue increased $553.5 million, or 36.7%, to approximately $2.063 billion for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $1.510 billion for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Of this increase, $202.9 million was attributable to a 13.4% increase in comparable-store sales and an approximate $350.6 million net increase was related to stores opened, including acquired, or closed that were not eligible for inclusion in the comparable-store base. The increase in our comparable-store sales was primarily due to demand driven increases in new and used boat revenue and our higher margin finance and insurance products, brokerage, parts, service, and storage services.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased $260.7 million, or 65.4%, to $659.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $398.7 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue increased to 32.0% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from 26.4% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of revenue was primarily the result of demand driven price increases resulting in greater new and used boat margins and increases in our higher margin businesses, including our superyacht-services companies, as a percentage of sales. The increase in gross profit dollars was primarily attributable to increased new and used boat sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $158.0 million, or 54.1%, to $450.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $292.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased as a percentage of revenue to 21.8% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from 19.3% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was driven by an increase in mix to our higher margin businesses which typically carry a higher expense structure and acquisitions.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $5.6 million, or 60.2%, to $3.7 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from $9.3 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Interest expense as a percentage of revenue decreased to 0.2% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from 0.6% for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily the result of decreased borrowings.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense increased $28.0 million, or 122.8%, to $50.8 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $22.8 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Our effective income tax rate increased to 24.7% for fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, from 23.4% for fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in the effective income tax rate was primarily attributed to prior fiscal year state tax benefits and prior fiscal year tax benefits from stock-based compensation that did not occur for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Quarterly Data and Seasonality
Our business, as well as the entire recreational boating industry, is highly seasonal, with seasonality varying in different geographic markets. With the exception of Florida, we generally realize significantly lower sales and higher levels of inventories, and related short-term borrowings, in the quarterly periods ending December 31 and March 31. The onset of the public boat and recreation shows in January generally stimulates boat sales and typically allows us to reduce our inventory levels and related short-term borrowings throughout the remainder of the fiscal year. Our business could become substantially more seasonal if we acquire additional dealers that operate in colder regions of the United States or close retail locations in warm climates.
Our business is also subject to weather patterns, which may adversely affect our results of operations. For example, prolonged winter conditions, drought conditions (or merely reduced rainfall levels) or excessive rain, may limit access to area boating locations
or render boating dangerous or inconvenient, thereby curtailing customer demand for our products. In addition, unseasonably cool weather and prolonged winter conditions may lead to a shorter selling season in certain locations. Hurricanes and other storms could result in disruptions of our operations or damage to our boat inventories and facilities, as has been the case when Florida and other markets were affected by hurricanes, such as Hurricanes Harvey and Irma in 2017. Although we believe our geographic diversity is likely to reduce the overall impact to us of adverse weather conditions in any one market area, these conditions will continue to represent potential, material adverse risks to us and our future financial performance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash needs are primarily for working capital to support operations, including new and used boat and related parts inventories, off-season liquidity, and growth through acquisitions. Acquisitions remain an important strategy for us, and we plan to continue our growth through this strategy in appropriate circumstances. However, we cannot predict the length of favorable economic or financial conditions. We regularly monitor the aging of our inventories and current market trends to evaluate our current and future inventory needs. We also use this evaluation in conjunction with our review of our current and expected operating performance and expected business levels to determine the adequacy of our financing needs.
These cash needs historically have been financed with cash generated from operations and borrowings under the Credit Facility (described below). Our ability to utilize the Credit Facility to fund operations depends upon the collateral levels and compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility. Any turmoil in the credit markets and weakness in the retail markets may interfere with our ability to remain in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility and therefore our ability to utilize the Credit Facility to fund operations. As of September 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility. We currently depend upon dividends and other payments from our dealerships and the Credit Facility to fund our current operations and meet our cash needs. As 100% owner of each of our dealerships, we determine the amounts of such distributions subject to applicable law, and currently, no agreements exist that restrict this flow of funds from our dealerships.
For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by operating activities was approximately $373.9 million and $304.7 million, respectively. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, cash used in operating activities was approximately $12.4 million. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was primarily related to decreases in inventory, increases in contract liabilities (customer deposits), accrued expenses and other liabilities, and our net income adjusted for non-cash expenses and gains such as depreciation and amortization expense, deferred income tax provision, and stock-based compensation expense. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was primarily related to decreases in inventory, accounts receivable, increases in accrued expenses and other liabilities, increases in accounts payable, and our net income adjusted for non-cash expenses and gains such as depreciation and amortization expense, deferred income tax provision, stock-based compensation expense, and insurance proceeds received. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, cash used in operating activities was primarily related to increases in inventory, accounts receivable, and prepaid expenses and other assets, partially offset by our net income adjusted for non-cash expenses and gains such as depreciation and amortization expense, deferred income tax provision, stock-based compensation expense, insurance proceeds received, and increases in accounts payable, contract liabilities, and accrued expenses and other long-term liabilities.
For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019, cash used in investing activities was approximately $161.1 million, $30.1 million, and $56.3 million, respectively. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, cash used in investing activities was primarily used for acquisitions, to purchase property and equipment associated with improving existing retail facilities, and to purchase investments, partially offset by proceeds from insurance settlements. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, cash used in investing activities was primarily used to purchase property and equipment associated with improving existing retail facilities and purchase property and equipment and other assets associated with business acquisitions. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, cash used in investing activities was primarily used to purchase property and equipment associated with improving existing retail facilities and purchase property and equipment and other assets associated with business acquisitions.
For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, cash used in financing activities was approximately $145.7 million and $158.1 million, respectively. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was approximately $58.6 million. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to net payments for short-term borrowings, purchase of treasury stock, payments on tax withholdings for equity awards, payments for long-term debt, and contingent acquisition consideration payments, partially offset by proceeds from long-term debt and net proceeds from issuance of common stock under incentive compensation and employee purchase plans. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to a decrease in net short-term borrowings as a result of decreased inventory levels, repurchase of common stock under the share repurchase program, payments on tax withholdings for equity awards, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our stock-based compensation plans and proceeds from long- term debt. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was primarily attributable to net short-term borrowings as a result of increased inventory levels and proceeds from the issuance of common stock from our stock-based compensation plans, partially offset by the repurchase of common stock under the share repurchase program and payments on tax withholdings for equity awards.
In July 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, with Wells Fargo Commercial Distribution Finance LLC, M&T Bank, Bank of the West, and Truist Bank. The Credit Facility provides the Company a line of credit with asset based borrowing availability of up to $500.0 million for working capital and inventory financing, with the amount permissible pursuant to a borrowing base formula. The Credit Facility has a three-year term and expires in July 2024, subject to extension for two one-year periods, with lender approval.
The Credit Facility has certain financial covenants as specified in the agreement. The covenants include provisions that our leverage ratio must not exceed 2.75 to 1.0 and that our current ratio must be greater than 1.2 to 1.0. The interest rate for amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility is 345 basis points plus the greater of 75 basis points or the one-month LIBOR. There is an unused line fee of ten basis points on the unused portion of the Credit Facility. In October 2021, we amended the Credit Facility to allow for the transition of the benchmark interest rate used from LIBOR to the Secured Overnight Finance Rate (SOFR).
Advances under the Credit Facility are initiated by the acquisition of eligible new and used inventory or are re-advances against eligible new and used inventory that have been partially paid-off. Advances on new inventory will generally mature 1,080 days from the original invoice date. Advances on used inventory will mature 361 days from the date we acquire the used inventory. Each advance is subject to a curtailment schedule, which requires that we pay down the balance of each advance on a periodic basis starting after six months. The curtailment schedule varies based on the type and value of the inventory. The collateral for the Credit Facility is primarily the Company’s inventory that is financed through the Credit Facility and related accounts receivable. None of our real estate has been pledged for collateral for the Credit Facility.
As of September 30, 2021, our indebtedness associated with our short-term borrowings and our long-term debt totaled approximately $24.1 million and $51.7 million, respectively. As of September 30, 2021, short-term borrowings and long-term debt recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets included unamortized debt issuance costs of approximately $0.2 million and $0.6 million, respectively. Refer to Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure of borrowing availability, interest rates, and terms of our short-term borrowings and long-term debt.
Except as specified in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and in the attached consolidated financial statements, we have no material commitments for capital for the next 12 months. Based on the information currently available to us, the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on consumer demand is uncertain, however, we believe that the cash generated from sales and our existing capital resources will be adequate to meet our liquidity and capital requirements for at least the next 12 months, except for possible significant acquisitions.
Commitments and Commercial Commitments
The following table sets forth a summary of our material contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of September 30, 2021:
(1)
Estimates of future interest payments for short-term borrowings have been excluded in the tabular presentation. Amounts due are contingent upon the outstanding balances and the variable interest rates. Refer to Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure of borrowing availability, interest rates, and terms of our short-term borrowings.
(2)
The amounts included in long-term debt refers to future cash principal payments. Refer to Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for disclosure of borrowing availability, interest rates, and terms of our long-term debt.
(3)
The amounts included in other liabilities consist primarily of our estimated liability for claims on certain workers’ compensation insurance policies and estimated future contingent consideration payments.
(4)
Amounts for operating lease commitments do not include certain operating expenses such as maintenance, insurance, and real estate taxes. These amounts are not a material component of operating expenses.