Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Horizon Acquisition Corporation II,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Horizon Acquisition Corporation II. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on July 22, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. While we are evaluating potential business combination targets, we have not entered into any definitive acquisition agreement with any potential business combination target. While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry, we currently intend to concentrate our efforts in identifying businesses in the media and entertainment industry with a focus on differentiated product and service offerings. In particular, we expect to seek assets that target four broad themes (1) innovative platforms that support consumer access to financial wellness solutions, (2) next-generation alternative asset management platforms, particularly those that benefit from upheaval in long-term interest rates, (3) traditional financial services businesses requiring an injection of capital due to exogenous shocks from the current environment and (4) insurance and related offerings, including insurance technology, administration and other solutions. Our sponsor is Horizon II Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on October 19, 2020. On October 22, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 50,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $500.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $19.6 million, inclusive of approximately $12.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions. The underwriter was granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the initial public offering to purchase up to 5,175,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per unit. The Underwriters exercised the over-allotment option on November 24, 2020 to purchase an additional 2,500,000 units, which closed on November 27, 2020 generating gross proceeds of $25.0 million, and incurring additional offering costs of approximately $1.4 million in underwriting fees (inclusive of approximately $0.9 million in deferred underwriting fees).
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,933,333 warrants to our sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $8.9 million, pursuant to the private placement warrants purchase agreement, dated October 19, 2020, by and between us and our sponsor. The private placement purchase agreement provided for a second closing of the private placement simultaneously with the closing of the over-allotment units. Accordingly, on November 27, 2020, the second closing of the private placement was consummated, resulting in the purchase of an aggregate of 333,334 private placement warrants by our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $0.5 million.
Our sponsor agreed to forfeit up to 1,875,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the founder shares will represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the IPO. On October 22, 2020, in connection with consummation of the sponsor IPO units, our sponsor surrendered 581,250 founder shares to the Company for no consideration, thus reducing the amount of Class B ordinary shares subject to forfeiture to 1,293,750 Class B ordinary shares. As a result of the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the remainder of the over-allotment units expiring unexercised on December 3, 2020, 668,750 Class B ordinary shares were automatically surrendered for no consideration by the sponsor.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering, the over-allotment, and the private placements, a total of $525.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and over-allotment, and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was placed in a trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, or October 22, 2022 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from July 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, was in preparation for an initial public offering, and since our initial public offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from July 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a loss of approximately $247,000, which consisted of approximately $250,000 in general and administrative expenses, offset by approximately $3,000 in interest income on investments held in trust account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $823,000 in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $1.1 million.
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of the initial public offering through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder, a loan of approximately $161,000 pursuant to the Note (as defined below) issued to our sponsor. We repaid the Note in full on October 22, 2020. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (as defined below). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On August 7, 2020, our sponsor paid an aggregate of $25,000 for certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for issuance of 14,375,000 Class B ordinary shares. Our sponsor agreed to forfeit up to 1,875,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the sounder shares will represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the IPO. On October 22, 2020, in connection with consummation of our sponsor IPO units, our s surrendered 581,250 founder shares to us for no consideration, thus reducing the amount of Class B ordinary shares subject to forfeiture to 1,293,750 Class B ordinary shares. As a result of the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the remainder of the over-allotment units expiring unexercised, on December 3, 2020, 668,750 Class B ordinary shares were automatically surrendered for no consideration by the sponsor.
The Initial Shareholders agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial business combination or earlier if, subsequent to the initial business combination, the closing price of the Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, capitalization of shares, share dividends, rights issuances, subdivisions reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination, and (B) the date following the completion of the initial business combination on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement
On October 22, 2020, simultaneous with the consummation of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 5,933,333 private placement warrants to our sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of approximately $8.9 million. On November 27, 2020, the second closing of the private placement was consummated, resulting in the purchase of an aggregate of 333,334 private placement warrants by our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $0.5 million.
Each whole private placement warrant is exercisable for one whole Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. If we do not complete a business combination within the Combination Period, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. The private placement warrants will be non-redeemable except as described below and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by our sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Our sponsor and our officers and directors will agree, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their private placement warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination.
Related Party Loans
On August 7, 2020, our sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 to be used for the payment of costs related to the initial public offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). The Note is non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the closing of the initial public offering. We borrowed approximately $161,000 under the Note and fully repaid the Note on October 22, 2020.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we may repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the NYSE through the earlier of consummation of the initial business combination or the liquidation, we agreed to pay our sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to our management team. From the date the securities were first listed on the NYSE through December 31, 2020, our sponsor waived the fee.
In addition, our sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. The audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to the sponsor, officers or directors, or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial business combination will be made from funds held outside the trust account.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 5,175,000 additional units at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On November 27, 2020, we issued an additional of 2,500,000 units at the initial public offering price at $10.00 per unit pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit (excluding the sponsor IPO units), or $8.9 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit (excluding the Affiliated units), or $17.5 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In connection with the consummation of the sale of units pursuant to the over-allotment option on November 27, 2020, the underwriters were entitled to an additional fee of approximately $1.4 million paid upon closing and an additional deferred underwriting commissions of approximately $0.9 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the trust account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in interest income on investments held in trust account in the accompanying Statement of Operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the trust account are determined using available market information.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 50,817,231 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the accompanying Balance Sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period, excluding ordinary shares subject to forfeiture. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 23,766,667 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the periods presented.
Our Statement of Operations includes a presentation of income per share for Class A ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted, for Class A ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the trust account of approximately $3,000 for the period from July 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $247,000 for the period from July 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares of approximately $0, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.