Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the “Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” preceding Part I.
Our fiscal year consists of 52 weeks with every fifth year consisting of 53 weeks and ending either the last Sunday in December or the first Sunday in January. As used in this section, references to the “fiscal year ended December 27, 2020” or “fiscal 2020” refer to the 52-week period that began on December 30, 2019 and ended on December 27, 2020. References to the “fiscal year ended December 29, 2019” or “fiscal 2019” refer to the 52-week period that began on December 31, 2018 and ended on December 29, 2019. References to the “fiscal year ended December 30, 2018” or “fiscal 2018” refer to the 52-week period that began on January 1, 2018 and ended on December 30, 2018.
Overview
We are a leading global digital marketplace connecting vehicle buyers and sellers. Leveraging leading-edge technology and focusing on innovation, our unique platform facilitates the marketing and sale of total-loss, damaged and low-value vehicles for a full spectrum of sellers. Headquartered in Westchester, IL, we have two operating segments: United States and International. We maintain operations in the United States, which make up the United States segment and operations in Canada and the United Kingdom, which make up the International segment. We have more than 200 facilities across both business segments.
We serve a global buyer base and a full spectrum of sellers, including insurance companies, dealerships, fleet lease and rental car companies, and charitable organizations. We offer sellers a comprehensive suite of services aimed at maximizing vehicle value, reducing administrative costs, shortening selling cycle time and delivering the highest economic returns. Our solutions provide global buyers with the vehicles they need to, among other things, fulfill their vehicle rebuild requirements, replacement part inventory or scrap demand. We provide global buyers with multiple bidding/buying digital channels, innovative vehicle merchandising, efficient evaluation services and online bidding tools, enhancing the overall purchasing experience.
During fiscal 2020, we completed the roll-out of our buyer digital transformation in the United States in April 2020 and in Canada in July 2020. IAA UK has operated an online, digital only auction since 2005. As a result, we have shifted to a fully online, digital auction model, resulting in a reduction of costs previously associated with the physical auctions.
The Separation
On February 27, 2018, KAR announced a plan to pursue the separation and spin off (“the Separation”) of its salvage auction businesses into a separate public company. On June 28, 2019 (the “Separation Date”), KAR completed the distribution of 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of IAA to the holders of record of KAR’s common stock on June 18, 2019, on a pro rata basis (the “Distribution”). Following the Separation and Distribution, IAA became an independent publicly-traded company.
Industry Trends
Vehicles deemed a total loss by automobile insurance companies represent the largest category of vehicles sold in the salvage vehicle auction industry. Based on data from CCC Information Services, the percentage of claims resulting in total losses was approximately 21% in 2020, 19% in 2019 and 18% in 2018. There is no central reporting system for the salvage vehicle auction industry that tracks the number of salvage vehicle auction volumes in any given year, which makes estimating industry volumes difficult.
Fluctuations in used vehicle and commodity pricing (aluminum, steel, etc.) have an impact on proceeds received in the salvage vehicle auction industry. In times of rising prices, revenue and gross profit are positively impacted. If used vehicle and commodity prices decrease, proceeds, revenue and gross profit at salvage auctions may be negatively impacted, which could adversely affect our level of profitability. The price per ton of crushed auto bodies in North America increased approximately 15% in 2020 as compared to 2019 and declined approximately 29% in 2019 as compared to 2018.
Sources of Revenues and Expenses
A significant portion of our revenue is derived from auction fees and related services associated with our salvage auctions. Approximately two-thirds of our revenue is earned from buyers. Buyer revenue represents fees charged based on a tiered structure that increases with the sales price of the vehicle as well as service fees for additional services such as storage, transportation, and vehicle condition reporting. Approximately one-third of our revenue is earned from sellers. Seller revenue represents the combination of the inbound tow, processing, storage, titling, enhancing and auctioning of the vehicle. Although auction revenues primarily include the auction services and related fees, our related receivables and payables include the gross value of the vehicles sold.
Our operating expenses consist of cost of services, cost of vehicle sales, selling, general and administrative and depreciation and amortization. Cost of services is comprised of payroll and related costs, subcontract services, supplies, insurance, property taxes, utilities, service contract claims, maintenance and lease expense related to the auction sites. Cost of vehicle sales is comprised of the cost of purchased vehicles. Cost of services and vehicle sales excludes depreciation and amortization. Selling, general and administrative expenses are comprised of payroll and related costs, sales and marketing, information technology services and professional fees.
COVID-19 Impact on our Business
The outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) has severely impacted, and continues to impact worldwide economic activities. In an effort to contain and combat the spread of COVID-19, government and health authorities around the world took extraordinary and wide-ranging actions, including orders to close all business not deemed “essential”, quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders, and the practice of social distancing. Although many of these governmental restrictions have since been lifted or scaled back, ongoing surges of COVID-19 infections, including new more contagious and/or vaccine resistant variants, in certain geographies have resulted in the re-imposition of certain restrictions from time to time, and may lead to other restrictions being re-implemented in response to efforts to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
Given our operations, we are deemed “essential” and have remained open for business and our branches continue to be operational. We have implemented strict health and sanitization protocols across all of our locations in an effort to keep our employees and customers safe including, but not limited to: the use of personal protective equipment; sanitizing our facilities; continuing to temporarily require employees to work remotely where possible; suspending all non-essential travel worldwide for our employees; and discouraging employee attendance at in-person work-related meetings. We have also activated contingency plans to ensure continued operations and business continuity across our global network.
The significant decline in miles driven resulting from the stay-at-home orders that were executed in mid-March across North America and the United Kingdom translated into a reduction in vehicle assignments. This decline in volume significantly impacted our business in fiscal 2020. Notwithstanding this reduction in volume, our net revenue per unit during fiscal 2020 increased compared to the prior year period due to benefits from our buyer digital transformation, enhanced service offerings such as IAA 360 ViewTM and IAA InteractTM, as well as strong used car pricing and strong demand from buyers. As certain economies began to re-open, we saw gradual improvements in miles driven that resulted in higher vehicle assignments in the third and fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 as compared to the second quarter. Even with this gradual improvement in the second half of 2020, miles driven remained lower than pre-COVID levels.
In response to the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, we took a series of actions during the second quarter of fiscal 2020 to reduce costs and cash outlays, including, but not limited to, a temporary reduction in salaries at the senior leadership level through June 2020, a temporary reduction in the annual cash retainer payable in quarterly installments to directors through September 2020, aggressive cost reductions across all departments, a temporary reduction in branch labor hours across most locations that generally lasted through September 2020, employee furloughs in select international locations and a reduction of certain non-critical capital spending during fiscal 2020. In addition, we enhanced our liquidity position by: (i) entering into an amendment to our Credit Agreement in May 2020 to increase the aggregate principal amount to be borrowed under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below) by $136.0 million to $361.0 million; and (ii) entering into a credit agreement in July 2020 which provides for a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million Canadian dollars (the "Canadian Credit Facility"). We are continuing to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from the government and public health authorities and we may take additional actions that we determine are in the best interest of the Company and all our stakeholders.
The COVID-19 pandemic had limited impact on our operations in the first quarter of fiscal 2020, but adversely affected our operations in the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020 and we anticipate it will continue to do so in fiscal 2021, depending in part on how quickly vaccine rollouts occur throughout the markets in which we operate and the effectiveness of vaccines in limiting the spread of COVID-19 and particularly if buyer demand declines or the stabilization in assignments and miles driven is not achieved and sustained. All of the factors described above may have far-reaching impacts on our business, operations, and financial results and conditions, directly and indirectly, including, but not limited to, impacts on vehicle assignments, branch operations, the health of our management and employees, and on the overall economy.
Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, uncertainties surrounding the timing of vaccine rollouts, public acceptance and usage of vaccines and the effectiveness of vaccines in limiting the spread of COVID-19, the severity and duration of business disruption and the related financial effects cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. However, we expect COVID-19 and the efforts taken to reduce its spread to have a negative impact on our vehicle assignments in fiscal 2021, the impact of which may continue to be material. See Item 1A, Risk Factors for additional information.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Financial Results
Historical KAR Cost Allocations versus IAA as a Stand-alone Company:
Our historical consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"). The financial statements for periods prior to the Separation include certain expenses of KAR that were allocated to IAA for certain corporate functions including accounting, treasury, tax, internal audit, risk management, human resources, safety, and security, and information technology risk. These costs may not be representative of the costs IAA will incur as an independent, publicly traded company. In addition, our financial information for periods prior to the Separation does not reflect changes that IAA expects to experience as a result of IAA’s separation from KAR, including changes in IAA’s cost structure, personnel needs, tax structure, capital structure, financing and business operations. The consolidated financial statements also do not reflect the assignment of certain assets and liabilities between KAR and IAA. Consequently, the financial information included here may not necessarily reflect IAA’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows in the future or what IAA’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows would have been had IAA been an independent, publicly traded company during the periods prior to the Separation.
Debt financing:
In connection with the Separation, we entered into a credit agreement on June 28, 2019 with several banks and other financial institutions. We borrowed (i) an aggregate principal amount of $800 million under a seven-year senior secured term loan facility, and (ii) an aggregate principal of $225 million under a five-year revolving credit facility.
In connection with the Separation, on June 6, 2019, we also issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Notes due 2027 (the "Notes").
We used the net proceeds from the Notes offering, together with borrowings under the term loan facility, to make a cash distribution to KAR and to pay fees and expenses related to the Separation and Distribution. We used the remaining proceeds from the term loan facility for our ongoing working capital needs and general corporate purposes.
Acquisitions:
On July 31, 2019, we acquired Decision Dynamics, Inc. ("DDI"), a leading electronic lien and title technology firm located in Lexington, South Carolina for $19.2 million which includes the fair value of contingent consideration of $2.5 million.
COVID-19:
The outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic and the efforts taken to reduce its spread adversely affected our operations in fiscal 2020. See above under "COVID-19 Impact on our Business" for additional information.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
The table below presents consolidated statements of income for the periods indicated and the dollar change and percentage change between periods.
* Exclusive of depreciation and amortization
** NM - Not meaningful
Service Revenues
United States service revenues decreased $61.8 million due to a lower volume of consigned vehicles sold, which decreased by 15.2% primarily resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease in volume of consigned vehicles sold was partially offset by an increase in revenue per unit of 11.9% primarily from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and favorable industry dynamics. Additionally, fiscal 2020 included incremental revenue of $5.6 million from the DDI acquisition and fiscal 2019 benefited from a non-cash adjustment of $3.6 million relating to certain revenue agreements.
International service revenues decreased $8.9 million due to a lower volume of consigned vehicles sold, which decreased by 17.2%, primarily resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and an unfavorable foreign currency impact of $0.7 million from the Canadian dollar. The decrease in volume of vehicles sold was partially offset by an increase in revenue per unit of 10.7% primarily from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and favorable industry dynamics.
Vehicle Sales
United States vehicle sales increased $10.8 million due to an increase in revenue per unit sold, which primarily resulted from higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and favorable industry dynamics.
International vehicle sales increased $8.0 million due to an increase in revenue per unit sold of 27%, as a result of higher average selling prices due to increased buyer participation, enhanced product and service offerings, and favorable industry dynamics. This increase in revenue per unit sold was partially offset by a decline in volume of 11%, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Services
United States cost of services decreased $54.6 million primarily due to lower volume, lower labor and travel, and benefits related to adopting a fully-digital auction model. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in the cost of occupancy and incremental cost from the DDI acquisition of $1.8 million.
International cost of services decreased $3.8 million primarily due to lower volume and lower labor cost, partially offset by increase in the cost of occupancy.
Cost of Vehicles Sales
United States cost of vehicle sales increased $10.6 million primarily due to higher average purchase prices resulting from a change in vehicle mix.
International cost of vehicle sales increased $6.5 million primarily due to higher average purchase prices resulting from a change in vehicle mix, partially offset by lower volume.
Selling, General and Administrative
United States selling, general and administrative expenses increased $3.7 million primarily due to incremental costs of $7.0 million related to IAA becoming a stand-alone company, increases in stock-based compensation of $3.8 million, provision for credit losses of $3.1 million, professional services of $3.4 million, and $4.3 million in incremental costs from the DDI acquisition. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in discretionary spending of $10.0 million, including items such as travel and meetings, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and lower employee related cost of $7.9 million.
International selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $1.2 million primarily due to a decrease in the provision of credit losses of $0.5 million, and lower employee related costs of $0.7 million.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased $7.3 million as compared to fiscal 2019 as there were fewer intangible assets to amortize within the United States segment during fiscal 2020.
Income Taxes. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 was 24.2% as compared to 26.3% for fiscal 2019. Fiscal 2020 effective tax rate benefited by a reduction of 1.6% as a result of the finalization of federal income tax regulations, a change in the mix of jurisdictional income associated with alignment of internal cost structures, and other impacts including certain discrete items. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2019 was adversely impacted by 0.5% associated with the spin-off from KAR.
Fiscal 2019 Compared to Fiscal 2018
For a discussion of fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 29, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 18, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We believe that the significant indicators of liquidity for our business are cash on hand, cash flow from operations and working capital. Our principal source of liquidity consists of cash generated by operations. Our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below) and Canadian Credit Facility provide another source of liquidity as needed.
Our cash flow is used to invest in new products and services, fund capital expenditures and working capital requirements and, coupled with borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and Canadian Credit Facility, is expected to be adequate to satisfy our cash requirements, including those listed below, and fund future acquisitions, if any. Our ability to fund our cash requirements will depend on our ongoing ability to generate cash from operations and to access borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and Canadian Credit Facility. We believe that our cash on hand, future cash from operations, borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Facility and Canadian Credit Facility and access to the debt and capital markets will provide adequate resources to fund our operating and financing needs for the next twelve months and beyond.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations include:
Debt Service Obligations
In connection with the Separation, on June 28, 2019 we entered into a credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto from time to time (the “Credit Agreement”), which provides for, among other things, a seven year senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $800 million (the “Term Loan Facility”) and a five year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $225 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). On May 1, 2020, in response to the uncertainty around COVID-19, we entered into an amendment to the Credit Agreement to increase the aggregate principal amount able to be borrowed under the Revolving Credit Facility by $136.0 million to $361.0 million. The Revolving Credit Facility also includes a $50 million sub-limit for issuance of letters of credit and a $50 million sublimit for swing line loans, which can be borrowed on same-day notice. As of December 27, 2020, no amounts were outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility. At December 27, 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $6.1 million, all of which reduce the amount available for borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. We were in compliance with the covenants in the Credit Agreement at December 27, 2020.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, we repaid $22.0 million of the Term Loan Facility, consisting of $2.0 million required principal payment and a $20.0 million optional principal pre-payment. During the first quarter of fiscal 2020, we made an additional optional principal pre-payment of $4.0 million of the Term Loan Facility. We made no optional principal pre-payments of the Term Loan Facility during the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2020. All repayments of the Term Loan Facility have been made using cash on hand. As a result of our optional principal pre-payments under the Term Loan Facility, our next mandatory principal payment under the Term Loan Facility is not due until September 30, 2021. As of December 27, 2020, $774.0 million was outstanding under the Term Loan Facility.
On June 6, 2019, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.500% Senior Notes due 2027. We must pay interest on the Notes in cash on June 15 and December 15 of each year at a rate of 5.500% per annum. The Notes will mature on June 15, 2027. The net proceeds from the Notes offering, together with borrowings under our prior senior credit facility, were used to make a cash distribution to KAR and to pay fees and expenses related to the Separation. We were in compliance with the covenants in the indenture governing the Notes at December 27, 2020.
On July 7, 2020, we entered into the Canadian Credit Facility. The Canadian Credit Facility matures on July 6, 2021. The proceeds from the Canadian Credit Facility can be used by our Canadian subsidiary for its working capital requirements, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. As of December 27, 2020, no amounts were outstanding under the Canadian Credit Facility.
See Note 10 - Debt in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information including future principal payment schedule.
Capital Expenditures
We expend capital to support our operating plan and business strategies. Capital expenditures for the years ended December 27, 2020 and December 29, 2019, were $69.8 million and $68.5 million, respectively. Capital expenditures were funded primarily from cash flow from operations. We continue to invest in our core information technology capabilities and capacity expansion. Our capital expenditures during fiscal 2020 primarily related to real estate development and technology-based investments, including improvements in information technology systems and infrastructure. Future capital expenditures could vary substantially based on capital project timing, the opening of new auction facilities, capital expenditures related to acquired businesses and the initiation of new information systems projects to support our business strategies.
During the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we purchased certain previously leased property in New Jersey consisting of land and buildings for $11.0 million. This expenditure was funded from cash flow from operations. See Note 16 - Subsequent Events in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Leases
We enter into leases in the normal course of business. We lease property, software, automobiles, trucks and trailers pursuant to operating lease agreements. Lease obligations for fiscal 2020 were funded primarily from cash flow from operations. We also lease furniture, fixtures and equipment under finance leases. See Note 11 - Leases in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information and a schedule of maturities of lease maturities. Future lease obligations would change if we entered into additional lease agreements.
Put Option
In November 2020, we entered into an agreement which grants the owner a right during fiscal years 2023 and 2024 to cause the Company to acquire certain assets (the "Put Option") for a price based on a pre-defined formula. We measured and recognized this Put Option at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation. The estimated fair value of the Put Option as of the inception date and at December 27, 2020 was zero.
Working Capital
A substantial amount of our working capital is generated from the payments received for services provided. The majority of our working capital needs are short-term in nature, usually less than three months in duration. Due to the decentralized nature of the business, payments for most vehicles purchased are received at each auction and branch. Most of the financial institutions place a temporary hold on the availability of the funds deposited that generally can range up to two business days, resulting in cash in our accounts and on our balance sheet that is unavailable for use until it is made available by the various financial institutions. There are outstanding checks (book overdrafts) to sellers and vendors included in current liabilities at December 29, 2019. We had no book overdrafts at December 27, 2020. Because a portion of these outstanding checks for operations are drawn upon bank accounts at financial institutions other than the financial institutions that hold the cash, we cannot offset all the cash and the outstanding checks on our balance sheet. Changes in working capital vary from quarter-to-quarter as a result of the timing of collections and disbursements of funds to consignors from auctions held near period end.
Approximately $48.2 million of available cash was held by our foreign subsidiaries at December 27, 2020. We do not currently expect to incur significant additional tax liabilities if funds held by our foreign subsidiaries were to be repatriated.
Summary of Cash Flows
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
Net cash flow provided by operating activities in fiscal 2020 increased by $38.8 million as compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in operating cash flow was primarily attributable to an increase in accounts payable of $66.0 million and an increase in profitability, net of non-cash adjustments, of $22.1 million. These increases were partially offset by changes in accounts receivable of $16.7 million resulting from the timing of collections from customers and other parties, changes in other assets of $14.6 million primarily relating to a decrease in certain prepaid assets, and an increase in operating lease payments of $11.6 million.
Net cash used by investing activities decreased by $15.9 million for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in net cash used by investing activities was primarily due to the acquisition of DDI in the third quarter of fiscal 2019 for an initial cash price of $16.7 million.
Net cash used by financing activities decreased by $126.5 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. The decrease in net cash used by financing activities was primarily attributable to dividends and distributions paid to KAR prior to and at the time of Separation of $1,395.8 million, partially offset by net proceeds from the Notes offering and our Term Loan Facility in June 2019 of $1,259.7 million, and a change in bank overdrafts of $6.8 million during fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2019 compared to Fiscal 2018
For a discussion of fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Summary of Cash Flows in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 29, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 18, 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing the financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, management must often make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures at the date of the financial statements and during the reporting period. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex. Consequently, actual results could differ from those estimates. Accounting measurements that management
believes are most critical to the reported results of our operations and financial condition include: (1) business combinations; (2) goodwill and other intangible assets; and (3) legal proceedings and other loss contingencies.
In addition to the critical accounting estimates, there are other items used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that require estimation, but are not deemed critical. Changes in estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on our financial statements.
We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used to prepare the consolidated financial statements. In cases where management estimates are used, they are based on historical experience, information from third-party professionals, and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable. In addition, our most significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and elsewhere in the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Business Combinations
When we acquire businesses, we estimate and recognize the fair values of tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, identifiable intangible assets acquired, and contingent consideration, if any. The excess of the purchase consideration over the fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. The purchase accounting process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to intangible assets and contingent consideration.
Critical estimates are often developed using valuation models that are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies. These estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, growth rates, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates. Depending on the facts and circumstances, we may engage an independent valuation expert to assist in valuing significant assets and liabilities.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We assess goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may exist. Important factors that could trigger an impairment review include significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results; significant negative industry or economic trends; and our market valuation relative to our book value. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit is impaired. If we do not perform a qualitative assessment, or if we determine that a reporting unit’s fair value is not more likely than not greater than its carrying value, then we calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit using discounted cash flows and market approaches.
When assessing goodwill for impairment, our decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment for a reporting unit in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, including the size of the reporting unit’s goodwill, the significance of the excess of the reporting unit’s estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, and the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments and the date of acquisition. If we perform a quantitative assessment of a reporting unit’s goodwill, our impairment calculations contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions and apply judgment when estimating future cash flows and earnings, including projected revenue growth and operating expenses related to existing businesses, as well as utilizing valuation multiples of similar publicly traded companies and selecting an appropriate discount rate based on the estimated cost of capital that reflects the risk profile of the related business. Estimates of revenue growth and operating expenses are based on internal projections considering the reporting unit’s past performance and forecasted growth, strategic initiatives and changes in economic conditions. These estimates, as well as the selection of comparable companies and valuation multiples used in the market approach are highly subjective, and our ability to realize the future cash flows used in our fair value calculations is affected by factors such as the success of strategic initiatives, changes in economic conditions, changes in our operating performance and changes in our business strategies.
The estimated fair value of both of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying value by a substantial amount in our last quantitative assessment. In 2020, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment for our reporting units. Based on our goodwill assessment, the Company has not identified a reporting unit for which the goodwill was impaired in 2020, 2019 or 2018.
As with goodwill, we assess indefinite-lived tradenames for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may exist. When assessing indefinite-lived tradenames for impairment using a qualitative assessment, we evaluate if changes in events or circumstances have occurred that indicate that impairment may exist. If we do not perform a qualitative impairment assessment or if changes in events and circumstances indicate that a quantitative assessment should be performed, management is required to calculate the fair value of the tradename
asset group. The fair value calculation includes estimates of revenue growth, which are based on past performance and internal projections for the tradename asset group's forecasted growth, and royalty rates, which are adjusted for our particular facts and circumstances. The discount rate is selected based on the estimated cost of capital that reflects the risk profile of the related business. These estimates are highly subjective, and our ability to achieve the forecasted cash flows used in our fair value calculations is affected by factors such as the success of strategic initiatives, changes in economic conditions, changes in our operating performance and changes in our business strategies.
We review other intangible assets for possible impairment whenever circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. If it is determined that the carrying amount of an other intangible asset exceeds the total amount of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows from that asset, we would recognize a loss to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset. Management judgment is involved in both deciding if testing for recovery is necessary and in estimating undiscounted cash flows. Our impairment analysis is based on the current business strategy, expected growth rates and estimated future economic conditions.
In 2020, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment for our indefinite-lived tradenames. We did not record any impairment relating to indefinite-lived tradenames and other intangible assets in fiscal 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Legal Proceedings and Other Loss Contingencies
We are subject to the possibility of various legal proceedings and other loss contingencies, many involving litigation incidental to the business and a variety of environmental laws and regulations. Litigation and other loss contingencies are subject to inherent uncertainties and the outcomes of such matters are often very difficult to predict and generally are resolved over long periods of time. We consider the likelihood of loss or the incurrence of a liability, as well as the ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss, in determining loss contingencies. Estimating probable losses requires the analysis of multiple possible outcomes that often are dependent on the judgment about potential actions by third parties. Contingencies are recorded in the consolidated financial statements, or otherwise disclosed, in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies. We accrue for an estimated loss contingency when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Management regularly evaluates current information available to determine whether accrual amounts should be adjusted. If the amount of an actual loss is greater than the amount accrued, this could have an adverse impact on our operating results in that period.
New Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements for a description of recently issued accounting standards.