ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion also contains forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are an automated global electronic broker. We custody and service accounts for hedge and mutual funds, ETFs, registered investment advisers, proprietary trading groups, introducing brokers and individual investors. We specialize in routing orders and executing and processing trades in stocks, options, futures, forex, bonds, mutual funds and ETFs on more than 135 electronic exchanges and market centers in 33 countries and in 25 currencies seamlessly around the world.
As an electronic broker, we execute, clear and settle trades globally for both institutional and individual customers. Capitalizing on our proprietary technology, our systems provide our customers with the capability to monitor multiple markets around the world simultaneously and to execute trades electronically in these markets at a low cost, in multiple products and currencies from a single trading account. The emerging complexity of multiple market centers has provided us with the opportunity to build and continuously adapt our order routing software to secure excellent execution prices.
Since our inception in 1977, we have focused on developing proprietary software to automate broker-dealer functions. The proliferation of electronic exchanges and market centers over the last three decades has allowed us to integrate our software with an increasing number of trading venues into one automatically functioning, computerized platform that requires minimal human intervention.
Our customer base is diverse with respect to geography and segments. Currently, approximately 76% of our customers reside outside the U.S. in over 200 countries and territories, and over 50% of new customers come from outside the U.S. Approximately 64% of our customers’ equity is in institutional accounts such as hedge funds, financial advisors, proprietary trading desks and introducing brokers. Specialized products and services that we have developed are successfully attracting these accounts. For example, we offer prime brokerage services, including financing and securities lending to hedge funds; our model portfolio technology and automated share allocation and rebalancing tools are particularly attractive to financial advisors; and our trading platform, global access and low pricing attract introducing brokers.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization recognized the outbreak of the COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus as a pandemic. The pandemic affects all countries in which we operate. The response of governments and societies to the COVID-19 pandemic, which includes temporary closures of certain businesses; social distancing; travel restrictions, “shelter in place” and other governmental regulations; and reduced consumer spending due to job losses, has significantly impacted market volatility in the financial, commodities and energy markets, and general economic conditions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has precipitated unprecedented market conditions with equally unprecedented social and community challenges. Amid these challenges:
The Company is committed to ensuring the highest levels of service to its customers so they can effectively manage their assets, portfolios and risks. The Company’s technical infrastructure has withstood the challenges presented by the extraordinary volatility and increased market volume.
The Company can run its business from alternate office locations and/or remotely if a Company office must temporarily close due to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As announced on April 9, 2020, during the second quarter of 2020 the Company donated $5 million to assist efforts to provide food and support for people affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States as well as to advance medical solutions.
The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s financial results for 2020 can be summarized as follows: (1) higher commission revenue due to increased trading activity and a higher rate of customer accounts opened during this period; and (2) lower net interest income resulting from lower benchmark interest rates.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s future financial results could be significant but currently cannot be quantified, as it will depend on numerous evolving factors that currently cannot be accurately predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the pandemic; its impact on our customers, employees and vendors; governmental actions in response to the pandemic; and the overall impact of the pandemic in the economy and society; among other factors. Any of these events could have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s financial results.
Business Environment
2020 was a unique year, as the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, together with unpredictable geopolitical events, created great uncertainty and volatility in the world’s financial markets.
U.S. market volatility rose in 2020 over the prior year, with particularly high volatility in the first half of the year as the pandemic took hold. Fears about economic collapse were especially strong in the first quarter of 2020, as global markets fell and the S&P 500 declined 20%.
Central banks turned to monetary easing to buffer their national economies from a pandemic-induced downturn. In March, the U.S. Federal Reserve adopted a near-zero interest rate policy and other countries maintained or reduced rates to zero and below.
Following on the heels of the initial panic was a worldwide surge of interest in financial markets, particularly equity markets, as people following stay-at-home guidelines opened brokerage accounts for investing and trading. Equity market indices, which had fallen in the first quarter as the scope of the pandemic became known, responded to this surge in new participants and most indices rose over the remainder of the year. North American and Asian markets recovered more strongly than those in Europe, which may have been negatively affected by the final negotiations around Brexit.
A more active trading environment worldwide coincided with higher volatility, with the average Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (“VIX®”) up 89% in the fourth quarter of 2020, compared to the year-ago quarter. Among our customer base, volatility is highly correlated with customer trading activity across product types. In 2020, higher volatility, in combination with strong customer account growth, led to significant increases in trading volume. The resulting boost to commission revenues was tempered by a decline in net interest income. Lower benchmark interest rates, though they reduced the rate of interest paid on customer cash to zero in most currencies, also reduced the rates we earned on margin lending and gave us fewer opportunities to earn net interest income on fully interest-sensitive balances.
In this environment, with near-zero interest rates and rising asset values in actively-trading markets, customer account growth was robust. Total customer accounts increased 56% in 2020 to over 1.07 million. Inflows from new and existing customers, combined with rising securities prices that generally lifted customers’ investment values, led to customer equity growth of 66% to $288.6 billion. Institutional customers, such as hedge funds, mutual funds, introducing brokers, proprietary trading groups and financial advisors, comprised approximately 43% of total accounts and approximately 64% of total customer equity at the end of 2020. Customers seek out our superior technology and execution capabilities, global market access, and low costs, as well as our securities finance services, including margin lending and short sale support.
The following is a summary of the key profit drivers that affect our business and how they compared to 2019:
Global trading volumes. According to data received from exchanges, volumes in exchange-listed equity-based options rose by approximately 93% in the U.S. for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, while U.S. equities volumes increased by 103% and exchange-listed futures increased by 31%. See the “Trading Volumes and Brokerage Statistics” section below in this Item 7 for additional details regarding our trade volumes, contract and share volumes, and brokerage statistics.
Volatility. Based on the VIX®, average U.S. market volatility rose to 29.2 in 2020, up 89% from the average of 15.4 in 2019. Higher volatility tends to improve our electronic brokerage performance because it generally corresponds to stronger trading volumes. In 2020, as the VIX maintained elevated levels for most of the year, we saw the impact on both customer trading activity, which more than doubled, and our commissions revenue, which rose 58%.
Interest Rates. The U.S. Federal Reserve reduced the target federal funds rate to near-zero in March of 2020, mirroring rates in most other currencies, which generally ranged from near-zero to negative. Decreases in benchmark rates can lead to lower net interest income and a narrower net interest margin. As our margin balances are tied to benchmark rates, declining U.S. interest rates reduce the interest we receive on our U.S. dollar customer margin balances. Falling rates also reduce the interest we earn on our segregated cash, the majority of which is invested in U.S. government securities and related instruments. Partially offsetting these factors in 2020 were higher average customer credit balances, up 28%, higher average margin lending, up 9%, reduced interest expense due to lower rates, and strong securities lending activity and other financing activities. In total, our net interest income fell 19% compared to 2019.
‎
Currency fluctuations. As a global electronic broker trading on exchanges around the world in multiple currencies, we are exposed to foreign currency risk. We actively manage this exposure by keeping our net worth in proportion to a defined basket of 10 currencies we call the “GLOBAL” to diversify our risk and to align our hedging strategy with the currencies that we use in our business. Because we report our financial results in U.S. dollars, the change in the value of the GLOBAL versus the U.S. dollar affects our earnings. During 2020 the value of the GLOBAL, as measured in U.S. dollars, increased 1.45% compared to its value as of December 31, 2019. A discussion of our approach for managing foreign currency exposure is contained in Part II,