Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplemental Data, of Part II of this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the section captioned “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We are one of the nation’s largest insulation installers for the residential new construction market and are also a diversified installer of complementary building products, including waterproofing, fire-stopping and fireproofing, garage doors, rain gutters, window blinds, shower doors, closet shelving, mirrors and other products throughout the United States. We offer our portfolio of services for new and existing single-family and multi-family residential and commercial building projects in all 48 continental states and the District of Columbia from our national network of over 190 branch locations. Substantially all of our net revenue comes from service-based installation of these products in the residential new construction, repair and remodel and commercial construction end markets. We believe our business is well positioned to continue to profitably grow due to our strong balance sheet, liquidity and our continuing acquisition strategy.
A large portion of our net revenue comes from the U.S. residential new construction market, which depends upon a number of economic factors, including demographic trends, interest rates, consumer confidence, employment rates, housing inventory levels, foreclosure rates, the health of the economy and availability of mortgage financing. The strategic acquisitions of multiple companies over the last several years contributed meaningfully to our 9.4% increase in net revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption throughout the world. We estimate the pandemic had a negative effect on our net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, potentially delaying the completion of some of our jobs. However, the single family residential housing market
rebounded quickly and we do not believe the impact on our overall business was significant during 2020. For a detailed discussion of impacts on our business, see "Key Factors Affecting our Operating Results, COVID-19 Impacts" below.
We have omitted discussion of 2018 results in the sections that follow where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7, of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
2020 Highlights
Net revenues increased 9.4%, or $141.6 million, while gross profit increased 17.3% to $510.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We also generated approximately $180.8 million of cash from operating activities, and at December 31, 2020 we had $231.5 million of cash and cash equivalents. We have not drawn on our existing $200 million revolving line of credit. The increase in net revenue and gross profit was primarily driven by selling price increases, the contribution of our recent acquisitions, lower fuel costs and increased sales volume of complementary products. We experienced sales growth year-over-year as reflected in the sales and relative performance metrics detailed below.
The highest level of growth occurred in our multi-family end market which grew by 37.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We grew our largest end market, the single family subset of the residential new construction market, by 5.0% despite the effects of temporary business interruptions earlier in 2020 due to federal, state and local requirements in response to COVID-19. All of our locations serving the residential new construction end market were operating at December 31, 2020, although some continued to experience limitations depending on their local market. The large commercial end market experienced sales growth of 15.3% during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily through acquisitions as same branch sales growth lagged resulting from certain production inefficiencies due to COVID-19 social distancing requirements as well as project delays due to macroeconomic concerns surrounding the pandemic. These fluctuations are shown in further detail in the "Key Measures of Performance" section below, and impacts from COVID-19 are discussed further in the sections that follow.
We were successful at realizing selling price increases during the year to offset previous cost increases on the material we install. We will continue to proactively work with customers and suppliers to manage the impacts of material inflation in 2021.
We believe there are several trends that should drive long-term growth in the housing market, even if there are temporary periods of slowed growth. These long-term trends include an aging housing stock, population growth, household formation growth and the fact that housing starts are currently below long-term historic averages. We expect that our net revenue, gross profit and operating income will benefit from this growth.
2019 Highlights
Net revenues increased 13.1%, or $175.2 million, during 2019 compared to 2018, primarily driven by increased selling prices, the continued recovery of housing markets, the contributions of our recent acquisitions and growth across our end markets and products. We experienced strong sales growth year-over-year of approximately 10.8% in our combined residential new construction and repair and remodel end markets and approximately 24.7% in our total commercial end-market. Gross margin of 28.8% benefited from selling price increases in 2019 resulting from significant insulation materials price increases in 2018.
In September 2019, we modified our debt structure in order to take advantage of the attractive market conditions. We issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount at maturity of senior unsecured notes (the “Senior Notes”) with interest payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on February 1 and August 1, commencing on February 1, 2020. The net proceeds from the Senior Notes offering were $295.0 million after debt issuance costs, a portion of which we used to partially repay our outstanding obligations (including accrued and unpaid interest) under our term loan credit agreement (the “Term Loan Agreement”) and pay fees and expenses related to entry into the ABL Credit Agreement as defined below. In September 2019, we also entered into a new asset-based lending credit agreement (the “ABL Credit Agreement”). The ABL Credit Agreement provides for an asset-based lending credit facility (the “ABL Revolver”) of up to $200.0 million with a five-year maturity, which replaced our previous revolving credit facility of up to $150.0 million. In December 2019, we amended and restated our Term Loan. The amended Term Loan (i) effects a repricing of the interest rate applicable to the term loans thereunder from LIBOR plus 2.50% to LIBOR plus 2.25% and (ii) replaces Royal Bank of Canada with Bank of America, N.A. as the administrative agent and collateral agent thereunder. See "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below for further information about our debt.
Key Measures of Performance
The following table shows additional key measures of performance we utilize to evaluate our results:
(1)
Same-branch basis represents period-over-period growth for branch locations owned greater than 12 months as of each financial statement date.
(2)
Calculated based on period-over-period growth in the single-family subset of the residential new construction end market.
(3)
Calculated based on period-over-period growth in the multi-family subset of the residential new construction end market.
(4)
Calculated based on period-over-period growth in the residential new construction end market.
(5)
Calculated based on period-over-period growth in the large commercial end market.
(6)
Excludes the large commercial end market; calculated as period-over-period change in the number of completed same-branch residential new construction and repair and remodel jobs.
(7)
Excludes the large commercial end market; defined as change in the mix of products sold and related pricing changes and calculated as the change in period-over-period average selling price per same-branch residential new construction and repair and remodel jobs multiplied by total current year jobs. The mix of end customer and product would have an impact on the year-over-year price per job.
(8)
U.S. Census Bureau data, as revised.
We believe the revenue growth measures are important indicators of how our business is performing, however, we may rely on different metrics in the future. We also utilize gross profit percentage as shown in the following section to monitor our most significant variable costs and to evaluate labor efficiency and success at passing increasing costs of materials to customers.
Net revenue, cost of sales and gross profit
The components of gross profit for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net revenues increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by acquisitions, increased sales volume of complimentary products, and increased selling prices. We estimate net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by temporary branch closures as a result of COVID-19 by a range of approximately $12.0 million to $14.5 million. As a percentage of net revenues, gross profit increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 attributable primarily to lower fuel costs and achieving higher selling prices on relatively stable material costs, as evidenced by our 2.8% improvement in pricing and customer and product mix, based on all of our combined markets excluding the large commercial end market. Labor utilization improved, in part, as a result of leverage on selling price increases and efficiencies gained through a tighter geographic concentration of housing in certain markets due to higher demand. However, restrictions limiting the number of laborers on a jobsite and our internal standards for social distancing practices impacted the number of completed jobs and operational efficiencies across our end markets during portions of 2020. See “Key Factors Affecting Our Operating Results, COVID-19 Impacts" below for further information.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Selling
The dollar increase in selling expenses in 2020 was primarily driven by a year-over-year increase in selling wages, benefits and commissions of $6.6 million, or 10.1%, which supported our increased net revenue of 9.4%. Selling expense decreased slightly as a percentage of sales as we maintained our selling leverage as we increased sales.
Administrative
The increase in administrative expenses in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in wages and benefits in the amount of $19.4 million, which was attributable to both acquisitions and organic growth as well as company performance. During 2020, we saw our costs related to liability insurance increase $2.1 million and our costs related to facilities increase $2.9 million due to both acquisitions and organic growth. This increase was offset by lower travel costs due to travel restrictions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Amortization
Our intangible assets include non-competes, customer relationships, trade names and backlog. Amortization of intangibles attributable to acquisitions increased by $4.0 million in 2020 resulting from new intangible assets from 2020 acquisitions. See
Note 17, Business Combinations, in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K for information on our acquisitions.
Other Expense
Other expense, net for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
The year-over-year increase in other expense, net during 2020 and 2019 was primarily a result of increased debt levels associated with our debt-related financing transactions. Interest expense, net also increased during 2020 due to amortization of our realized loss on our terminated interest rate swap derivatives. See Note 8 and Note 11 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for further information regarding debt balances and derivatives.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision and effective tax rates for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our tax rate was favorably impacted by the release of a valuation allowance for a tax filing entity. This favorability was offset by the tax effect of losses incurred by separate companies to which no benefit can be recognized due to a full valuation allowance against the losses as well as a tax shortfall from equity vesting.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our tax rate was unfavorably impacted by the tax effect of losses incurred by separate companies to which no benefit can be recognized due to a full valuation allowance against the losses and various permanent items.
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax was as follows (in thousands):
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we terminated our two existing interest rate swaps and our forward interest rate swap. We will amortize the realized loss at the time of termination over the course of the originally scheduled settlement dates of the terminated swaps. During the year ended December 31, 2020, unrealized loss on cash flow hedge, net of taxes included $1.3 million of such amortization. In addition, prior to termination of the swaps, we recorded unrealized losses, net of taxes on our now-terminated cash flow hedges primarily due to interest rate declines and market responses to the COVID-19 pandemic of $6.3 million. Upon termination of our existing swaps, we simultaneously entered into a new forward interest rate swap. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an unrealized gain, net of taxes of $3.4 million on our new forward cash flow hedge due to favorable market conditions. In 2019, our cash flow hedge position decreased primarily due to unexpected declines in interest rates. For more information on our cash flow hedges, see "Liquidity and Capital Resources, Derivative Instruments" below.
KEY FACTORS AFFECTING OUR OPERATING RESULTS
Trends in the Construction Industry
Our operating results may vary based on the amount and type of products we install and the mix of our end markets among new single-family, multi-family and commercial builders and owners of existing homes. We expect to benefit from the continued growth in single-family new residential construction as housing returns to historic stabilized levels. We maintain a mix of business among all types of homebuilders ranging from small custom builders to large regional and national homebuilders as well as a wide range of commercial builders. Net revenue derived from our ten largest homebuilder customers in the United States was approximately 15% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The residential new construction and repair and remodel markets represented approximately 82% of our total net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, with the remaining portion attributable to the commercial construction end market.
The industry experienced signs of manufacturer supply constraints for some of the insulation materials we install during the fourth quarter of 2020 due to an unanticipated increase in demand as well as manufacturing curtailments due to COVID-19. We anticipate these shortages will continue into 2021 but will not last as long as the shortages we experienced after the 2017 incident. Our results of operations in 2021 may be temporarily impacted by the current supply constraints as we may be unable to complete jobs at our preferred pace, but we expect supply to catch up to our demand by the end of 2021. This outlook may change depending on continued increased housing demand and the ability of manufacturers to produce adequate supply.
Cost of Materials
We typically purchase the materials we install directly from manufacturers. The industry supply of these materials has experienced disruptions in the past. For example, the industry supply of a portion of the insulation materials we install was disrupted due to a catastrophic failure at a manufacturer’s facility during the fourth quarter of 2017. This resulted in the need for manufacturers to allocate materials across the industry which affected the pricing of those materials.
In addition, we experience price increases from our suppliers from time to time, including multiple increases in the last two years. We have also experienced increased pricing for fiberglass insulation materials in 2021, and expect manufacturers to seek additional price increases during the year. Increased market pricing, regardless of the catalyst, has and could continue to impact our results of operations in 2021, to the extent that price increases cannot be passed on to our customers. For example, after the events of the fourth quarter of 2017, selling price increases lagged materials cost increases. We began to see improvement in our selling prices in the second quarter of 2019, and this continued into 2020 as evidenced by our 2.0% improvement in gross profit as a percentage of sales during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. We will continue to work with our customers to adjust selling prices to offset higher costs as they occur. See “COVID-19 Impacts” below for a discussion of the short-term impacts of the current economic climate on the availability of the materials we install.
Cost of Labor
Our business is labor intensive. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 8,950 employees, most of whom work as installers on local construction sites. We expect to spend more to hire, train and retain installers to support our growing business in 2021, as tight labor availability continues within the construction industry. We offer a comprehensive benefits package, which many of our local competitors are not able to provide, which will increase costs as we hire additional personnel. Our workers’ compensation costs also continue to increase as we increase our coverage for additional personnel.
Despite temporary layoffs and furloughs driven by branch closures during portions of the first and second quarters as a response to the effects of COVID-19, we experienced strong employee retention, turnover and labor efficiency rates in the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe this is partially a result of various programs meant to benefit our employees, including our financial wellness plan, longevity stock compensation plan for employees and assistance from the Installed Building Products Foundation meant to benefit our employees, their families and their communities. While improved retention drives lower costs to recruit and train new employees, resulting in greater installer productivity, these improvements are somewhat offset by the additional costs of these incentives. See “COVID-19 Impacts” below for a discussion of the short-term impacts of the current economic climate on our workforce. In 2020, we contributed $1.9 million to the Foundation. These contributions were primarily funded by our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer, who agreed in advance to waive their performance-based cash awards to assist with our Foundation programs. For 2021, we currently expect that contributions to the Foundation will be funded in full by the Company.
COVID-19 Impacts
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, the virus has spread globally, including to the United States. In response, the World Health Organization declared the situation a pandemic and the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services declared a public health emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. Many public health organizations and international, federal, state and local governments implemented measures to combat the spread of COVID-19 during portions of 2020 with some of these restrictions still in place as of the date of filing of this Form 10-K. Some of these measures include restrictions on movement such as quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and social distancing ordinances and restricting or prohibiting outright some or all forms of commercial and business activity. While portions of the economy have since reopened, there is still significant uncertainty surrounding the duration and scope of the pandemic, as well as its impact on the economy. We cannot predict if federal, state and local governments will implement additional restrictions, when restrictions currently in place will expire or whether restrictions currently in place will become more limiting.
Due to these limitations, we saw a temporary but significant reduction in activity during portions of March, April and May of 2020 in our branches located in seven states and the Bay Area of California, which collectively accounted for 10% of our net revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduced activity in these areas was attributable to construction being temporarily deemed non-essential during that time period. While we estimate net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 was reduced as a result of these interruptions, we do not believe the various orders and restrictions, or COVID-19 itself, significantly impacted our business in the year ended December 31, 2020 as construction was deemed “essential” in other states.
While we expect the COVID-19 pandemic and related events could have a negative effect on us in 2021, the full extent and scope of the impact on our business and industry, as well as national, regional and global markets and economies, depends on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic, additional government actions taken in response to the pandemic, the impact on construction activity and demand for homes (based on employment levels, consumer spending and consumer confidence). The U.S. housing market was robust in the latter months of 2019 and experienced a strong start in 2020. Despite a decline in year-over-year U.S. housing starts in the second quarter of 2020, housing starts increased 11.2% and 11.7% in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to 2019, respectively. This is evidence of the quick recovery in housing demand that should serve to help offset prolonged impacts of the pandemic already experienced. In addition, we believe there remains a sizable industry backlog for the residential end market which we expect will provide us short-term relief from the volatility in industry housing starts experienced earlier in 2020. However, due to the normal lag between housing starts and completions, we began to see an impact from this decline in housing starts, and other market disruptions that occurred in the early stages of the pandemic, in the fourth quarter of 2020 and expect to continue to see this trend into 2021. Specifically, we anticipate revenue, net income and cash from operations were, and could be, impacted during these periods. Given the considerable uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential effects, it is not possible to estimate the full, adverse impact to our full year 2020 or 2021 sales or other financial results at this time.
We expect any future branch closures, as well as any broader impacts to the housing industry that might occur, will negatively impact our business. Industry information has indicated that new home orders at some of the nation’s larger builders slowed dramatically during the second quarter of 2020 but have rebounded quickly. Most industry experts currently forecast 2021 housing starts will continue to improve over 2020, with total 2021 housing starts estimated at 1.47 million units per Wolters Kluwer’s Blue Chip Economic Indicators January 2021 forecast compared to 1.38 million starts in 2020 per the U.S. Census Bureau. In the commercial sector, we have experienced some impact to our large commercial business, mainly in the form of project start delays and inefficiencies due to social distancing requirements in some areas. In the future, certain large-scale infrastructure programs may be at risk if the need for such structures decline, project funding declines or as consumer behaviors change in the wake of COVID-19 disruptions to the economy and changes to our general ways of life. For example, reduced demand for office buildings and/or educational facilities, decreased airport traffic, or decreased usage of sports arenas or similar large commercial structures could impact our commercial end market.
Our management remains focused on mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on our business and the risk to our employees and customers. We have taken a number of precautionary measures intended to mitigate these risks, including increasing the frequency of regular cleaning and disinfecting processes at our facilities, adhering to social distancing protocols, limiting the number of workers on our jobsites, suspending non-essential air travel and encouraging employees to work remotely when possible. As is common practice in our industry, installers are required to wear protective equipment in the process of completing their work and this practice has been extended to employees at our facilities and within general office spaces. We are prepared to take additional actions if necessary as suggested or required by various health agencies.
We continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Specific impacts of branch closures to date, as well as potential future impacts include, but are not limited to, the following:
•Other than branches that serve states where construction was not deemed “essential” during portions of 2020, we have experienced limited business disruptions to date and therefore have not needed to implement significant continuity measures and have not incurred significant expenditures to do so. Assuming a significant number of additional states or markets in which we operate do not reverse their current positions about construction being an “essential” business, we do not anticipate having to implement any additional measures in the future.
•The industry experienced signs of manufacturer supply constraints for some of the insulation materials we install during the fourth quarter of 2020 and continuing into 2021 due, in part, to effects of COVID-19 on some manufacturers. However, some are taking measures to address the reduced supply and we have not yet experienced a significant disruption in the supply of the various insulation products we install. All insulation manufacturers from which we purchase operate facilities in the continental U.S. We are monitoring suppliers of our other products and, to date, have had no issues acquiring the inventory we need to operate our business. We currently do not anticipate the pandemic to cause any significant issues with securing these other products in the future.
•During the first half of 2020, we laid off or furloughed approximately 600 employees in areas where construction was not deemed “essential.” We are pleased to report we have rehired or brought back substantially all of those employees.
•Our corporate office is fully operational, even though many employees are working remotely. As such, we have made no modifications to internal controls over financial reporting and have confidence controls are operating as designed. We have enhanced our efforts to mitigate cyber threats and phishing, given the number of employees working remotely. We are continually monitoring and assessing the COVID-19 situation on our internal controls to minimize the impact of their design and operating effectiveness.
•We continue to expect some impact to our earnings, financial position and cash flows in 2021, however there is much uncertainty surrounding the estimated magnitude of these impacts. We estimate limited impact to our Consolidated Balance Sheets other than a potential reduction in working capital due to the possibility of reduced net revenue and net income. This impact was mitigated somewhat in 2020 by actions taken by management to limit spending during portions of the year including temporarily suspending our stock repurchase program and temporarily suspending acquisition activities. Trade accounts receivable may also be reduced somewhat by lower net revenue and a higher allowance for credit losses due to enhanced risk of uncollectibility from some customers, although we have not seen a significant impact to date. We anticipate revenue and net income may be negatively impacted in 2021. While our cash from operations may decline over recent performance due to a decrease in expected net income driven by lower net revenue, we do not anticipate any issues meeting debt obligations or making timely payments to vendors given our strong liquidity and large cash reserves. See discussion of impacts to our liquidity within the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security ("CARES Act") was signed into law. The CARES Act provides numerous tax provision and other stimulus measures. We have benefited from the temporary suspension of certain payment requirements for the employer portion of Social Security taxes. As of December 31, 2020, we deferred $20.7 million of payments, depending on the number of employees, that would have been paid during 2020, such that under the CARES Act, 50% of the amount will now be paid on December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% will be paid on December 31, 2022. It is important to note that this does not impact the timing of the expense, only the timing of the payment. We also benefited from the creation of certain refundable employee retention credits and the technical correction for qualified leasehold improvements, which provides for tax bonus depreciation.
In addition, we were adhering to the Families First Coronavirus Response Act ("FFCRA") which required employers to provide their employees with paid sick leave and extended family and medical leave for specified reasons related to COVID-19. Qualifying reasons for leave related to COVID-19 include when an employee is quarantined, is experiencing COVID-19 symptoms and is seeking a medical diagnosis, is being advised by a healthcare provider to self-quarantine, is caring for an individual subject to a quarantine order or self-quarantine situation, is caring for a child whose school or place of care is closed, or is experiencing any other substantially similar condition specified by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. These provisions were in effect until December 31, 2020.
Other Factors
We expect our selling and administrative expenses to continue to increase as our business grows, which could impact our future operating profitability.
INFLATION
Our performance is dependent to a significant extent upon the levels of U.S. residential new construction spending, which is affected by factors such as interest rates, inflation, consumer confidence and unemployment. We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations in 2020.
SEASONALITY
We tend to have higher sales during the second half of the year as our homebuilder customers complete construction of homes placed under contract for sale in the traditionally stronger spring selling season. In addition, some of our larger branches operate in states impacted by winter weather and as such experience a slowdown in construction activity during the first quarter of the calendar year. This winter slowdown contributes to traditionally lower sales and profitability in our first quarter. See Item 1, Business, for further information.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our capital resources primarily consist of cash from operations and borrowings under our various debt agreements and capital equipment leases and loans. Our primary capital requirements are to fund working capital needs, operating expenses, acquisitions and capital expenditures and to meet required principal and interest payments. We may also use our resources to fund our optional stock repurchase program and recently announced quarterly dividend program. As discussed above, our cash reserves may also be used to fund payroll and other short-term requirements if our business is affected significantly by COVID-19. Our investments consisted of highly liquid instruments primarily including corporate bonds and commercial paper as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under our asset-based lending credit facility (as defined below).
We believe that our cash flows from operations, combined with our current cash levels and available borrowing capacity, will be adequate to support our ongoing operations and to fund our debt service requirements, capital expenditures and working capital for at least the next 12 months as evidenced by our net positive cash flows from operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. We believe that we have access to additional funds, if needed, through the capital markets to obtain further debt financing under the current market conditions.
While the general economic environment within the United States and most markets around the world have been significantly impacted by the spread of COVID-19, prompting governmental and health agencies to issue unprecedented orders to close businesses not deemed “essential” during portions of the year ended December 31, 2020, we believe we have robust capital resources at our immediate disposal to meet our needs. We have cash reserves and short-term investments of $231.5 million as of December 31, 2020 as well as access to $200.0 million under our ABL Revolver, less $38.8 million of outstanding letters of credit. This amount available to us is based on eligible collateral, which may be reduced over time. While our cash from operations may decline in 2021 due to factors described above, we believe it will remain at a level to fund our operations and not require us to draw on our ABL Revolver. However, as necessary or desirable, we may adjust or amend the terms of our credit facilities. With the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19, our ability to engage in such transactions may be constrained by volatile credit market conditions.
In response to COVID-19, we took a number of proactive steps during the year ended December 31, 2020 to preserve cash and maximize our financial flexibility in order to efficiently manage through the COVID-19 pandemic. These actions included:
•temporarily suspending stock repurchases under our share repurchase program (reinstated in November 2020);
•deferring employer portion of Social Security taxes under the CARES Act and adhering to the FFCRA Act. See "COVID-19 Impacts" above.
•delaying acquisition closings during portions of the first and second quarters (activity resumed in late June 2020 after our industry stabilized);
•temporarily suspending pay increases for our executive officers until the third quarter of 2020; and
•eliminating non-essential travel.
See Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for more information on the potential impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic strain.
LIBOR is used as a reference rate for our Term Loan and our interest rate swap agreements we use to hedge our interest rate exposure. In 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the authority that regulates LIBOR, announced that it intends to stop compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR after 2021, and it is unclear whether new methods of calculating LIBOR will be established. The Intercontinental Exchange Benchmark Administration, the administrator of LIBOR, announced in November 2020 a consultation regarding its intention to extend the publication of certain LIBOR settings, including the setting we use as a reference rate, to June 2023. Our Term Loan Agreement, as hereinafter defined, was amended to include a mechanism to establish an alternative Eurodollar rate if certain circumstances arise such that LIBOR may no longer be used. Additionally, our ABL Credit Agreement includes a provision related to the potential discontinuance of LIBOR to be replaced with one or more Secured Overnight Financing Rate values or another alternate benchmark rate. However, if LIBOR ceases to exist after June 2023, the interest rates under the alternative rate could be higher than LIBOR. In addition, LIBOR is used as a reference rate for our interest rate swap agreements we use to hedge our interest rate exposure. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we adopted ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform: Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting (Topic 848). The purpose of this guidance is to provide relief for impacted areas as it relates to impending reference rate reform. We elected to apply the hedge accounting expedients related to probability and the assessments of effectiveness for future LIBOR-indexed cash flows to assume that the index upon which future hedged transactions will be based matches the index on the corresponding derivatives. Application of these expedients preserves the presentation of derivatives consistent with past presentation.
The following table summarizes our liquidity as of December 31 (in thousands):
(1) Total liquidity reflects full borrowing base capacity under our asset-based lending credit facility (as defined below) and may be limited by certain cash collateral limitations depending upon the status of our borrowing base availability. These potential deductions would lower our available cash and cash equivalents balance shown in the table above. As of December 31, 2020, total liquidity would be reduced by $15.5 million due to these cash collateral limitations. In addition, total liquidity is further reduced by $5.3 million within cash and cash equivalents above which was deposited into a trust to serve as additional collateral for our workers’ compensation and general liability policies. This amount can be converted to a letter of credit at our discretion and would reduce the availability on our asset-based lending credit facility (as defined below) included in the table above.
Debt
5.75% Senior Notes due 2028
In September 2019, we issued $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.75% senior unsecured notes (the “Senior Notes”). The Senior Notes will mature on February 1, 2028 and interest will be payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on February 1 and August 1, commencing on February 1, 2020. The net proceeds from the Senior Notes offering were $295.0 million after debt issuance costs. We used some of the net proceeds to repay a portion of our outstanding obligations (including accrued and unpaid interest) under our term loan credit agreement (as defined below) and to pay fees and expenses related to the entry into a new revolving credit facility described below.
The indenture covering the Senior Notes contains restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit the ability of the Company and certain of our subsidiaries (subject to certain exceptions) to: (i) incur additional debt and issue preferred stock; (ii) pay dividends on, redeem or repurchase stock in an aggregate amount exceeding 2.0% of market capitalization per fiscal year, or in an aggregate amount exceeding certain applicable restricted payment baskets; (iii) prepay subordinated debt; (iv) create liens; (v) make specified types of investments; (vi) apply net proceeds from certain asset sales; (vii) engage in
transactions with affiliates; (viii) merge, consolidate or sell substantially all of our assets; and (ix) pay dividends and make other distributions from subsidiaries.
Credit Facilities
In December 2019, we amended and restated our $400 million, seven-year term loan facility due April 2025 (the “Term Loan”) under our credit agreement (the “Term Loan Agreement”), dated as of April 13, 2017 (as previously amended by the First Amendment thereto dated November 30, 2017 and by the Second Amendment thereto dated June 19, 2018). The amended Term Loan (i) effects a repricing of the interest rate applicable to the term loans thereunder from LIBOR plus 2.50% to LIBOR plus 2.25% and (ii) replaces Royal Bank of Canada with Bank of America, N.A. as the administrative agent and collateral agent thereunder. As of December 31, 2020, we had $198.7 million, net of unamortized debt issuance costs, due on our Term Loan. The amended Term Loan also has a margin of 1.25% in the case of base rate loans.
In September 2019, we entered into a new asset-based lending credit agreement (the “ABL Credit Agreement”). The ABL Credit Agreement provides for an asset-based lending credit facility (the “ABL Revolver”) of up to $200.0 million with a five-year maturity, which replaced the Company’s previous revolving credit facility. Borrowing availability under the ABL Revolver is based on a percentage of the value of certain assets securing the Company’s obligations and those of the subsidiary guarantors thereunder. In connection with the Amended and Restated Term Loan, we entered into a Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the ABL/Term Loan Intercreditor Agreement with Bank of America, N.A., as ABL Agent for the lenders under the ABL Credit Agreement, and Bank of America, N.A., as Term Loan Agent for the lenders under the Term Loan. Including outstanding letters of credit, our remaining availability under the ABL Revolver as of December 31, 2020 was $161.2 million.
The ABL Revolver bears interest at either the Eurodollar rate or the base rate (which approximated the prime rate), at the Company’s election, plus a margin of (A) 1.25% or 1.50% in the case of Eurodollar rate loans (based on a measure of availability under the ABL Credit Agreement) and (B) 0.25% or 0.50% in the case of base rate loans (based on a measure of availability under the ABL Credit Agreement).
The ABL Revolver also provides incremental revolving credit facility commitments of up to $50.0 million. The terms and conditions of any incremental revolving credit facility commitments must be no more favorable than the terms of the ABL Revolver. The ABL Revolver also allows for the issuance of letters of credit of up to $75.0 million in aggregate and borrowing of swingline loans of up to $20.0 million in aggregate.
The ABL Credit Agreement contains a financial covenant requiring the satisfaction of a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.0x in the event that we do not meet a minimum measure of availability under the ABL Revolver. The ABL Credit Agreement and the Term Loan Agreement contain restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit the ability of the Company and certain of our subsidiaries (subject to certain exceptions) to: (i) incur additional debt and issue preferred stock; (ii) pay dividends on, redeem or repurchase stock in an aggregate amount exceeding 2.0% of market capitalization per fiscal year, or in an aggregate amount exceeding certain applicable restricted payment baskets; (iii) prepay subordinated debt; (iv) create liens; (v) make specified types of investments; (vi) apply net proceeds from certain asset sales; (vii) engage in transactions with affiliates; (viii) merge, consolidate or sell substantially all of our assets; and (ix) pay dividends and make other distributions from subsidiaries.
All of the obligations under the Term Loan and ABL Revolver are guaranteed by all of the Company’s existing restricted subsidiaries and will be guaranteed by the Company’s future restricted subsidiaries. Additionally, all obligations under the Term Loan and ABL Revolver, and the guarantees of those obligations, are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and the guarantors, subject to certain exceptions and permitted liens, including a first-priority security interest in such assets that constitute ABL Priority Collateral, as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement, and a second- priority security interest in such assets that constitute Term Loan Priority Collateral, as defined in the Term Loan Agreement.
At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all applicable covenants under the Term Loan Agreement, ABL Credit Agreement and the Senior Notes.
Derivative Instruments
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we terminated our two existing interest rate swaps and our forward interest rate swap and simultaneously entered into a new forward interest rate swap beginning July 30, 2021. The purpose of terminating our then existing derivative contracts in favor of a new contract was to take advantage of better available market rates. We settled the terminated swaps by making a cash payment of $17.8 million. The unrealized loss included in accumulated other comprehensive loss associated with the terminated swaps of $17.8 million at the time of termination will be amortized to
interest expense over the course of the originally scheduled settlement dates of the terminated swaps. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we amortized $1.3 million of the unrealized loss to interest expense, net. The new forward interest rate swap has a beginning notional amount of $200.0 million, a fixed rate of 0.51% and a maturity date of April 15, 2030. Upon commencement, this forward swap will serve to hedge substantially all of the variable cash flows on our Term Loan until its maturity and if extended. The assets and liabilities associated with the forward interest rate swap are included in other long-term assets and other current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at their fair value amounts as described in Note 10, Fair Value Measurements.
Vehicle and Equipment Notes
We have financing loan agreements with various lenders to provide financing for the purpose of purchasing or leasing vehicles and equipment used in the normal course of business. Vehicles and equipment purchased or leased under each financing arrangement serve as collateral for the note applicable to such financing arrangement. Regular payments are due under each note for a period of typically 60 consecutive months after the incurrence of the obligation.
Total gross assets and respective outstanding loan balances relating to our master loan and equipment agreements were $132.2 million and $67.5 million as of December 31, 2020, respectively, and $130.2 million and $72.7 million as of December 31, 2019, respectively. See Note 8 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for more information regarding our Master Loan and Security Agreement, Master Equipment Lease Agreement and Master Loan Agreements.
Letters of Credit and Bonds
We may use performance bonds to ensure completion of our work on certain larger customer contracts that can span multiple accounting periods. Performance bonds generally do not have stated expiration dates; rather, we are released from the bonds as the contractual performance is completed. In addition, we occasionally use letters of credit and cash to secure our performance under our general liability and workers’ compensation insurance programs. Permit and license bonds are typically issued for one year and are required by certain municipalities when we obtain licenses and permits to perform work in their jurisdictions. The following table summarizes our outstanding bonds, letters of credit and cash-collateral (in thousands):
In 2020, we posted $5.3 million into a trust to serve as additional collateral for our workers’ compensation and general liability policies. This collateral can be converted to a letter of credit at our discretion and is therefore not considered to be restricted cash.
Historical cash flow information
Working Capital
We carefully manage our working capital and operating expenses. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, our working capital, including cash, was $387.5 million, or 23.4% of net revenue, and $367.8 million, or 24.3% of net revenue, respectively. The increase in working capital year-over-year in 2020 was driven primarily by a $15.7 million increase in cash and cash equivalents and investments resulting from positive operating cash flows, and an increase in accounts receivable of $22.0 million resulting from our increased net revenue. These increases were offset by an increase of $12.2 million in accrued compensation primarily due to the current portion of payroll tax deferrals due under the CARES Act as of December 31, 2020. We continue to look for opportunities to reduce our working capital as a percentage of net revenue.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $180.8 million and $123.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Generally, the primary drivers of our cash flow from operations are operating income, adjusted for certain non-cash items, offset by cash payments for taxes and interest on our outstanding debt. Our cash flows from operations can be
impacted by the timing of our cash collections on sales and collection of retainage amounts. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we saw a significant increase in cash from operations primarily due to higher net income from improved results as described above, as well as payroll tax deferrals under the CARES Act. These increases during the year ended December 31, 2020 were offset by a $17.8 million cash payment to settle our previous cash flow hedges.
While COVID-19 only minimally impacted our net revenue during 2020, primarily during portions of the first and second quarters of 2020, it has not impacted our cash collections to date. Historically, cash flows tend to be seasonally stronger in the third and fourth quarters as a result of increased construction activity. However, we may see a reduction in cash inflows in any future quarter, depending on continued pandemic impacts on housing starts and large commercial projects as well as potential future government-mandated branch closures. See “Key Factors Affecting our Operating Results, COVID-19 Impacts" above for further information on short-term impacts to our cash from operations.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Business Combinations. In 2020 and 2019, we made cash payments, net of cash acquired, of $76.4 million and $51.7 million, respectively, on business combinations. The amount of cash paid is dependent on various factors, including the size and determined value of the business being acquired. Due to the potential impacts of COVID-19, we had temporarily delayed acquisition closings until June 2020 when we resumed our acquisition strategy. See Note 17, Business Combinations, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for more information regarding our business acquisitions in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Capital Expenditures. Total cash paid for property and equipment was $33.6 million and $50.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and primarily related to purchases of vehicles and various equipment to support our growing operations and increased net revenue. We expect to continue to support any increases in future net revenue through further capital expenditures. A majority of these capital expenditures were subsequently reimbursed via various vehicle and equipment notes payable, with related cash inflows shown in cash flows from financing activities.
Other. In 2020 and 2019, we invested $0.8 million and $52.8 million, respectively, in short-term investments consisting primarily of corporate bonds and commercial paper and had $38.7 million and $25.1 million in short-term investments mature in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have recently slowed the rate of investment purchases due to the relatively low returns provided from current interest rates associated with traditional investments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
We utilize our credit facilities and Senior Notes to support our operations and continuing acquisitions. To support those initiatives, we received $300.0 million in proceeds from issuance of our Senior Notes, paid off $195.8 million of our Term Loan balance and paid $6.7 million in debt issuance costs during the year ended December 31, 2019, resulting in a net cash inflow of $97.5 million. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we also received proceeds of $21.3 million and $33.1 million, respectively, from our fixed asset loans which serve to offset a significant portion of the capital expenditures included in cash outflows from investing activities as described above. We made payments on these fixed asset loans and various other notes payable of $26.7 million and $21.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition, we made $2.6 million and $4.2 million in principal payments on our finance leases during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Lastly, we repurchased approximately 0.6 million shares of our common stock for $33.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as part of our stock repurchase plan. We did not repurchase any shares under our stock repurchase plan during the year ended December 31, 2019. See Note 12, Stockholders’ Equity, for more information surrounding our stock repurchase plan.
Contractual Obligations
In the table below, we set forth our enforceable and legally binding obligations as of December 31, 2020. Some of the amounts included in the table are based on management’s estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, the possibility of renewal, anticipated actions by third parties and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, our actual payments may vary from those reflected in the table. In addition, certain other long-term liabilities included on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as well as our unrecognized tax benefits under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740, “Income Taxes,” have been excluded from the contractual obligations table because of the inherent uncertainty and the inability to reasonably estimate the timing of cash outflows.
(1)Long-term debt obligations include interest payments on our Senior Notes, Term Loan, our notes payable to sellers of acquisitions, and vehicles purchased under the Master Loan and Security Agreement, the Master Equipment Agreement and the Master Loan Agreements. Long-term debt obligations do not include commitment fees on the unused portion of the ABL Revolver since those fees are subject to change based on the factors described in the ABL Credit Agreement. Interest on seller obligations maturing through March 2025 is estimated using current market rates. For additional information, see Note 8, Long-Term Debt, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
(2)We maintain certain production vehicles under a finance lease structure. The leases expire on various dates through December 2025. Finance lease obligations, as disclosed above, include estimated interest expense payments. In determining expected interest expense payments, we utilize the rates embedded in the lease documentation.
(3)We lease certain locations, vehicles and equipment under operating lease agreements, including, but not limited to, corporate offices, branch locations and various office and operating equipment. In some instances, these lease agreements exist with related parties. For additional information, see Note 15, Related Party Transactions and Note 9, Leases, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
(4)As of December 31, 2020, we had a product supply agreement extending through December 31, 2021. For additional information, see Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, other than letters of credit issued under our ABL Revolver and performance and license bonds, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements with unconsolidated entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Certain accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have been reported using different assumptions or under different conditions. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of our assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We provide discussion of our more significant accounting policies, estimates, assumptions and judgments used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements below.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are derived primarily through contracts with customers whereby we install insulation and other complementary building products and are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. We account for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. An insignificant portion of our sales, primarily retail sales, is accounted for on a point-in-time basis when the sale occurs, adjusted accordingly for any return
provisions. We do offer assurance-type warranties on certain of our installed products and services that do not represent a separate performance obligation and, as such, do not impact the timing or extent of revenue recognition.
For contracts that are not complete at the reporting date, we recognize revenue over time utilizing a cost-to-cost input method as we believe this represents the best measure of when goods and services are transferred to the customer. When this method is used, we estimate the costs to complete individual contracts and record as revenue that portion of the total contract price that is considered complete based on the relationship of costs incurred to date to total anticipated costs. Under the cost-to-cost method, the use of estimated costs to complete each contract is a significant variable in the process of determining recognized revenue, requires significant judgment and can change throughout the duration of a contract due to contract modifications and other factors impacting job completion. The costs of earned revenue include all direct material and labor costs and those indirect costs related to contract performance, such as indirect labor, supplies, tools and repairs. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined.
Our long-term contracts can be subject to modification to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements. We consider contract modifications to exist when the modification either creates new, or changes the existing, enforceable rights and obligations. Most of our contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct from the existing contract due to the significant integration service provided in the context of the contract and are accounted for as if they were part of that existing contract. The effect of a contract modification on the transaction price and our measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates, is recognized as an adjustment to revenue (either as an increase in or a reduction of revenue) on a cumulative catch-up basis.
Billing on our long-term contracts occurs primarily on a monthly basis throughout the contract period whereby we submit invoices for customer payment based on actual or estimated costs incurred during the billing period. On certain of our long-term contracts the customer may withhold payment on an invoice equal to a percentage of the invoice amount, which will be subsequently paid after satisfactory completion of each installation project.
This amount is referred to as retainage and is common practice in the construction industry, as it allows for customers to ensure the quality of the service performed prior to full payment. Retainage receivables are classified as current or long-term assets based on the expected time to project completion.
We disaggregate our revenue from contracts with customers by end market and product, as we believe it best depicts how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of our revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors.
Accounts Receivable
We account for trade receivables based on amounts billed to customers. Past due receivables are determined based on contractual terms. We do not accrue interest on any of our trade receivables.
Retainage receivables represent the amount retained by our customers to ensure the quality of the installation and is received after satisfactory completion of each installation project. Management regularly reviews aging of retainage receivables and changes in payment trends and records an allowance when collection of amounts due are considered at risk. Amounts retained by project owners under construction contracts and included in accounts receivable were $41.7 million and $33.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Goodwill
Goodwill results from business combinations and represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of acquired tangible assets and liabilities and identifiable intangible assets. On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2017-04, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment.” This ASU addresses concerns over the cost and complexity of the two-step goodwill impairment test and removes the second step. Annually, on October 1, or if conditions indicate an earlier review is necessary, we perform a one-step quantitative test to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The estimate of the reporting unit’s fair value is determined by weighting a discounted cash flow model and a market-related model using current industry information that involve significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs). In determining the estimated future cash flow, we consider and apply certain estimates and judgments, including current and projected future levels of income based on management’s plans, business trends, prospects, market and economic conditions and market-participant considerations. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the reporting unit's fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 842, “Leases,” which requires substantially all leases, with the exception of leases with a term of one year or less, to be recorded on the Condensed Balance Sheet as a lease liability measured as the present value of the future lease payments with a corresponding right-of-use asset. ASC 842 also requires disclosures designed to give financial statement users information on the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows.
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Most of our operating leases do not provide an implicit rate so we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the commencement date to determine the present value of future payments. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet as we recognize lease expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We elected the package of practical expedients for the adoption of ASC 842 available for expired or existing contracts, which allowed us to carryforward our historical assessments of whether contracts are or contain leases, lease classification tests and treatment of initial direct costs. We also elected to not separate lease components from non-lease components for all fixed payments, and we exclude variable lease payments in the measurement of right-of-use assets and lease obligations.
Most lease agreements include one or more renewal options, all of which are at our sole discretion. Generally, future renewal options that have not been executed as of the balance sheet date are excluded from right-of-use assets and related lease liabilities. Certain leases also include options to purchase the leased property. The depreciable life of assets and leasehold improvements are limited by the expected lease term, unless there is a transfer of title or purchase option reasonably certain of exercise. Some of our vehicle lease agreements include provisions for residual value guarantees and any expected payment is included in our lease liability.
Derivatives and Hedging Activities
We record all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value. The accounting for changes in the fair value of derivatives depends on the intended use of the derivative, whether we have elected to designate a derivative in a hedging relationship and apply hedge accounting and whether the hedging relationship has satisfied the criteria necessary to apply hedge accounting. Derivatives designated and qualifying as a hedge of the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows, or other types of forecasted transactions, are considered cash flow hedges. Hedge accounting generally provides for the matching of the timing of gain or loss recognition on the hedging instrument with the recognition of the earnings effect of the hedged forecasted transactions in a cash flow hedge. We may enter into derivative contracts that are intended to economically hedge certain of our risks, even though hedge accounting does not apply or we elect not to apply hedge accounting. See Note 11, Derivatives and Hedging, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for additional information on our accounting policy for derivative instruments and hedging activities.
Share-Based Compensation
Our share-based compensation program is designed to attract and retain employees while also aligning employees’ interests with the interests of our stockholders. Restricted stock awards are periodically granted to certain employees, officers and non-employee members of our board of directors under the stockholder-approved 2014 Omnibus Incentive Plan.
Certain of our stock awards are deemed to be equity-based with a service condition and do not contain a market or performance condition with the exception of performance-based awards granted to certain officers and performance-based stock units. Fair
value of the non-performance-based awards to employees and officers is measured at the grant date and amortized to expense over the vesting period of the awards using the straight-line attribution method for all service-based awards with a graded vesting feature. This fair value is reduced by assumed forfeitures and adjusted for actual forfeitures until vesting. We also issue performance-based stock awards to certain officers under our 2014 Omnibus Incentive Plan. The performance-based compensation expense is recorded over the requisite service period using the graded-vesting method for the entire award. Performance-based stock awards are accounted for at fair value at date of grant. We also periodically grant performance-based stock units to certain employees under the stockholder-approved 2014 Omnibus Incentive Plan. These units convert to shares upon meeting time- and performance-based requirements.
Compensation expense for performance-based stock units is recorded based on an assessment each reporting period of the probability that certain performance goals will be met during the contingent vesting period. If performance goals are not probable of occurrence, no compensation expense will be recognized. If performance goals that were previously deemed probable are not or are not expected to be met, the previously recognized compensation cost related to such performance goals will be reversed. Employees and officers are subject to tax at the vesting date based on the market price of the shares on that date, or on the grant date if an election is made.
Business Combinations
The purchase price for business combinations is allocated to the estimated fair values of acquired tangible and intangible assets, including goodwill and assumed liabilities, where applicable. Additionally, we recognize customer relationships, trademarks and trade names and non-competition agreements as identifiable intangible assets. These assets are recorded at fair value as of the transaction date. The fair value of these intangibles is determined primarily using the income approach and using current industry information which involves significant unobservable inputs classified as Level 3 inputs. These inputs include projected sales, margin and tax rate. At times, the total purchase price for a business combination could be less than the estimated fair values of acquired tangible and intangible assets. In these cases, we record a gain on bargain purchase within Other Expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income rather than goodwill in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Insurance Liabilities
We carry insurance for a number of risks, including, but not limited to, workers’ compensation, general liability, vehicle liability, property and our obligation for employee-related health care benefits. Liabilities relating to claims associated with these risks are estimated by considering historical claims experience, including frequency, severity, demographic factors and other actuarial assumptions. In estimating our liability for such claims, we periodically analyze our historical trends, including loss development, and apply appropriate loss development factors to the incurred costs associated with the claims with the assistance of external actuarial consultants. While we do not expect the amounts ultimately paid to differ significantly from our estimates, our reserves and corresponding expenses could be affected if future claim experience differs significantly from historical trends and actuarial assumptions.
Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, the amount of taxes currently payable or refundable are accrued and deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences of temporary differences that currently exist between the tax basis and financial reporting basis of our assets and liabilities.
Valuation allowances are established against deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that the realization of those deferred tax assets will not occur. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, the ability to produce future taxable income, tax planning strategies available and recent financial operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results adjusted for the results of discontinued operations and changes in accounting policies and incorporate assumptions, including the amount of future federal and state pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates in effect in the years when those temporary differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred taxes from a change in tax rate is recognized through operations in the period that includes the enactment date of the change. Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future.
A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits. We recognize tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available.
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the United States, which includes numerous state and local jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the income tax expense.
Estimated Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 approximate fair value due to the short-term maturities of these financial instruments. The carrying amounts of our long-term debt, including the Term Loan and our ABL Revolver as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, approximate fair value due to the variable rate nature of the agreements. The carrying amounts of the obligations associated with our operating and finance leases as well as our vehicle and equipment notes approximate fair value as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Our Senior Notes are not recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 10, Fair Value Measurements, for estimated fair value of the Senior Notes, assessed by utilizing third-party quotes derived from market pricing. All debt classifications represent Level 2 fair value measurements.
Derivative financial instruments are measured at fair value based on observable market information and appropriate valuation methods. Contingent consideration liabilities arise from future earnout payments to the sellers associated with certain acquisitions and are based on predetermined calculations of certain future results. These future payments are estimated by considering various factors, including business risk and projections. The contingent consideration liabilities are measured at fair value by discounting estimated future payments, calculated based on a weighted average of various future forecast scenarios, to their net present value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued and/or adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.