ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A, and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, our other filings with the SEC, and other press releases, documents, reports and announcements that we make, issue or publish may contain statements that we believe are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that are subject to risks and uncertainties and are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and other related federal security laws. These forward-looking statements include information about our possible or assumed future results of operations, including our future revenues, income, expenses, provision for taxes, effective tax rate, earnings per share and cash flows, our future capital expenditures and dividends, our future financial condition and changes therein, including changes in our loan portfolio and allowance for loan losses, our future capital structure or changes therein, the plan and objectives of management for future operations, our future or proposed acquisitions, the future or expected effect of acquisitions on our operations, results of operations and financial condition, our future economic performance and the statements of the assumptions underlying any such statement. Such statements are typically, but not exclusively, identified by the use in the statements of words or phrases such as “aim,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “goal,” “guidance,” “intend,” “is anticipated,” “is estimated,” “is expected,” “is intended,” “objective,” “plan,” “projected,” “projection,” “will affect,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will decrease,” “will grow,” “will impact,” “will increase,” “will incur,” “will reduce,” “will remain,” “will result,” “would be,” variations of such words or phrases (including where the word “could,” “may” or “would” is used rather than the word “will” in a phrase) and similar words and phrases indicating that the statement addresses some future result, occurrence, plan or objective. The forward-looking statements that we make are based on the Company’s current expectations and assumptions regarding its business, the economy, and other future conditions. Because forward-looking statements relate to future results and occurrences, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements, which are neither statements of historical fact nor guarantees or assurances of future performance. Many possible events or factors could affect our future financial results and performance and could cause those results or performance to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements. These possible events or factors include, but are not limited to:
•the disruption to local, regional, national and global economic activity caused by infectious disease outbreaks, including the recent outbreak of coronavirus, or COVID-19 and the significant impact that such outbreak has had and may have on our growth, operations, earnings and asset quality;
•our ability to sustain our current internal growth rate and total growth rate;
•changes in geopolitical, business and economic events, occurrences and conditions, including changes in rates of inflation or deflation, nationally, regionally and in our target markets, particularly in Texas and Colorado;
•worsening business and economic conditions nationally, regionally and in our target markets, particularly in Texas and Colorado, and the geographic areas in those states in which we operate;
•our dependence on our management team and our ability to attract, motivate and retain qualified personnel;
•the concentration of our business within our geographic areas of operation in Texas and Colorado;
•changes in asset quality, including increases in default rates on loans and higher levels of nonperforming loans and loan charge-offs, generally, and specifically resulting from the economic dislocation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic;
•concentration of the loan portfolio of the Bank, before and after the completion of acquisitions of financial institutions, in commercial and residential real estate loans and changes in the prices, values and sales volumes of commercial and residential real estate;
•the ability of the Bank to make loans with acceptable net interest margins and levels of risk of repayment and to otherwise invest in assets at acceptable yields and presenting acceptable investment risks;
•inaccuracy of the assumptions and estimates that the managements of our Company and the financial institutions that we acquire make in establishing reserves for probable loan losses and other estimates, generally, and specifically as a result of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•lack of liquidity, including as a result of a reduction in the amount of sources of liquidity we currently have;
•material increases or decreases in the amount of deposits held by the Bank or other financial institutions that we acquire and the cost of those deposits;
•our access to the debt and equity markets and the overall cost of funding our operations;
•regulatory requirements to maintain minimum capital levels or maintenance of capital at levels sufficient to support our anticipated growth;
•changes in market interest rates that affect the pricing of the loans and deposits of each of the Bank and the financial institutions that we acquire and that affect the net interest income, other future cash flows, or the market value of the assets of each of the Bank and the financial institutions that we acquire, including investment securities;
•fluctuations in the market value and liquidity of the securities we hold for sale, including as a result of changes in market interest rates;
•effects of competition from a wide variety of local, regional, national and other providers of financial, investment and insurance services;
•changes in economic and market conditions, including the economic dislocation resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, that affect the amount and value of the assets of the Bank and of financial institutions that we acquire;
•the institution and outcome of, and costs associated with, litigation and other legal proceedings against one of more of the Company, the Bank and financial institutions that we acquire or to which any of such entities is subject;
•the occurrence of market conditions adversely affecting the financial industry generally, including the economic dislocation resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the impact of recent and future legislative regulatory changes, including changes in banking, securities, and tax laws and regulations and their application by the Company’s regulators, and changes in federal government policies, as well as regulatory requirements applicable to, and resulting from regulatory supervision of, the Company and the Bank as a financial institution with total assets greater than $10 billion;
•changes in accounting policies, practices, principles and guidelines, as may be adopted by the bank regulatory agencies, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, as the case may be;
•governmental monetary and fiscal policies, including changes resulting from the implementation of the new Current Expected Credit Loss accounting standard;
•changes in the scope and cost of FDIC insurance and other coverage;
•the effects of war or other conflicts, acts of terrorism (including cyber attacks) or other catastrophic events, including natural disasters such as storms, droughts, tornadoes, hurricanes and flooding, that may affect general economic conditions;
•our actual cost savings resulting from previous or future acquisitions are less than expected, we are unable to realize those cost savings as soon as expected, or we incur additional or unexpected costs;
•our revenues after previous or future acquisitions are less than expected;
•the liquidity of, and changes in the amounts and sources of liquidity available to, us, before and after the acquisition of any financial institutions that we acquire;
•deposit attrition, operating costs, customer loss and business disruption before and after our completed acquisitions, including, without limitation, difficulties in maintaining relationships with employees, may be greater than we expected;
•the effects of the combination of the operations of financial institutions that we have acquired in the recent past or may acquire in the future with our operations and the operations of the Bank, the effects of the integration of such operations being unsuccessful, and the effects of such integration being more difficult, time consuming, or costly than expected or not yielding the cost savings we expect;
•the impact of investments that the Company or the Bank may have made or may make and the changes in the value of those investments;
•the quality of the assets of financial institutions and companies that we have acquired in the recent past or may acquire in the future being different than we determined or determine in our due diligence investigation in connection with the acquisition of such financial institutions and any inadequacy of loan loss reserves relating to, and exposure to unrecoverable losses on, loans acquired;
•our ability to continue to identify acquisition targets and successfully acquire desirable financial institutions to sustain our growth, to expand our presence in our markets and to enter new markets;
•general business and economic conditions in our markets change or are less favorable than expected, generally, and specifically as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•changes occur in business conditions and inflation, generally, and specifically as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•an increase in the rate of personal or commercial customers’ bankruptcies, generally, and specifically as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•technology-related changes are harder to make or are more expensive than expected;
•attacks on the security of, and breaches of, the Company's and the Bank's digital information systems, the costs we or the Bank incur to provide security against such attacks and any costs and liability the Company or the Bank incurs in connection with any breach of those systems;
•the potential impact of technology and “FinTech” entities on the banking industry generally;
•the other factors that are described or referenced in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Risk Factors”; and
•other economic, competitive, governmental, regulatory, technological and geopolitical factors affecting the Company’s operations, pricing and services.
We urge you to consider all of these risks, uncertainties and other factors carefully in evaluating all such forward-looking statements made by us. As a result of these and other matters, including changes in facts and assumptions not being realized or other factors, the actual results relating to the subject matter of any forward-looking statement may differ materially from the anticipated results expressed or implied in that forward-looking statement. Any forward-looking statement made in this 10-K or made by us in any report, filing, document, or information incorporated by reference in this 10-K speaks only as of the date on which it is made. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any such forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise, except as may be required by law.
A forward looking-statement may include a statement of the assumptions or bases underlying the forward-looking statement. The Company believes that these assumptions or bases have been chosen in good faith and that they are reasonable. However, the Company cautions you that assumptions as to future occurrences or results almost always vary from actual future occurrences or results, and the differences between assumptions and actual occurrences and results can be material. Therefore, the Company cautions you not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this 10-K or incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
The Company was organized as a bank holding company in 2002. On January 1, 2009, the Company was merged with Independent Bank Group Central Texas, Inc., and, since that time, has pursued a strategy to create long-term shareholder value through organic growth of our community banking franchise in our market areas and through selective acquisitions of complementary banking institutions with operations in the Company’s market areas or in new market areas. On April 8, 2013, the Company consummated the initial public offering, or IPO, of its common stock which is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
The Company’s principal business is lending to and accepting deposits from businesses, professionals and individuals. The Company conducts all of the Company’s banking operations through its principal bank subsidiary. The Company derives its income principally from interest earned on loans and, to a lesser extent, income from securities available for sale. The Company also derives income from non-interest sources, such as fees received in connection with various deposit services, mortgage banking operations and investment advisory services. From time to time, the Company also realizes gains on the sale of assets. The Company’s principal expenses include interest expense on interest-bearing customer deposits, advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas (FHLB) and other borrowings, operating expenses such as salaries, employee benefits, occupancy costs, communication and technology costs, expenses associated with other real estate owned, other administrative expenses, amortization of intangibles, acquisition expenses, provisions for loan losses and the Company’s assessment for FDIC deposit insurance.
The Company intends for this discussion and analysis to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding the Company’s financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from period to period and the primary factors that accounted for those changes. This discussion relates to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, and the accompanying notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s year ends on December 31. The following discussion and analysis presents the more significant factors that affected our financial condition as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and results of operations for each of the years then ended. Refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2019 and 2018 Annual Reports on Form 10-K, as amended, filed with the SEC on March 6, 2020 and February 28, 2019, respectively, for discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Recent Developments: COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization and almost all public commerce and related business activities have been curtailed, to varying degrees. As a result of the shelter-at-home mandate that was in force early in the second quarter of 2020, commercial activity throughout the state of Texas and Colorado, as well as nationally, decreased significantly. As of December 31, 2020, many of the more restrictive government orders eased on a national level and more specifically in the Company's markets of Texas and Colorado, allowing businesses to reopen at varying capacity levels, which has improved commercial and consumer activity but has not returned to pre-pandemic levels. In addition, the risk of a resurgence in infections and possible reimplementation of restrictions remains significant.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has taken several actions to offer various forms of support to our employees, customers, and communities that have experienced impacts during this unprecedented time. For discussion related to the impact of COVID-19 on the Company's business operations, legislative measures and the Company's response, refer to Item 1, Business - "COVID-19 Impact and Response".
In addition, the Company continues to take deliberate actions to ensure the continued health and strength of its balance sheet in order to serve its clients and communities, including increases in liquidity and managing our assets and liabilities in order to maintain a strong capital position.
Impact on our Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Company's business has been, and continues to be, impacted by the recent and ongoing outbreak of COVID-19. The Company continues to monitor developments related to the pandemic and its impact on the Company's business, customers, employees, counterparties, vendors, and service providers. Refer to Item 1A, Risk Factors - "RISKS RELATED TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC" for additional discussion.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the most notable financial impact to the Company's results of operations include a higher provision for loan losses primarily as a result of deterioration in macroeconomic variables, as well as lower service charge income and deposit and loan related expenses, as more fully discussed throughout the various sections of this discussion and analysis.
Lending Operations and Accommodations to Borrowers
The Company has participated in the CARES Act PPP as discussed in Item 1, Business - "COVID-19 Impact and Response". As of December 31, 2020, the Company has outstanding balances of $804.4 million to 5,003 customers. Management believes that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program.
The Company continues to actively work with its borrowers on an individual, one-on-one basis to assess and understand the impact of pandemic-related economic hardships and provide prudent modifications allowing for payment deferrals or payment relief where appropriate. Through December 31, 2020, the Company has granted temporary COVID-19 modifications on over 2,100 loans totaling approximately $2.6 billion. The number of loans on active payment deferral has significantly declined since the beginning of the pandemic, and the vast majority of borrowers who were provided temporary payment relief have returned to paying as originally agreed. As of December 31, 2020, 79 loans with a total outstanding balance of $223.4 million remain in deferral status, of which $159.3 million are on second deferrals and $54.0 million are on third deferrals. Under current guidance, such modifications are currently exempt from the accounting guidance for TDRs (Refer to Note 6, Loans, Net and Allowance for Loan Losses, to the Company's consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report). As of January 15, 2021, the amount of loans with active deferrals declined to $205.7 million across 74 accounts, which represents 1.7% of the Company’s outstanding total loans held for investment balances, excluding PPP loans, as of fourth quarter end and 0.37% of the Company’s outstanding total loan accounts at fourth quarter end. The $205.7 million in active deferrals, of which $126.1 million are second deferrals and $68.0 million are third deferrals, include $127.3 million, or 61.9%, in hotel and motel; $5.0 million, or 2.4%, in retail; $763 thousand, or 0.4%, in office; $22.8 million, or 11.1%, in other commercial real estate (CRE) and construction and development (C&D); and $45.2 million, or 22.0% in general C&I, with the remainder spread throughout other portfolios.
Capital and Liquidity
The Company's capital remains strong, with ratios of the Company, and its subsidiary bank, well above the standards to be considered well-capitalized under regulatory requirements. Refer to the section captioned "Regulatory Capital Requirements" elsewhere in this discussion for additional information related to the Company's regulatory capital.
The Company's liquidity remains strong and continues to reflect excess balances, with cash and securities representing approximately 16.7% of total assets as of December 31, 2020. The Company maintains the ability to access considerable sources of contingent liquidity at the Federal Home Loan Bank and the Federal Reserve. Management considers the Company's current liquidity position to be adequate to meet short-term and long-term liquidity needs. Refer to the section captioned "Liquidity Management" elsewhere in this discussion for additional information regarding the Company's liquidity position.
Credit and Asset Quality
Under the CARES Act, the Company elected to defer the adoption of the CECL accounting standard and has continued its consistent application of the incurred loss method for estimating the allowance for loan losses and applicable provision for 2020. Refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Company's consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional discussion of the impact resulting from this discussion. Due to the macroeconomic environment brought on by the pandemic and energy price volatility, the Company recorded a provision of $43.0 million during 2020, increasing the allowance for loan losses to $87.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Management believes that the allowance adequately supports inherent credit losses within the loan portfolio. Refer to Note 6, Loans, Net and Allowance for Loan Losses as well as, the sections captioned "Provision for Loan Losses" and "Asset Quality" elsewhere in this discussion for additional information related to the factors considered by management in estimating the necessary level of allowance for loan losses.
During third and fourth quarter 2020, the Company adjusted the risk grades of several of its loans as the pandemic’s impacts on borrowers became clearer. Classified loans have increased year to date by $115.2 million to $229.5 million, or 2.0% of loans held for investment, net of mortgage warehouse purchase loans, as of December 31, 2020. Loans on special mention also increased by $318.6 million during the year. These increases are mainly due to the migration of several hotel loans as well as a few loans in the office and senior living portfolios. This prudent adjustment of risk grades is reflective of the Company's longstanding credit culture with a lender focus to continue to facilitate constructive engagement with borrowers through these challenging times. Overall, asset quality remains solid, reflecting the Company's disciplined underwriting and conservative lending philosophy which has supported strong credit performance during prior financial crises. Refer to Note 6, Loans, Net and Allowance for Loan Losses, to the Company's consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report and to the section captioned "Asset Quality" elsewhere in this discussion for additional disclosures related to asset quality of the Company's loan portfolio.
While all industries could experience adverse impacts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has an increased level of COVID-19 industry exposure risk in the following loan categories as of December 31, 2020:
◦Commercial real estate (CRE) loans were $6.1 billion with an average loan size in the CRE portfolio is $1.2 million.
◦Construction and Development (C&D) loans were $1.6 billion. The average loan size in the C&D portfolio was $639.2 thousand and the average loan-to-value was 58.6%. Construction activity continues across Texas and Colorado, and 98.4% of the Company’s C&D loans are located within these states. Of the Company’s C&D loans, 39.4% are for owner-occupied properties.
◦The Company's Retail CRE loans were approximately $1.8 billion, with the average loan size of $1.8 million. The mix of the portfolio consists of loans secured by 73.5% in strip centers properties, 13.9% in free standing/single tenant properties, 10.6% in mixed use properties, and 2.0% in big box properties.
◦The Company has approximately $438.3 million of loans secured by hotel and motel properties, with the average loan size of $5.7 million and the average loan-to-value of 53.1%. The mix of the portfolio consists of 62.1% of loans secured by limited service properties, 15.8% secured by full-service properties, 13.8% secured by extended stay properties, and 8.3% secured by boutique/independent properties.
◦Energy loans were $205.5 million, or 1.8% of total loans held for investment, excluding mortgage warehouse purchase loans. Energy loans are secured 92.6% by exploration and production of oil and gas, and 7.4% by energy services companies. Energy allowance for loan losses represents 5.8% of the total energy loan portfolio.
This pandemic crisis has been impactful and the timing and magnitude of recovery cannot be predicted. The Company continues to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 on its customers, the communities it serves and the economy as a whole; however, the extent to which the pandemic will continue to impact operations and financial results in 2021 is uncertain.
Certain Events Affect Year-over-Year Comparability
Acquisitions
There were no acquisitions completed in 2020. The Company completed an acquisition in 2019 and 2018. These acquisitions increased total assets, gross loans and deposits on their respective acquisition date as detailed below.
The Company issued an aggregate 15,251,729 shares of common stock in connection with these acquisitions. The comparability of the Company’s consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are affected by these acquisitions.
During 2019, the Company successfully completed the rebalancing of its retail footprint, by consolidating eight branches in Colorado and four branches in Texas. This consolidation reduced overlapping locations designed to improve efficiency, while keeping the Bank well-positioned to support existing customers and future growth.
Termination of proposed merger with Texas Capital Bancshares, Inc.: On December 9, 2019, the Company and Texas Capital Bancshares, Inc. (TCBI) and its subsidiary, Texas Capital Bank, had entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement) providing for the merger of TCBI with and into the Company. On May 22, 2020, the Company and TCBI entered into a mutual agreement to terminate the Merger Agreement. The termination was approved by each company's board of directors after careful consideration of the significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on global markets and on the companies' ability to fully realize the benefits expected to be achieved through the merger. Neither party paid a termination fee in connection with the termination of the Merger Agreement. Refer to Note 22, Business Combinations, to the Company's consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information on the termination.
Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s results of operations compares its results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Results of Operations
The Company’s net income available to common shareholders increased by $8.5 million, or 4.4%, to $201.2 million ($4.67 per common share on a diluted basis) for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $192.7 million ($4.46 per common share on a diluted basis) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net income for 2020 over 2019 was primarily due to growth in net interest income and noninterest income as well as a reduction in acquisition related expenses. Net income in 2020 also included a provision for credit losses of $43.0 million compared to $14.8 million in 2019. The increased provision reflects the stress on the loan portfolio from the economic impact of the Covid 19 pandemic. The Company posted returns on average common equity of 8.26% and 8.50%, returns on average assets of 1.23% and 1.32%, and efficiency ratios of 48.79% and 53.01% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The efficiency ratio is calculated by dividing total noninterest expense (which does not include the provision for loan losses and the amortization of core deposits intangibles) by net interest income plus noninterest income. The Company’s dividend payout ratio was 22.48% and 22.42% and the equity to assets ratio was 14.17% and 15.64% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net Interest Income
The Company’s net interest income is its interest income, net of interest expenses. Changes in the balances of the Company’s earning assets and its deposits, FHLB advances and other borrowings, as well as changes in the market interest rates, affect the Company’s net interest income. The difference between the Company’s average yield on earning assets and its average rate paid for interest-bearing liabilities is its net interest spread. Noninterest-bearing sources of funds, such as demand deposits and stockholders’ equity, also support the Company’s earning assets. The impact of the noninterest-bearing sources of funds is reflected in the Company’s net interest margin, which is calculated as annualized net interest income divided by average earning assets.
The Company earned net interest income of $516.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11.7 million, or 2.3%, from $504.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net interest income from the previous year was primarily due to decreased funding costs due to a declining rate environment which more than offset decreased purchase accounting accretion. The Company’s net interest margin for 2020 decreased to 3.55% from 3.95% in 2019, and the Company’s interest rate spread for 2020 decreased to 3.26% from the 3.47% interest rate spread for 2019. The average balance of interest-earning assets for 2020 increased by $1.8 billion, or 13.9%, to $14.6 billion from an average balance of $12.8 billion for 2019. The increase from the prior year was primarily related to increased average loan balances including PPP loans and mortgage warehouse loans, as well as an increase in average interest-bearing deposits with correspondent banks due to significant deposit growth during 2020. The Company’s net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by a 91 basis point decrease in the weighted-average yield on interest-earning assets to 4.20% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 5.11% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease from the prior year is due primarily to an increase in average interest-bearing deposits, decreased loan accretion, and the addition of lower yielding PPP loans to the portfolio. The year ended December 31, 2020 includes $30.4 of loan accretion compared to $46.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cost of interest bearing liabilities, including borrowings, was 0.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 1.64% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease from the prior year is primarily due to lower rates offered on our deposit products, as well as rate decreases on short-term FHLB advances and other debt. In response to the unprecedented Fed Funds rate decrease to combat the effects of COVID-19 on the economy, during first quarter 2020, the Company strategically lowered rates on certain deposit products and purchased lower rate advances to compensate for higher priced advances rolling off early second quarter 2020.
Average Balance Sheet Amounts, Interest Earned and Yield Analysis. The following table presents average balance sheet information, interest income, interest expense and the corresponding average yields earned and rates paid for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The average balances are principally daily averages and, for loans, include both performing and nonperforming balances.
____________
(1) Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans.
(2) Net interest margins for the periods presented represent: (i) the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets and the interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, divided by (ii) average interest-earning assets for the period.
(3) A tax-equivalent adjustment has been computed using a federal income tax rate of 21%.
Interest Rates and Operating Interest Differential. Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in average interest rates. The following table shows the effect that these factors had on the interest earned on the Company’s interest-earning assets and the interest incurred on the Company’s interest-bearing liabilities. The effect of changes in volume is determined by multiplying the change in volume by the previous year’s average rate. Similarly, the effect of rate changes is calculated by multiplying the change in average rate by the prior year’s volume. For purpose of the following table, changes attributable to both volume and rate, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amount of change in each.
Interest Income. The Company’s total interest income decreased $41.4 million, or 6.3%, to $611.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $652.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following tables set forth the major components of the Company’s interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period variations in such categories of interest income:
The Company’s interest and fees on loans decreased 5.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and was primarily attributable to $15.7 million less purchase accounting loan accretion and reductions in loan rates as a result of decreases in the Fed Funds rate directly related to combating the pandemic during the first half of 2020. The average balance on loans increased $1.2 billion to $12.3 billion during the year ended 2020 as compared with the average balance of $11.2 billion for the year ended 2019. The increase primarily resulted from the addition of PPP loans and increased volume of mortgage warehouse purchased loans.
The interest the Company earned on taxable securities, which consists primarily of government agencies, municipals and residential pass-through securities, decreased 10.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of a decrease in the average portfolio balance from $770.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $749.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily related to maturities during the year not being reinvested due to uncertainties within the market.
The interest the Company earned on nontaxable securities slightly decreased 0.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 while there was a 4.5% increase in the average balance of nontaxable securities from $329.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $344.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The 58.4% decrease in the Company's interest on interest-bearing deposits and other for the year ended December 31, 2020, from the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to lower rates being offered due to the decrease in the Fed Funds rate as a direct result of the pandemic. The average balance of interest-bearing deposits increased 126.3% from $504.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The higher average balance in 2020 primarily resulted from slower loan growth and substantial organic deposit growth after the pandemic started in March 2020.
Interest Expense. Total interest expense on the Company’s interest-bearing liabilities decreased $53.1 million, or 35.8%, to $95.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $148.2 million in the prior year. The following table sets forth the major components of the Company’s interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period variations in such categories of interest expense:
Interest expense on deposits decreased by $47.1 million, or 38.2% for the year over year period, primarily due to the declining rate environment during 2020. Average interest-bearing deposit balances increased 10.3% year-over-year from $8.3 billion in 2019 to $9.2 billion in 2020 primarily due to robust organic growth of $2.1 billion, or 17.3%, for the year over year period. The average rate on the Company’s deposits decreased by 65 basis points to 0.83% for 2020 compared to 1.48% for 2019. This decrease in cost of funds primarily resulted from lower rates offered on promotional certificates of deposit and money market accounts during the majority of 2020 due to decreased interest rates on deposit products tied to Fed Funds rates.
Interest expense on FHLB advances for 2020 decreased by $6.0 million, or 59.0%, due primarily to rate decreases on short-term FHLB advances. The increase in average balance of such advances over the period, from $464.4 million in 2019 to $613.3 million in 2020, is a result of management strategically purchasing lower rate advances during first quarter 2020 to compensate for higher priced advances rolling off in early second quarter 2020, as well as, borrowings during second quarter to provide additional liquidity in light of economic uncertainty and to facilitate funding for the PPP loan program.
Interest expense on other borrowings for 2020 increased by $872 thousand, or 7.5% from 2019, primarily as a result of the interest expense recognized on a $130.0 million of subordinated debentures issued in third quarter 2020, offset by a reduction of interest expense related to borrowings against the Company's unsecured revolving line of credit and Federal Reserve's PPP Liquidity Facility with a total average year to date outstanding balance of $7.8 million for 2020 compared to a $21.6 million average year to date outstanding line of credit balance for 2019.
Interest expense on junior subordinated debentures decreased $866 thousand, or 28.6% from the prior year due to decreased interest rates from the year over year period.
Provision for Loan Losses
Under the CARES Act and as amended, the Company elected to defer the adoption of the CECL accounting standard and has continued its consistent application of the incurred loss method for estimating its allowance for loan losses and provision for 2020. The Company adopted the CECL accounting standard as of January 1, 2021.
Management actively monitors the Company’s asset quality and provides specific loss provisions when necessary. Provisions for loan losses are charged to income to bring the total allowance for loan losses to a level deemed appropriate by management based on such factors as historical loss experience, trends in classified loans and past dues, the volume, concentrations and growth in the loan portfolio, current economic conditions and the value of collateral.
Loans are charged-off against the allowance for loan losses when appropriate. Although management believes it uses the best information available to make determinations with respect to the provision for loan losses, future adjustments may be necessary if economic conditions differ from the assumptions used in making the determination.
The Company increased its allowance for loan losses to $87.8 million at December 31, 2020, by making provisions for loan losses totaling $43.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This is an increase of $28.2 million, or 190.4% in provision expense compared to total provision expense of $14.8 million made by the Company in 2019. Provision expense is elevated primarily due to general provision expense for economic factors related to COVID-19 and energy price volatility as well as charge-offs and specific reserves taken during the year. The 2020 provision is also reflective of net charge-offs totaling $6.6 million, which is 0.05% of the Company's average loans outstanding during the period. The 2020 charge-offs were primarily related to partial charge-offs of two energy credit relationships totaling $4.1 million and a commercial credit relationship totaling $1.1 million.
The balance of the provision for loan losses was made based on the Company’s assessment of the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio and in view of the amount of the Company’s net charge-offs in that period. The Company did not make any material provision for loan losses with respect to the loans acquired in the Guaranty acquisition completed on January 1, 2019 because, in accordance with acquisition accounting standards, the Company recorded the loans acquired in the acquisition at fair value without a reserve and determined that the Company’s fair value adjustments appropriately reflected the probability of losses on those loans as of the acquisition date. The Company does not believe there has been any material deterioration of credit of these acquired loans since the acquisition. As of December 31, 2020, the discount on acquired loans totaled $59.3 million.
See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 6, Loans, net and Allowance for Loan Losses, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Noninterest Income
The following table sets forth the major components of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period variations in such categories of noninterest income:
____________
N/M - Not meaningful
Noninterest income increased $6.9 million, or 8.8%, to $85.1 million for the year ended 2020 from $78.2 million for the year ended 2019. Significant changes in the components of noninterest income are discussed below.
Service charges on deposit accounts. Service charges on deposit accounts decreased $2.8 million, or 23.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in service charges on deposit accounts reflects decreased income related to transaction volumes such as non-sufficient funds and service charge fees that have been adversely impacted by the pandemic during 2020.
Investment management and trust. Investment management and trust decreased $1.8 million, or 19.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily a result of the sale of the trust business in October 2019 coupled with a decline in assets under management, resulting from the market decline during 2020.
Mortgage banking revenue. Mortgage banking revenue increased $21.0 million, or 136.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was reflective of increased mortgage origination and refinance activity resulting from the low interest rate environment during 2020.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense decreased $15.7 million, or 4.9%, to $306.1 million for the year ended 2020 from $321.9 million for the year ended 2019. Significant changes in the components of noninterest expense are discussed below.
The following table sets forth the major components of the Company’s noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the period-over-period variations in such categories of noninterest expense:
____________
N/M - not meaningful
Salaries and employee benefits. Salaries and employee benefits expense, which historically has been the largest component of the Company’s noninterest expense, decreased $5.1 million, or 3.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The change is primarily due to increased salary cost deferrals of $9.8 million primarily related to the origination of the PPP loans and other COVID-related loan modifications/deferrals during second quarter 2020. Severance and retention expense of $5.7 million was recognized in 2019 primarily due to payments made to employees not retained from the Guaranty acquisition as well as the 2019 branch restructuring and also a $3.0 million separation agreement with a former executive officer in 2019. Offsetting these decreases were increases of $2.4 million in overall salaries expense due to increased headcount, $5.3 million in commission and mortgage incentive expense due to higher mortgage and refinance activity and $1.9 million in contract labor costs due to various infrastructure projects and PPP resources, as well $2.8 million in severance and accelerated stock grant amortization related to departmental and business line restructurings in 2020, $1.4 million in bonus and overtime costs related to the Company's participation in the PPP, $996 thousand in COVID-related hazard pay and $550 thousand in employee paid time off.
FDIC assessment. FDIC assessment expense increased $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The Company recorded a $3.2 million Small Bank Assessment Credit in third quarter 2019. In addition, the FDIC assessment was impacted by the Company becoming a large institution under regulatory guidelines, effective January 1, 2020, which resulted in higher assessment costs for the year over year period.
Professional fees. Professional fees increased $4.7 million, or 59.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase is primarily due to higher legal expenses related to ongoing acquired litigation and increased consulting expenses related to a compliance project and new system implementations.
Acquisition expense. Acquisition expense is primarily legal, advisory and accounting fees associated with services to facilitate the acquisition of other banks. Acquisition expenses also include data processing conversion costs and contract termination costs. Total acquisition expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $17.2 million, or 51.5% over the same period in 2019. The decrease in acquisition expense is primarily due to elevated expenses in 2019 related to the Guaranty transaction including $8.7 million in change in control payments to Guaranty executives as well as an increase in professional fees, conversion-related expenses and contract termination fees, including $6.9 million related to Guaranty's debit card provider expensed in the third quarter of 2019. Off-setting these decreases are elevated expense in 2020 for the terminated merger including $8.8 million in integration costs and $6.0 million in legal and advisory fees.
Other. Other noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $5.1 million, or 12.9%, compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in noninterest expense is primarily due to lower deposit-related expenses and auto and travel expenses due to the pandemic disruption in 2020. In addition, the decrease is reflective of an operations loss recognized in second quarter 2019 which was partially recovered in second quarter 2020, resulting in a net total loss of $974 thousand for the year over year period.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $51.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is an effective tax rate of 20.3%. Income tax expense was $53.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is an effective tax rate of 21.7%. The lower effective tax rate compared to prior year is primarily a result of the 2019 provision to return adjustment related to state income tax and an adjustment to the Company's estimated 2020 state income tax rates recorded in second quarter 2020, as well as an $856 thousand tax benefit recorded in first quarter 2020 due to the net operating loss carryback provision allowed through the enactment of the CARES Act. In addition, the change in the year over year period is reflective of a higher effective tax rate in 2019 due to $1.4 million in deductibility limitations related to the change in control payments made to Guaranty employees and nondeductible acquisition expenses in addition to increased state income tax expense for the period.
No valuation allowance for deferred tax assets was recorded at December 31, 2020 and 2019, as management believes it is more likely than not that all of the deferred tax assets will be realized.
Quarterly Financial Information
The following table presents certain unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information regarding the Company’s results of operations for the quarters ended December 31, September 30, June 30 and March 31 in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This information should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition discusses and analyzes the financial condition of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and certain changes in that financial condition from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020.
Assets
The Company's total assets increased by $2.8 billion, or 18.7%, to $17.8 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $15.0 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase is due primarily to deposit organic growth in addition to loan and deposit growth related to the PPP program.
Loan Portfolio
The Company’s loan portfolio is the largest category of the Company’s earning assets. The following table presents the balance and associated percentage of each major category in the Company’s loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016:
____________
(1) Includes mortgage warehouse purchase loans of $1.5 billion, $687.3 million, $170.3 million, $164.7 million and $0 at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(2) Includes SBA PPP loans of $804.4 million with net deferred loan fees of $9.8 million at December 31, 2020.
(3) Includes loans held for sale of $82.6 million, $35.6 million, $32.7 million, $39.2 million and $9.8 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company's loan portfolio, net of the allowance for loan losses and deferred fees, totaled $13.1 billion, which is an increase of 12.6% over total net loans as of December 31, 2019. The majority of the increase was due to the addition of $804.4 million in PPP loans funded during second quarter as well as an increase of $766.5 million year over year in the volume of mortgage warehouse purchase loans.
The principal categories of the Company’s loan portfolio are discussed below:
Commercial loans. The Company provides a mix of variable and fixed rate commercial loans. The loans are typically made to small-and medium-sized manufacturing, wholesale, retail, energy related service businesses and medical practices for working capital needs and business expansions. Commercial loans generally include lines of credit and loans with maturities of five years or less. The loans are generally made with operating cash flows as the primary source of repayment, but may also include collateralization by inventory, accounts receivable, equipment and/or personal guarantees. Additionally, our commercial loan portfolio includes loans made to customers in the energy industry, which is a complex, technical and cyclical industry. Experienced bankers with specialized energy lending experience originate our energy loans. Companies in this industry produce, extract, develop, exploit and explore for oil and natural gas. Loans are primarily collateralized with proven producing oil and gas reserves based on a technical evaluation of these reserves. The Company has a mortgage warehouse purchase program providing mortgage inventory financing for residential mortgage loans originated by mortgage banker clients across a broad geographic scale. Proceeds from the sale of mortgages is the primary source of repayment for warehouse inventory financing via approved investor takeout commitments. These loans are reported as commercial loans since the loans are secured by notes receivable, not real estate.
With the passage of the CARES Act PPP, administered by the Small Business Administration (SBA), the Company has participated in originating loans to its customers through the program. PPP loans have terms of two to five years and earn interest at 1%. In return for processing and funding the loans, the SBA paid the lenders a processing fee tiered by the size of the loan. Based on published program guidelines, these loans funded through the PPP are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government. Management believes that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program with any remaining loan balances, after the forgiveness of any amounts, still fully guaranteed by the SBA.
The Company’s commercial loan portfolio increased $1.4 billion, or 57.2%, to $3.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, from $2.5 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase in this portfolio type for the current year is primarily due to the addition of PPP loans as well as an increase in the warehouse portfolio for the year over year period.
Commercial real estate loans (CRE). The Company’s commercial real estate loans generally are used by customers to finance their purchase of office buildings, retail centers, medical facilities and mixed-use buildings. Approximately 29% and 30% of the Company’s commercial real estate loans as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were owner-occupied. Such loans generally involve less risk than loans on investment property. The Company expects that commercial real estate loans will continue to be a significant portion of the Company’s total loan portfolio and an area of emphasis in the Company’s lending operations.
Commercial real estate loans increased $224.0 million, or 3.8%, to $6.1 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $5.9 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase was due to organic loan growth in this loan type during the year.
Commercial construction, land and land development loans. The Company’s commercial construction, land and land development loans comprise loans to fund commercial construction, land acquisition and real estate development construction. Although the Company continues to make commercial construction loans, land acquisition and land development loans on a selective basis, the Company does not expect the Company’s lending in this area to result in this category of loans being a significantly greater portion of the Company’s total loan portfolio.
Commercial construction, land and land development loans increased $9.2 million, or 0.7% to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020 from $1.2 billion at December 31, 2019, through organic loan growth in this type of loan.
Residential Real Estate Loans. The Company’s residential real estate loans, excluding mortgage loans held for sale, are primarily made with respect to and secured by single-family homes, which are both owner-occupied and investor owned and include a limited amount of home equity loans, with a relatively small average loan balance spread across many individual borrowers. The Company offers a variety of mortgage loan portfolio products which generally are amortized over five to thirty years. Loans collateralized by 1-4 family residential real estate generally have been originated in amounts of no more than 80% of appraised value. The Company requires mortgage title insurance and hazard insurance. The Company retains the majority of these portfolio loans for its own account rather than selling them into the secondary market. By doing so, the Company incurs interest rate risk as well as the risks associated with nonpayments on such loans. The Company’s loan portfolio also includes a number of multi-family housing real estate loans. The Company expects that the Company will continue to make residential real estate loans, with an emphasis on single-family housing loans, so long as housing values in the Company’s markets do not deteriorate from current prevailing levels and the Company is able to make such loans consistent with the Company’s current credit and underwriting standards.
The Company’s residential real estate loan portfolio declined by $115.8 million, or 7.5%, to a balance of $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2019. The decrease in this category was primarily a result of higher than normal payoffs due to refinancings because of the historically low mortgage rate environment.
Single-Family Interim Construction Loans. The Company makes single-family interim construction loans to home builders and individuals to fund the construction of single-family residences with the understanding that such loans will be repaid from the proceeds of the sale of the homes by builders or, in the case of individuals building their own homes, with the proceeds of a permanent mortgage loan. Such loans are secured by the real property being built and are made based on the Company’s assessment of the value of the property on an as-completed basis. The Company expects to continue to make single-family interim construction loans so long as demand for such loans continues and the market for single-family housing and the values of such properties remain stable or continue to improve in the Company’s markets.
The balance of single-family interim construction loans in the Company’s loan portfolio decreased by $51.5 million, or 13.6%, to $326.6 million as of December 31, 2020 from $378.1 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease in this category was due to more borrowers opting for a one time close product rather than traditional interim construction loans because of low mortgage rates.
Other Categories of Loans. Other categories of loans included in the Company’s loan portfolio include agricultural loans made to farmers and ranchers relating to their operations and consumer loans made to individuals for personal purposes, including automobile purchase loans and personal loans. None of these categories of loans represents more than 1% of the Company’s total loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and such categories continue to be a very small percentage of the Company's total loan portfolio.
The following table sets forth the contractual maturities, including scheduled principal repayments, of the Company’s loan portfolio (which includes balloon notes) and the distribution between fixed and adjustable interest rate loans as of December 31, 2020:
Asset Quality
Nonperforming Assets. The Company has established procedures to assist the Company in maintaining the overall quality of the Company’s loan portfolio. In addition, the Company has adopted underwriting guidelines to be followed by the Company’s lending officers and require significant senior management review of proposed extensions of credit exceeding certain thresholds. When delinquencies exist, the Company rigorously monitors the levels of such delinquencies for any negative or adverse trends. The Company’s loan review procedures include approval of lending policies and underwriting guidelines by Independent Bank’s board of directors, an annual independent loan review, approval of large credit relationships by Independent Bank’s Executive Loan Committee and loan quality documentation procedures. The Company, like other financial institutions, is subject to the risk that its loan portfolio will be subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
The Company discontinues accruing interest on a loan when management of the Company believes, after considering the Company’s collection efforts and other factors, that the borrower’s financial condition is such that collection of interest of that loan is doubtful. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status or charged-off at an earlier date if collection of principal or interest is considered doubtful. All interest accrued but not collected for loans, including troubled debt restructurings, that are placed on nonaccrual status or charged off is reversed against interest income. Cash collections on nonaccrual loans are generally credited to the loan receivable balance, and no interest income is recognized on those loans until the principal balance has been collected. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured. The Company did not make any changes in the Company’s nonaccrual policy during the years of 2020 or 2019.
Placing a loan on nonaccrual status has a two-fold impact on net interest earnings. First, it may cause a charge against earnings for the interest which had been accrued in the current year but not yet collected on the loan. Second, it eliminates future interest income with respect to that particular loan from the Company’s revenues. Interest on such loans are not recognized until the entire principal is collected or until the loan is returned to performing status.
Real estate the Company has acquired as a result of foreclosure or by deed-in-lieu of foreclosure is classified as other real estate owned until sold. The Company’s policy is to initially record other real estate owned at fair value less estimated costs to sell at the date of foreclosure. After foreclosure, other real estate is carried at the lower of the initial carrying amount (fair value less estimated costs to sell or lease), or at the value determined by subsequent appraisals or internal valuations of the other real estate.
The Company obtains appraisals of real property that secure loans and may update such appraisals of real property securing loans categorized as nonperforming loans and potential problem loans, in each case as required by regulatory guidelines. In instances where updated appraisals reflect reduced collateral values, an evaluation of the borrower’s overall financial condition is made to determine the need, if any, for possible write-downs or appropriate additions to the allowance for loan losses.
The Company periodically modifies loans to extend the term or make other concessions to help a borrower with a deteriorating financial condition stay current on their loan and to avoid foreclosure. The Company generally does not forgive principal or interest on loans or modify the interest rates on loans to rates that are below market rates. Under applicable accounting standards, such loan modifications are generally classified as troubled debt restructurings.
As a result of the current economic environment caused by the COVID-19 outbreak, the Company has worked with its borrowers on an individual, one-on-one basis to assess and understand the impact of pandemic-related economic hardship on the borrowers and provide prudent modifications allowing for short-term payment deferrals or other payment relief where appropriate. The deferred payments along with interest accrued during the deferral period are due and payable on the maturity date. Under applicable accounting and regulatory guidance, such modifications are not considered troubled debt restructurings. It is possible that the Company’s asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 are prolonged. Refer to the above discussion under "Recent Developments: COVID-19, Lending Operations and Accommodations to Borrowers" and Note 6, Loans, Net and Allowance for Loan Losses, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional discussion related to COVID-19 loan modifications.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the Company’s nonperforming assets among the Company’s different asset categories as of the dates indicated. The Company classifies nonperforming loans (excluding loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality) as nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest or loans modified under restructurings as a result of the borrower experiencing financial difficulties. The balances of nonperforming loans reflect the net investment in these assets, including deductions for purchase discounts.
____________
(1) Nonaccrual loans include troubled debt restructurings of $578 thousand, $668 thousand, $506 thousand, $1.0 million and $209 thousand as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively and excludes loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality of $6.7 million, $10.9 million, $7.0 million, $7.9 million and $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(2) Excluding mortgage warehouse purchase loans of $1.5 billion, $687.3 million, $170.3 million, $164.7 million and $0 as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
The Company had $49.0 million and $11.5 million in loans on nonaccrual status (excluding loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to additions of two energy credits totaling $22.8 million, two CRE credits totaling $15.9 million and a commercial loan totaling $1.7 million, offset by $2.2 million in charge-offs and a $1.9 million CRE loan that moved to OREO. The increase in troubled debt restructurings was primarily due to a $1.5 million CRE loan modified during first quarter 2020. Loans delinquent 90 days or more and still accruing decreased to $433 thousand as of December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to a $14.1 million energy loan that was moved to nonaccrual during first quarter 2020 with a subsequent charge-off of $3.5 million during fourth quarter 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had other real estate owned and other repossessed assets of $589 thousand, which is a decrease from the balance of $4.9 million for prior year. The decrease is primarily due to sales of $4.8 million.
The Company did not recognize any interest income on nonaccrual loans during 2020 or 2019 while the loans were in nonaccrual status. The amount of interest the Company included in the Company’s net interest income for the years ended 2020 and 2019 with respect to nonperforming loans was $1.2 million and $901 thousand, respectively. Additional interest income that the Company would have recognized on these nonperforming loans had they been current in accordance with their original terms was $356 thousand and $481 thousand during the years ended 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a total of 115 substandard and doubtful loans with an aggregate principal balance of $158.2 million that were not currently impaired loans or purchase credit impaired loans, nonaccrual loans, 90 days past due loans or troubled debt restructurings, but where the Company had information about possible credit problems of the borrowers that caused the Company’s management to have serious concerns as to the ability of the borrowers to comply with present loan repayment terms and that could result in those loans becoming nonaccrual loans, 90 days past due loans or troubled debt restructurings in the future.
The Company generally continues to use the classification of acquired loans classified as nonaccrual or 90 days and accruing as of the acquisition date. The Company does not classify acquired loans as troubled debt restructurings, or TDRs, unless the Company modifies an acquired loan subsequent to acquisition that meets the TDR criteria. Reported delinquency of the Company’s purchased loan portfolio is based upon the contractual terms of the loans.
The Company utilizes an asset risk classification system in compliance with guidelines established by the state and federal banking regulatory agencies as part of the Company’s efforts to improve asset quality. In connection with examinations of insured institutions, examiners have the authority to identify problem assets and, if appropriate, classify them. There are three classifications for problem assets: “substandard,” “doubtful,” and “loss.” Substandard assets have one or more defined weaknesses and are characterized by the distinct possibility that the insured institution will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected. Doubtful assets have the weaknesses of substandard assets with the additional characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full questionable and there is a high probability of loss based on currently existing facts, conditions and values. An asset classified as loss is not considered collectible and is of such little value that continuance as an asset is not warranted. The Company produces a problem asset report that is reviewed by Independent Bank’s board of directors monthly. That report also includes “pass/watch” loans and special mention. Pass/watch loans have a potential weakness that requires more frequent monitoring. Special mention credits have weaknesses that require attention. Officers and senior management review these loans monthly to determine if a more severe rating is warranted.
Allowance for Loan Losses. As discussed elsewhere in this discussion and analysis, the Company elected to defer the adoption of the CECL accounting standard and has continued its consistent application of the incurred loss method for estimating the allowance for loan losses and applicable provision in 2020. The allowance for loan losses is established through charges to earnings in the form of a provision for loan losses. The Company’s allowance for loan losses represents the Company’s estimate of probable and reasonably estimable loan losses inherent in loans held for investment as of the respective balance sheet date. The Company’s methodology for assessing the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses includes a general allowance for performing loans, which are grouped based on similar characteristics, and an allocated allowance for individual impaired loans. Actual credit losses or recoveries are charged or credited directly to the allowance.
The Company establishes a general allowance for loan losses that the Company believes to be adequate for the losses the Company estimates to be inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio. In making the Company’s evaluation of the credit risk of the loan portfolio, the Company considers factors such as the volume, growth and composition of the loan portfolio, the effect of changes in the local real estate market on collateral values, trends in past dues, the experience of the lender, changes in lending policy, the effects on the loan portfolio of current economic indicators and their probable impact on borrowers, historical loan loss experience, the amount of nonperforming loans and related collateral and the evaluation of the Company’s loan portfolio by the loan review function.
The Company may assign a specific allowance to individual loans based on an impairment analysis. Loans are considered impaired when it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. The amount of impairment is based on an analysis of the most probable source of repayment, including the present value of the loan’s expected future cash flows, the estimated market value or the fair value of the underlying collateral. Loans evaluated for impairment include all commercial, real estate, agricultural loans and TDRs.
The Company follows a loan review program to evaluate the credit risk in the loan portfolio. Throughout the loan review process, the Company maintains an internally classified loan watch list, which, along with a delinquency list of loans, helps management assess the overall quality of the Company’s loan portfolio and the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Charge-offs occur when the Company deems a loan to be uncollectible.
Analysis of the Allowance for Loan Losses. The following table sets forth the allowance for loan losses by category of loan:
____________
(1) Represents the percentage of Independent’s total loans included in each loan category.
As of December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses amounted to $87.8 million, or 0.76%, of total loans held for investment, excluding mortgage warehouse purchase loans, compared with $51.5 million, or 0.47%, as of December 31, 2019. The dollar and percentage increase during 2020 is primarily due to added reserves for economic concerns related to the pandemic as well as increases in specific reserves and charge-offs in the year over year period. As of December 31, 2020, the discount on acquired loans totaled $59.3 million compared to $93.6 million as of December 31, 2019.
The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of nonperforming loans decreased from 193.35% at December 31, 2019, to 170.80% at December 31, 2020, due to increase in total nonperforming loans primarily resulting from additions to nonaccrual for energy credits totaling $22.8 million and CRE credits totaling $15.9 million as discussed above under the nonperforming asset section. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had made a specific allowance for loan losses of $8.5 million for impaired loans totaling $64.4 million, compared with a specific allowance of $358 thousand for impaired loans totaling $12.1 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in specific reserves was due primarily to additions of $7.2 million on two energy credits and $1.1 million on a commercial loan that were added to the impaired listing during 2020. The increase in impaired loans during 2020 was primarily due to the $38.7 million additions in nonaccrual loans noted above, offset by a $1.9 million commercial real estate loan moved to other real estate and subsequently sold during 2020.
Although the allowance for loan losses to nonperforming loans has decreased over the periods presented in the Company’s consolidated financial statements appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company believes the allowance is appropriate and has been derived from consistent application of its methodology. The allowance is primarily related to loans evaluated collectively and will continue to increase as the Company’s loan portfolio grows. Additional provision expense will vary depending on future credit quality trends within the portfolio. Refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 6, Loans, Net and Allowance for Loan Losses, in the notes to the Company's audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional details of the allowance for loan losses.
The following table provides an analysis of the provisions for loan losses, net charge-offs and recoveries for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016 and the effects of those items on the Company’s allowance for loan losses:
____________
(1) Calculation excludes loans held for sale and mortgage warehouse purchase loans from total loans.
The Company’s ratio of allowance to loan losses to total loans as of December 31, 2020 was 0.76%, increasing from 0.47% at December 31, 2019. The increase in the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans from prior year reflects increases in reserves due to the pandemic as well as increased specific reserves. The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to 0.05% from 0.07% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in charge-offs during 2020 was primarily related to elevated energy charge-offs during 2019.
Securities Available for Sale
The Company’s investment strategy aims to maximize earnings while maintaining liquidity in securities with minimal credit, interest rate and duration risk. The types and maturities of securities purchased are primarily based on the Company’s current and projected liquidity and interest rate sensitivity positions. The following table sets forth the book value, which is equal to fair market value because all investment securities the Company held were classified as available for sale as of the applicable date, and the percentage of each category of securities as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The Company recognized net gains on the sale of securities of $382 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net gains on the sale of securities of $275 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. Securities represented 6.5% and 7.3% of the Company’s total assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Certain investment securities are valued at less than their historical cost. Management evaluates securities for other-than-temporary impairment (OTTI) on at least a quarterly basis and more frequently when economic or market conditions warrant such an evaluation. Management does not intend to sell any debt securities it holds and believes the Company more likely than not will not be required to sell any debt securities it holds before their anticipated recovery, at which time the Company will receive full value for the securities. Management has the ability and intent to hold the securities classified as available for sale that were in a loss position as of December 31, 2020 for a period of time sufficient for an entire recovery of the cost basis of the securities. For those securities that are impaired, the unrealized losses are largely due to interest rate changes. The fair value is expected to recover as the securities approach their maturity date. Management believes any impairment in the Company’s securities at December 31, 2020 is temporary and no other-than-temporary impairment has been realized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The following table sets forth the book value, scheduled maturities and weighted average yields for the Company’s investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020:
The following table summarizes the amortized cost of securities classified as available for sale and their approximate fair values as of the dates shown:
The Company’s available for sale securities, carried at fair value, increased $67.8 million, or 6.2%, during 2020. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to investing excess liquidity balances.
Residential pass-through securities (mortgage backed securities) are securities that have been developed by pooling a number of real estate mortgages that are principally issued by federal agencies. These securities are deemed to have high credit ratings, and minimum regular monthly cash flows of principal and interest are guaranteed by the issuing agencies. Unlike U.S. Treasury and U.S. government agency securities, which have a lump sum payment at maturity, mortgage-backed securities provide cash flows from regular principal and interest payments and principal prepayments throughout the lives of the securities. Premiums and discounts on mortgage-backed securities are amortized over the expected life of the security and may be impacted by prepayments. As such, mortgage-backed securities which are purchased at a premium will generally suffer decreasing net yields as interest rates drop because home owners tend to refinance their mortgages resulting in prepayments and an acceleration of premium amortization, Securities purchased at a discount will generally obtain higher net yields in a decreasing interest rate environment as prepayments result in acceleration of discount accretion.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents increased by $1.2 billion, or 221.0% to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2020 from $565.2 million at December 31, 2019, of which $1.1 billion was held with the Federal Reserve Bank at year end 2020. Cash and cash equivalent balances can vary due to cash needs and volatility of several large title company and commercial accounts. Balances as of December 31, 2020 is due to significantly increased organic deposit growth during the year over year period.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration paid over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The Company’s total goodwill was $994.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Liabilities
Total liabilities increased $2.6 billion, or 20.8%, to $15.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, from $12.6 billion as of December 31, 2019, primarily due to increased deposits of $2.5 billion mainly as a result of organic growth and $127.5 million, net of issuance costs, related to subordinated debentures issued in third quarter 2020.
Deposits
Deposits represent the Company’s primary source of funds. The Company continues to focus on growing core deposits through the Company’s relationship driven banking philosophy and community-focused marketing programs.
Total deposits increased $2.5 billion, or 20.6%, to $14.4 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $11.9 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to organic growth as well as approximately $395 million of commercial deposits related to PPP loans that were funded by the Company in the second quarter and remain on deposit at year end 2020. Brokered deposits totaled $1.5 billion and $894.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, noninterest-bearing demand, interest-bearing checking, savings deposits and limited access money market accounts accounted for 90.2% and 84.7%, respectively, of the Company’s total deposits, while individual retirement accounts and certificates of deposit made up 9.8% and 15.3%, respectively, of total deposits. Noninterest-bearing demand deposits totaled $4.2 billion, or 28.9% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2020, compared with $3.2 billion, or 27.1% of total deposits, as of December 31, 2019. The total cost of deposits decreased 49 basis points from 1.08% at December 31, 2019 to 0.59% at December 31, 2020. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits was 0.83% per annum for 2020 compared with 1.48% for 2019. The decrease in cost of funds is primarily due to rate cuts on the Company's deposit products after the Federal Reserve reduced the target rate to zero (0) to 25 basis points.
The following table summarizes the Company’s average deposit balances and weighted average rates for the periods presented:
The following table sets forth the maturity of time deposits (including IRA deposits) of $100,000 or more as of December 31, 2020:
Short-Term Borrowings
The Company’s deposits have historically provided the Company with a major source of funds to meet the daily liquidity needs of the Company’s customers and fund growth in earning assets. However, from time to time the Company may also engage in short-term borrowings. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $31.5 million and $124.5 million, respectively, in short-term borrowings outstanding, of which $25.0 million and $100.0 million were short-term FHLB advances and $6.5 million and $24.5 million were borrowings against its revolving line of credit at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
These were recorded on the balance sheet under FHLB advances and other borrowings. The Company has not historically needed to engage in significant short-term borrowing through sources such as federal funds purchased, securities sold under agreements to repurchase or Federal Reserve Discount Window advances to meet the daily liquidity needs of the Company’s customers or fund growth in earning assets.
FHLB Advances
In addition to deposits, the Company utilizes FHLB advances either as a short-term funding source or a longer-term funding source and to manage the Company’s interest rate risk on the Company’s loan portfolio. FHLB advances can be particularly attractive as a longer-term funding source to balance interest rate sensitivity and reduce interest rate risk.
The Company’s FHLB borrowings totaled $375.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared with $325.0 million as of December 31, 2019. The change in FHLB borrowings from prior year reflects the use of short-term FHLB advances as needed for liquidity and to fund mortgage warehouse purchase loans. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $4.1 billion and $3.7 billion, respectively, in unused and available advances from the FHLB. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s FHLB advances are collateralized by assets, including a blanket lien on certain loans along with specific listed loans for an aggregate available carrying value of $5.7 billion and FHLB stock. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $1.2 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively, in undisbursed advance commitments (letters of credit) with the FHLB. The FHLB letters of credit were obtained in lieu of pledging securities to secure public fund deposits that are over the FDIC insurance limit. There were no disbursements against the advance commitments as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The following table provides a summary of the Company’s FHLB advances at the dates indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, the scheduled maturities of the Company’s FHLB advances were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Other Long-Term Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $305.7 million and $177.8 million, respectively, of long-term indebtedness (other than FHLB advances and junior subordinated debentures) outstanding, which included subordinated debentures. The increase from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was due to $127.5 million, net of issuance costs, of subordinated debentures issued during third quarter 2020 as well as the discount accretion and fee amortization on the debentures.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s long-term gross indebtedness of $110.0 million, $30.0 million, $40.0 million and $130.0 million will mature on August 1, 2024, December 31, 2027, July 20, 2026, and September 15, 2030, respectively, with the $30.0 million, $40.0 million and $130.0 million debentures having an optional redemption date of December 31, 2022, July 20, 2021 and September 15, 2025, respectively.
Junior Subordinated Debentures
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had outstanding an aggregate principal amount of $57.3 million of nine series of junior subordinated securities issued to nine unconsolidated subsidiary trusts. Each series of debentures was purchased by one of the trusts with the net proceeds of the issuance by such trust of floating rate trust preferred securities. These junior subordinated debentures are unsecured and will mature between March 2033 and September 2037. Each of the series of debentures bears interest at a per annum rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a spread that ranges from 1.60% to 3.25%, with a weighted average rate of 2.74%. Interest on each series of these debentures is payable quarterly, although the Company may, from time to time defer the payment of interest on any series of these debentures. A deferral of interest payments would, however, restrict the Company’s right to declare and pay cash distributions, including dividends on the Company’s common stock, or making distributions with respect to any of the Company’s future debt instruments that rank equally or are junior to such debentures. The Company may redeem the debentures, which are intended to qualify as Tier 1 capital, at the Company’s option, subject to approval of the Federal Reserve.
Capital Resources and Liquidity Management
Capital Resources
The Company’s stockholders’ equity is influenced by the Company’s earnings, the sales and redemptions of common stock that the Company makes, stock based compensation expense, the dividends the Company pays on its common stock, and, to a lesser extent, any changes in unrealized holding gains or losses occurring with respect to the Company’s securities available for sale.
Total stockholder’s equity was $2.5 billion at December 31, 2020, compared with $2.3 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $175.6 million. The increase was primarily due to net income earned for the year totaling $201.2 million, stock based compensation of $8.5 million and an increase of $17.0 million in unrealized gain on available for sale securities offset by stock repurchased by the Company totaling $5.8 million and dividends paid of $45.3 million.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity refers to the measure of the Company’s ability to meet the cash flow requirements of depositors and borrowers, while at the same time meeting the Company’s operating, capital and strategic cash flow needs, all at a reasonable cost. The Company’s asset and liability management policy is intended to maintain adequate liquidity and, therefore, enhance the Company’s ability to raise funds to support asset growth, meet deposit withdrawals and lending needs, maintain reserve requirements, and otherwise sustain operations. The Company accomplishes this through management of the maturities of the Company’s interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The Company believes that the Company’s present position is adequate to meet the Company’s current and future liquidity needs.
The Company continuously monitors the Company’s liquidity position to ensure that assets and liabilities are managed in a manner that will meet all of the Company’s short-term and long-term cash requirements. The Company manages the Company’s liquidity position to meet the daily cash flow needs of customers, while maintaining an appropriate balance between assets and liabilities to meet the return on investment objectives of the Company’s shareholders. The Company also monitors its liquidity requirements in light of interest rate trends, changes in the economy, and the scheduled maturity and interest rate sensitivity of the investment and loan portfolios and deposits.
Liquidity risk management is an important element in the Company’s asset/liability management process. The Company’s short-term and long-term liquidity requirements are primarily to fund on-going operations, including payment of interest on deposits and debt, extensions of credit to borrowers, capital expenditures and shareholder dividends. These liquidity requirements are met primarily through cash flow from operations, redeployment of pre-paid and maturing balances in the Company’s loan and investment portfolios, debt financing and increases in customer deposits. The Company’s liquidity position is supported by management of liquid assets and liabilities and access to alternative sources of funds. Liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits in banks, federal funds sold, securities available for sale and maturing or prepaying balances in the Company’s investment and loan portfolios. Liquid liabilities include core deposits, brokered deposits, federal funds purchased, securities sold under repurchase agreements and other borrowings. Other sources of liquidity include the sale of loans, the ability to acquire additional national market non-core deposits, the issuance of additional collateralized borrowings such as FHLB advances, the issuance of debt securities, borrowings through the Federal Reserve’s discount window and the issuance of equity securities. For additional information regarding the Company’s operating, investing and financing cash flows, see the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows provided in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In addition to the liquidity provided by the sources described above, the Company maintains correspondent relationships with other banks in order to sell loans or purchase overnight funds should additional liquidity be needed. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company had established federal funds lines of credit with various unaffiliated banks totaling $365 million and $375 million, respectively. Based on the values of stock, securities, and loans pledged as collateral, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had additional borrowing capacity with the FHLB of $4.1 billion and $3.7 billion, respectively.
The Company also maintains a secured line of credit with the Federal Reserve Bank with an availability to borrow approximately $716.7 million and $895.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Approximately $1.0 billion and $1.2 billion of commercial loans were pledged as collateral at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. There were no borrowings against this line as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The Company also participates in an exchange that provides direct overnight borrowings with other financial institutions. The funds are provided on an unsecured basis. Borrowing availability totaled $694.0 million and $484.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. There were no borrowings as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company has a $100 million unsecured revolving line of credit with an unrelated commercial bank. The line bears interest at LIBOR plus 1.75% and matured on January 17, 2021. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the line had $6.5 million and $24.5 million outstanding, respectively. The Company is required to meet certain financial covenants on a quarterly basis, which includes maintaining $5 million in cash at Independent Bank Group and meeting minimum capital ratios and bears a non-usage fee of 0.30% per year on the unused commitment at the end of each fiscal quarter. On January 17, 2020, the line of credit was renewed. As of March 1, 2021, the Company had no borrowings outstanding against this line.
In April 2020, the Company began originating loans to qualified small businesses under the CARES Act PPP administered by the SBA. During April 2020, the Company borrowed a $300.0 million advance from the FHLB that provided supplemental funding for the PPP loan originations. The short-term, full-recourse advance bore interest at an annualized rate of 0.35% and expired on July 15, 2020. During second quarter 2020, the Company participated in the Federal Reserve's PPP Facility, which, through March 31, 2021, extends loans to banks who were loaning money to small businesses under the PPP. The amounts borrowed under the facility during second quarter 2020 totaled $7.6 million, bore interest at a rate of 0.35% and matured at the same time as the maturity date of the PPP loan pledged to secure the borrowing. As of the end of third quarter 2020, the Company had repaid all borrowings under the PPP Facility. Federal bank regulatory agencies issued an interim final rule that permits banks to neutralize the regulatory capital effects of participating in the PPP and the PPP Facility. Specifically, all PPP loans have a zero percent risk weight under applicable risk-based capital rules. Additionally, a bank may exclude all PPP loans pledged as collateral to the PPP Facility from its average total consolidated assets for the purposes of calculating its leverage ratio, while PPP loans that are not pledged as collateral to the PPP Facility will be included.
The Company is a corporation separate and apart from the Bank and, therefore, the Company must provide for the Company’s own liquidity. The Company’s main source of funding is dividends declared and paid to the Company by the Bank. Statutory and regulatory limitations exist that affect the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Company. Management believes that these limitations will not impact the Company’s ability to meet the Company’s ongoing short-term cash obligations. For additional information regarding dividend restrictions, see “Risk Factors-Risks Related to the Company’s Business” in Part I, Item 1A, and “Supervision and Regulation” under Part I, Item 1, “Business.”
Regulatory Capital Requirements
The Company’s capital management consists of providing equity to support the Company’s current and future operations. The Company is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by state and federal banking agencies, including the TDB, Federal Reserve and the FDIC. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements may prompt certain actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of the Company’s assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The Company’s capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. Tier 2 capital for the Company includes permissible portions of the Company's subordinated notes. The permissible portion of qualified subordinated notes decreases 20% per year during the final five years of the term of the notes.
The Company is subject to the Basel III regulatory capital framework (the Basel III Capital Rules). The Basel III Capital Rules require that the Company maintain a 2.5% capital conservation buffer above the minimum risk-based capital adequacy requirements. The capital conservation buffer is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress and requires increased capital levels for the purpose of capital distributions and other payments. Failure to meet the full amount of the buffer will result in restrictions on the Company's ability to make capital distributions, including dividend payments and stock repurchases and to pay discretionary bonuses to executive officers.
In connection with the adoption of the Basel III Capital Rules, we elected to opt-out of the requirement to include most components of accumulated other comprehensive income in regulatory capital. Accordingly, amounts reported as accumulated other comprehensive income/loss related to securities available for sale do not increase or reduce regulatory capital and are not included in the calculation of risk-based capital and leverage ratios. Regulatory agencies for banks and bank holding companies utilize capital guidelines designed to measure capital and take into consideration the risk inherent in both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet items. Please refer to Note 21, Regulatory Matters, in the notes to the Company's audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional details.
The FDIC has promulgated regulations setting the levels at which an insured institution such as the Bank would be considered well-capitalized, adequately capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized and critically undercapitalized. The Bank is considered well-capitalized for purposes of the applicable prompt corrective action regulations.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company and Bank exceeded the Basel III capital requirements under prompt corrective action and other regulatory requirements, as detailed in the table below.
Stock Repurchase Program. From time to time, the Company's board of directors has authorized stock repurchase programs which allow the Company to purchase its common stock generally over a one-year period at various prices in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. On October 22, 2020, the Company's board of directors authorized a $150.0 million stock repurchase program allowing the Company to purchase shares of its common stock through October 31, 2021. Under this program, the Company repurchased 109,548 shares at a total cost of $5.7 million through March 1, 2021. Under prior stock repurchase programs, the Company repurchased 897,738 shares of Company stock at a total cost of $49.0 million during 2019 and none during 2018. In July 2019, the federal bank regulators adopted final rules that, among other things, eliminated the standalone prior approval requirement for any repurchase of common stock. However, the Company remains subject to a Federal Reserve Board guideline that requires consultation with the Federal Reserve regarding plans for share repurchases on a quarterly basis. The Company’s repurchases of its common stock may be subject to a prior approval or notice requirement under other regulations, policies or supervisory expectations of the Federal Reserve Board. Any redemption or repurchase of preferred stock or subordinated debt remains subject to the prior approval of the Federal Reserve Board. See Part II, Item 5 - Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities, in this report for additional information.
Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of the Company’s operations, the Company enters into certain contractual obligations, such as obligations for operating leases and other arrangements with respect to deposit liabilities, FHLB advances and other borrowed funds. The Company believes that it will be able to meet its contractual obligations as they come due through the maintenance of adequate cash levels. The Company expects to maintain adequate cash levels through profitability, loan and securities repayment and maturity activity and continued deposit gathering activities. The Company has in place various borrowing mechanisms for both short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
The following table contains supplemental information regarding the Company’s total contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The Company believes that it will be able to meet its contractual obligations as they come due through the maintenance of adequate cash levels. The Company expects to maintain adequate cash levels through profitability, loan and securities repayment and maturity activity and continued deposit gathering activities. The Company has in place various borrowing mechanisms for both short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
Other than normal changes in the ordinary course of business and the items mentioned above, there have been no significant changes in the types of contractual obligations or amounts due since December 31, 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, the Company enters into various transactions, which, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, are not included in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. However, the Company has only limited off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on the Company’s financial condition, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. Independent Bank enters into these transactions to meet the financing needs of the Company’s customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and issue standby letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets.
Commitments to Extend Credit. Independent Bank enters into contractual commitments to extend credit, normally with fixed expiration dates or termination clauses, at specified rates and for specific purposes. Substantially all of Independent Bank’s commitments to extend credit are contingent upon customers maintaining specific credit standards at the time of loan funding. Independent Bank minimizes its exposure to loss under these commitments by subjecting them to credit approval and monitoring procedures.
Standby Letters of Credit. Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments that Independent Bank issues to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event the customer does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, Independent Bank would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments Independent Bank could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, the customer is obligated to reimburse Independent Bank for the amount paid under this standby letter of credit.
Commitments to extend credit were $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Outstanding standby letters of credit were $25.9 million and $23.4 million, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements. The Company manages the Company’s liquidity in light of the aggregate amounts of commitments to extend credit and outstanding standby letters of credit in effect from time to time to ensure that the Company will have adequate sources of liquidity to fund such commitments and honor drafts under such letters of credit.
The Company guarantees the distributions and payments for redemption or liquidation of the trust preferred securities issued by the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary trusts to the extent of funds held by the trusts. Although this guarantee is not separately recorded, the obligation underlying the guarantee is fully reflected on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets as junior subordinated debentures, which debentures are held by the Company’s subsidiary trusts. The junior subordinated debentures currently qualify as Tier 1 capital under the Federal Reserve capital adequacy guidelines. Refer to Note 12, Junior Subordinated Debentures, in the notes to the Company's audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional details.
Asset/Liability Management and Interest Rate Risk
The principal objective of the Company’s asset and liability management function is to evaluate the interest rate risk within the balance sheet and pursue a controlled assumption of interest rate risk while maximizing net income and preserving adequate levels of liquidity and capital. The Investment Committee of Independent Bank’s Board of Directors has oversight of Independent Bank’s asset and liability management function, which is managed by the Company’s Treasurer. The Treasurer meets with the Company’s Chief Financial Officer and senior executive management team regularly to review, among other things, the sensitivity of the Company’s assets and liabilities to market interest rate changes, local and national market conditions and market interest rates. That group also reviews the liquidity, capital, deposit mix, loan mix and investment positions of the Company.
The Company’s management and the Board of Directors are responsible for managing interest rate risk and employing risk management policies that monitor and limit the Company’s exposure to interest rate risk. Interest rate risk is measured using net interest income simulations and market value of portfolio equity analyses. These analyses use various assumptions, including the nature and timing of interest rate changes, yield curve shape, prepayments on loans, securities and deposits, deposit decay rates, pricing decisions on loans and deposits, reinvestment and replacement of asset and liability cash flows.
Instantaneous parallel rate shift scenarios are modeled and utilized to evaluate risk and establish exposure limits for acceptable changes in net interest margin. These scenarios, known as rate shocks, simulate an instantaneous change in interest rates and use various assumptions, including, but not limited to, prepayments on loans and securities, deposit decay rates, pricing decisions on loans and deposits, reinvestment and replacement of asset and liability cash flows.
The Company also analyzes the economic value of equity as a secondary measure of interest rate risk. This is a complementary measure to net interest income where the calculated value is the result of the market value of assets less the market value of liabilities. The economic value of equity is a longer term view of interest rate risk because it measures the present value of the future cash flows. The impact of changes in interest rates on this calculation is analyzed for the risk to the Company’s future earnings and is used in conjunction with the analyses on net interest income.
The Company conducts periodic analyses of its sensitivity to interest rate risks through the use of a third-party proprietary interest-rate sensitivity model. That model has been customized to the Company's specifications. The analyses conducted by use of that model are based on current information regarding the Company's actual interest-earnings assets, interest-bearing liabilities, capital and other financial information that it supplies. The Company uses the information in the model to estimate the its sensitivity to interest rate risk.
The Company’s interest rate risk model indicated that it was in an asset sensitive position in terms of interest rate sensitivity as of December 31, 2020. The table below illustrates the impact of an immediate and sustained 200 and 100 basis point increase and a 100 basis point decrease in interest rates on net interest income based on the interest rate risk model as of December 31, 2020:
The Company's model indicates that its projected balance sheet at December 31, 2020 is more asset sensitive in comparison to its balance sheet as of December 31, 2019. The shift to a more asset sensitive position was primarily due to an increase in the relative proportion of interest bearing deposits (primarily amounts held in an interest-bearing account at the Federal Reserve). Interest-bearing deposits are more immediately impacted by changes in interest rates in comparison to our other categories of earning assets.
These are good faith estimates and assume that the composition of the Company’s interest sensitive assets and liabilities existing at each year-end will remain constant over the relevant twelve-month measurement period and that changes in market interest rates are instantaneous and sustained across the yield curve regardless of duration of pricing characteristics of specific assets or liabilities. Also, this analysis does not contemplate any actions that the Company might undertake in response to changes in market interest rates. The Company believes these estimates are not necessarily indicative of what actually could occur in the event of immediate interest rate increases or decreases of this magnitude. As interest-bearing assets and liabilities re-price in different time frames and proportions to market interest rate movements, various assumptions must be made based on historical relationships of these variables in reaching any conclusion. Since these correlations are based on competitive and market conditions, the Company anticipates that its future results will likely be different from the foregoing estimates, and such differences could be material.
Many assumptions are used to calculate the impact of interest rate fluctuations. Actual results may be significantly different than the Company’s projections due to several factors, including the timing and frequency of rate changes, market conditions and the shape of the yield curve. The computations of interest rate risk shown above do not include actions that the Company’s management may undertake to manage the risks in response to anticipated changes in interest rates and actual results may also differ due to any actions taken in response to the changing rates.
As part of the Company’s asset/liability management strategy, the Company’s management has emphasized the origination of shorter duration loans to limit the negative exposure to rate changes. The average duration of the loan portfolio is less than four years. The Company’s strategy with respect to liabilities has been to emphasize transaction accounts, particularly noninterest or low interest-bearing nonmaturing deposit accounts, which are less sensitive to changes in interest rates. In response to this strategy, nonmaturing deposit accounts have been a large portion of total deposits and totaled 90.2% and 84.7% of total deposits as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company had brokered deposits, including CDARS totaling $1.5 billion and $894.1 million, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company intends to focus on the Company’s strategy of increasing noninterest or low interest-bearing nonmaturing deposit accounts, but may consider the use brokered deposits as a stable source of lower cost funding.
Inflation and Changing Prices
The largest component of earnings for the Company is net interest income, which is affected by changes in interest rates. Changes in interest rates are also influenced by changes in the rate of inflation, although not necessarily at the same rate or in the same magnitude. In management's opinion, changes in interest rates have a more significant impact to the Company's operations than do changes in inflation. However, inflation, does impact the operating costs of the Company, primarily employment costs and other services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the Company’s reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under current circumstances, results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. The Company evaluates its estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Accounting policies, as described in detail in the notes to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements are an integral part of the Company’s financial statements. A thorough understanding of these accounting policies is essential when reviewing the Company’s reported results of operations and the Company’s financial position. The Company believes that the critical accounting policies and estimates discussed below require the Company to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain. Changes in these estimates, that are likely to occur from period to period, or the use of different estimates that the Company could have reasonably used in the current period, would have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
Acquired Loans. The Company’s accounting policies require that the Company evaluates all acquired loans for evidence of deterioration in credit quality since origination and to evaluate whether it is probable that the Company will collect all contractually required payments from the borrower.
Acquired loans from the transactions accounted for as a business combination include both loans with evidence of credit deterioration since their origination date and performing loans. The Company accounts for performing loans under ASC Paragraph 310-20, Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs, with the related difference in the initial fair value and unpaid principal balance (the discount) recognized as interest income on a level yield basis over the life of the loan. The Company accounts for the nonperforming loans acquired in accordance with ASC Paragraph 310-30, Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality. At the date of the acquisition, acquired loans are recorded at their fair value with no valuation allowance.
For purchase credit impaired loans, the Company recognizes the difference between the undiscounted cash flows the Company expects (at the time the Company acquires the loan) to be collected and the investment in the loan, or the “accretable yield,” as interest income using the interest method over the life of the loan. The Company does not recognize contractually required payments for interest and principal that exceed undiscounted cash flows expected at acquisition, or the “nonaccretable difference,” as a yield adjustment, loss accrual or valuation allowance. Increases in the expected cash flows subsequent to the initial investment are recognized prospectively through adjustment of the yield on the loan over the loan’s remaining life, while decreases in expected cash flows are recognized as impairment. Valuation allowances on these impaired loans reflect only losses incurred after the acquisition.
Upon an acquisition, the Company generally continues to use the classification of acquired loans classified nonaccrual or 90 days and still accruing. The Company does not classify acquired loans as TDRs unless the Company modifies an acquired loan subsequent to acquisition that meets the TDR criteria. Reported delinquency of the Company’s purchased loan portfolio is based upon the contractual terms of the loans.
Allowance for Loan Losses. ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires a new credit loss methodology, the current expected credit loss (CECL) model, became effective for the Company on January 1, 2020. As provided to financial institutions under the CARES Act enacted on March 27, 2020 and as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 signed into law on December 27, 2020, the Company elected to defer the adoption of the current expected credit loss (CECL) accounting standard and has continued its consistent application of the incurred loss method for estimating its allowance for loan losses and provision for 2020. The Company adopted the CECL accounting standard as of January 1, 2021. Refer to Note 2, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, in the notes to the Company's consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
The allowance for loan losses represents management’s estimate of probable and reasonably estimable credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio. In determining the allowance, the Company estimates losses on individual impaired loans, or groups of loans which are not impaired, where the probable loss can be identified and reasonably estimated. On a quarterly basis, the Company assesses the risk inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio based on qualitative and quantitative trends in the portfolio, including the internal risk classification of loans, historical loss rates, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, industry or borrower concentrations, delinquency trends, detailed reviews of significant loans with identified weaknesses and the impacts of local, regional and national economic factors on the quality of the loan portfolio. Based on this analysis, the Company records a provision for loan losses in order to maintain the allowance at appropriate levels.
Determining the amount of the allowance is considered a critical accounting estimate, as it requires significant judgment and the use of subjective measurements, including management’s assessment of overall portfolio quality. The Company maintains the allowance at an amount the Company believes is sufficient to provide for estimated losses inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio at each balance sheet date, and fluctuations in the provision for loan losses may result from management’s assessment of the adequacy of the allowance. Changes in these estimates and assumptions are possible and may have a material impact on the Company’s allowance, and therefore the Company’s financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. The excess purchase price over the fair value of net assets from acquisitions, or goodwill, is evaluated for impairment at least annually and on an interim basis if an event or circumstance indicates that it is likely an impairment has occurred. The Company first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then performing a quantitative impairment test is unnecessary. If the Company concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform an impairment test by calculating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing the fair value with the carrying amount of the reporting unit. The Company performs its impairment test annually as of December 31. During the period ended March 31, 2020, the economic turmoil and market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic crisis resulted in a substantial decrease in the Company's stock price and market capitalization. Management believed such decrease was a triggering indicator requiring an interim goodwill impairment quantitative analysis which resulted in no impairment charge for the period ended March 31, 2020. Subsequently, the Company's stock price and market capitalization has seen continued improvement through December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to the Company's consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Determining the fair value of goodwill is considered a critical accounting estimate because the allocation of the fair value of goodwill to assets and liabilities requires significant management judgment and the use of subjective measurements. Variability in the market and changes in assumptions or subjective measurements used to allocate fair value are reasonably possible and may have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
Core deposit intangibles and other acquired customer relationship intangibles lack physical substance but can be distinguished from goodwill because of contractual or other legal rights or because the asset is capable of being sold or exchanged either on its own or in combination with a related contract, asset, or liability. Other intangible assets are being amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives ranging from ten to thirteen years. Other intangible assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable from future undiscounted cash flows. If impaired, the assets are recorded at fair value.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has evaluated new accounting pronouncements that have recently been issued and have determined that there are no new accounting pronouncements that should be described in this section that will materially impact the Company’s operations, financial condition or liquidity in future periods. Refer to Note 2, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that have been adopted by the Company or that will require enhanced disclosures in the Company’s financial statements in future periods.