Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which are based on our assumptions about the future of our business. Our actual results will likely differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. Please read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included at the beginning of this annual report for additional information.
About the Company
iCoreConnect Inc., (the “Company”), a Nevada Corporation, builds secure cloud-based HIPAA compliant communications systems, productivity and workflow software focused on healthcare, although the core technology can be adopted to other vertical markets that require a high degree of secure data communication, such as the legal, financial and education fields.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, and shortly thereafter, we expanded our suite of software products, acquired new technology and expanded our offerings to include managed IT services (MSaaS), including HIPAA compliant backup and storage.
In April 2019, the Company acquired technology and certain other assets from ClariCare, Inc. ClariCare had created a cloud-based dental analytics and practice management software which empowers dentists to manage their practices more efficiently.The acquisition of ClariCare’s technology is now being developed by the Company and rebranded as iCoreHuddle. iCoreHuddle is a revenue optimizer tool that connects to many popular practice management and EHR systems.It provides the practice with a dashboard containing various metrics, analytics, and key performance indicators.iCoreHuddle provides a daily view of the patient schedules, their outstanding balances, open treatment plans, recall information, procedure information and the amount of remaining insurance benefits available.The software provides a dashboard to easily view the revenue potential of each patient as well as one-click access to the patient’s insurance eligibility including a detailed benefits and deductibles report.The software increases the workflow efficiency of the practice with a user-friendly dashboard that allows the practice to make informed real-time decisions on a host of data points.
During 2019 we developed our newest product iCoreRx, a fully HIPAA compliant electronic ePrescription software that integrates with popular Practice Management and EHR systems. The software can also be a stand-alone product.The software is cloud based allowing providers flexibility and freedom to access the software anytime or anywhere they have an internet connection.There is a built-in drug and medication directory that provides clear, concise, point-of-care drug information including dosing, warning and precautions, as well as clinical content.iCoreRx provides a doctor’s “favorites” list, drug interactions, and drug allergy interactions.Within the software we provide a medication and drug history giving the doctor a more complete picture of a patient’s medication history for better informed, efficient and safer care decisions.
iCorePDMP - is an add-on to our iCoreRx software that seamlessly integrates with state databases to automate prescription drug monitoring.Providers in many states are required to check the patient’s Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP/PMP) medication history before prescribing controlled substances.This service provides a one-click real-time access to the state databases without the need to manually enter data and provides access to PDMP data including a patient’s health medication history.The state PDMP sites may provide Narx Scores and an interactive visualization of usage patterns to help the prescriber identify potential risk factors.
iCoreRx software has been selected by 13 associations, including the North Carolina Dental Society, Texas Dental Association Perks Program, and Virginia Dental Services Corporation as their preferred choice of software for electronic prescribing.
SaaS Offerings
The Company currently markets eleven different customizable secure HIPAA compliant cloud-based SaaS offerings: iCoreExchange, iCoreCodeGenius, iCoreSecure, iCoreMD, iCoreDental, iCoreMobile, iCoreHuddle, iCoreRx, iCorePDMP, iCoreEPCS, and iCorePay.
Managed IT Services (MSP and MSaaS)
On January 3, 2020, the Company purchased the assets of Computer Plumber, LLC, doing business as TrinIT (“TrinIT”), an IT service company located in the Concord, North Carolina area to complement our technology line up.
The trend in IT Services companies for over a decade has been to move away from a “Break/Fix '' model to a “Managed Service Provider (MSP)” model with recurring revenue. TrinIT was an early adopter operating in the MSP and MSaaS market.
The MSP/MSaaS approach, by using preventative measures, keeps computers and networks up and running while data is accessible and safeguarded. Installation of critical patches and updates to virus protection are automated. Systems are monitored and backed up in real-time. They are fixed or upgraded before they cause a service disruption. A Unified Threat Management solution is deployed to protect against virus, malware, SPAM, phishing and ransomware attacks. Remote technical support is a click away. All support is delivered at a predictable monthly cost. Going forward, by leveraging managed services with our expertise in cloud computing, our customers can easily scale their business without extensive capital investment or disruption in services.
The Company is positioned to address the growing need for managed services:
·
Our current and future customers need managed IT services, along with cloud computing, storage and HIPAA compliant backup and encryption.
·
Managed service providers that can support the migration to cloud computing are in high demand.
·
The decision makers for our current technology and those for managed services are, in many cases, the same person or group of people.
·
Our management team has decades of experience operating successful IT companies.
·
The MSP revenue model matches our SaaS, MSaaS MRR (monthly recurring revenue) models.
Financing
We are currently funding our business capital requirements through revenues from product sales and consulting services, sales of our Common Stock and debt arrangements. While we intend to seek additional funding, if revenue increases to a point where we are able to sustain ourselves and increase our budget to match our growth needs, we may significantly reduce the amount of investment capital we seek. The amount of funds raised and revenue generated, if any, will determine how aggressively we can grow and what additional projects we will be able to undertake. No assurance can be given that we will be able to raise additional capital when needed or at all, or that such capital, if available, will be on terms acceptable to us.If we are unable to, or do not raise additional capital in the near future or if our revenue does not begin to grow as we expect, we will have to curtail our spending and downsize our operations.
In August 2019, the Company signed a $78,000 convertible promissory note due twelve months after issuance and received in exchange $75,000 net of closing fees. Interest at 10% per annum was not due until maturity.One hundred eighty (180) days following the date of funding and thereafter, the note was convertible into Common Stock. The conversion price of the note was 61% of the Market Price (as defined in the note) for the Common Stock (a discount of 39%) determined on the basis of the average of the three (3) lowest closing bid prices for the Common Stock during the prior fifteen (15) trading day period. There was an ascending prepayment penalty percentage applied should the Company have prepaid the note during the first one hundred eighty (180) days after which the Company had no right of prepayment.The note holder was limited to receive upon conversion no more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock at the time of conversion at any one time. This convertible promissory note was converted to 1,112,948 shares in 2020.
In December 2019, the Company signed a $45,000 convertible promissory note payable to a second finance company due twelve (12) months after issuance and received in exchange $40,000 net of closing fees.Interest at 10% per annum was not due until maturity.One hundred eighty (180) days following the date of funding and thereafter, the note was convertible into Common Stock. The conversion price of the note was 61% of the Market Price (as defined in the note) for the Common Stock (a discount of 39%) determined on the basis of the lowest traded price for the Common Stock during the prior twenty (20) trading day period. There was an ascending prepayment penalty percentage applied should the Company have prepaid the note during the first one hundred eighty (180) days after which the Company shall had no right of prepayment.The note holder was limited to receive upon conversion no more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock at the time of conversion at any one time. This convertible promissory note was paid off in 2020.
In October of 2020, the Company signed a $53,000 convertible promissory note payable to a third finance company due twelve (12) months after issuance and received in exchange $50,000 net of closing fees. Interest at 10% per annum is not due until maturity.One hundred eighty (180) days following the date of funding and thereafter, the note is convertible into Common Stock. The conversion price of the note is 61% of the Market Price (as defined in the note) for the Common Stock (a discount of 39%) determined on the basis of the average of the two (2) lowest traded prices for the Common Stock during the prior twenty (20) trading day period. There is an ascending prepayment penalty percentage applied should the Company prepay the note during the first one hundred eighty (180) days after which the Company shall have no right of prepayment.The note holder is limited to receive upon conversion no more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock at the time of conversion at any one time.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued 13,889,560 shares of Common Stock for cash and conversion of notes payable proceeds totaling $1,237,600.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements, which were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as recognized in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements required that we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We based our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We have 5 primary sources of revenue as of December 31, 2020:
1.
Electronic Health Records (EHR/Practice Management) software
2.
Encrypted and HIPAA Compliant Secure email
3.
ICD Coding Software
4.
ePrescription Software
5.
IT Managed Services
1) Revenue from Practice Management software licensing arrangements are recorded on a subscription basis using the software as a service (SaaS”) model with revenues recognized ratably over the contract term.
2) Encrypted HIPAA compliant and secure email services are provided on an annual subscription basis using the software as a service (“SaaS”) model with revenues recognized ratably over the contract term.
3) ICD Coding Software provides the 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), a medical classification list by the World Health Organization (WHO). It contains codes for diseases, signs and symptoms, abnormal findings, complaints, social circumstances, and external causes of injury or diseases. ICD coding services are provided on a subscription basis using the software as a service (“SaaS”) model with revenues recognized ratably over the contract term.
4) ePrescription software services are provided on an annual basis using the software as a service (‘SaaS’) model with revenue recognized ratably over the contract term.
5) Managed IT services - Consist of 3 revenue streams from the following sources: (i)Monthly recurring “Managed Service Provider (MSP)” model, (ii) periodic sale and installation of IT related hardware, and (iii)) ad hoc customer IT projects. The MSP model revenue is recognized monthly on a recurring basis while the revenue relating to IT hardware and ad hoc customer IT projects is recognized when the services are performed.
Software Development Capitalization and Amortization
We account for software development costs, including costs to develop software products or the software component of products to be marketed to external users.
In accordance with ASC 985-20-25, Computer Software Research and Development, research and planning phase costs are expensed as incurred and development phase costs including direct materials and services, payroll and benefits and interest costs are capitalized.
We have determined that technological feasibility for our products to be marketed to external users was reached before the release of those products and, as a result, the development costs and related acquisition costs after the establishment of technological feasibility were capitalized as incurred. Capitalized costs for software to be marketed to external users are amortized based on current and projected future revenue for each product with an annual minimum cost equal to the straight-line amortization of the costs over three years.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability approach to accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured based on differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established when it is necessary to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amount, if any, expected to be realized in future years.
ASC 740, Accounting for Income taxes (‘ASC 740’), requires that deferred tax assets be evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion more likely than not will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent cumulative loss experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdictions, the carry-forwarding periods available to us for tax reporting purposes and other relevant factors.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company estimates the fair value of each option award on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model that uses the following assumptions. The Company estimates the fair value of its shares of restricted Common Stock using the closing stock price of its common stock on the date of the award. The Company estimates the volatility of its Common Stock at the date of grant based on its historical stock prices. The Company determines the expected life based on historical experience with similar awards, giving consideration to the contractual terms, vesting schedules and post-vesting forfeitures. The Company uses the risk-free interest rate of the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury issues with an equivalent remaining term approximately equal to the expected life of the award. The Company has never paid cash dividends on its Common Stock and does not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets for impairment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable, in accordance with recently adopted accounting practices. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by reducing the carrying amount of the asset by the amount by which its carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our selected financial data for the periods indicated below:
iCoreConnect Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019
Revenues. Net revenues of $2,123,587 for 2020 compared to $1,014,000 for the 2019 period, an increase of 109%. Revenue growth was driven by a combination of strong organic growth and acquisition of TrinIT.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales of $1,008,843 for the 2020 period increased $703,843 when compared to $305,000 for the 2019 period. The increase between periods was primarily due to organic growth, the addition of acquisition TrinITin January of 2020, and a mix shift in revenue.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses of $3,447,014 for the 2020 period increased $13,014 or 0% when compared to $3,434,000 for the 2019 period.
Depreciation and amortization expenses. Depreciation and amortization expenses of $906,060 for the 2020 period increased $251,060 or 38% compared to $655,000 for the 2019 period.The increase between periods was primarily due to $787,000 amortization of capitalized software and $112,000 amortization of goodwill and intangibles associated with the acquisition of TrinIT
Interest expense. Interest expense of $238,820 for the 2020 period increased $2,820 or approximately 1% when compared to $236,000 for the 2019 period.
Other (expense) income.Other expense of $50,733 for the 2020 period decreased by $13,267 when compared to $64,000 for the 2019 period.
Gain on cancellation of debt. Gain on cancellation of debt fell substantially in 2020 to $36,642 from $697,000 for the 2019 period due to cancellation that did not repeat in 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL
The following table sets forth our selected financial data for the periods indicated below and the percentage dollar increase (decrease) of such items from period to period:
The increase in shares outstanding was driven by issuance of Common Stock for cash, the conversion of convertible notes payable and stock compensation expense.
The following table summarizes the impact of operating, investing and financing activities on our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The primary factors that influence our liquidity include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of our revenues, cash collections from our clients, investments in research and development, and ongoing capital raise efforts.
Operating Activities: Net cash required by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $396,509 to $1,270,491 compared to $1,667,000 utilized in the 2019 period. The improvement in cash utilized by operating activities compared to the 2019 period was attributable to a $362,631changein non-cash adjustments and a $94,932 positive contribution in the cash impact of changes in operating assets and liabilities during the 2020 period. Future spending on operating activities is expected to be funded by the revenues realized by the Company and the sale of additional shares of common stock.
Investing Activities: Net cash used by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $444,900 to $917,900 compared to $473,000 utilized in the 2019 period. The increase in cash utilized by investing activities was primarily due to an increase of $120,000 in capitalized software development costs and $374,900 paid as part of the consideration to acquire TrinIT. Future spending on investing activities is expected to be funded by the sale of additional shares of common stock.
Financing Activities: Net cash provided by financing activities of $1,751,010 for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $832,990less than the $2,584,000 for the year ended 2019, primarily due to a change in proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $1,047,000 in 2020 versus $3,197,000 in proceeds in 2019.Net proceeds from debt increased to $676,000 in 2020 vs $123,000 in 2019. Payments on debt fell to $70,928 in 2020 from $736,000 in 2019.
In August 2019, the Company signed a $78,000 convertible promissory note due twelve months after issuance and received $75,000 net of closing fees. Interest at 10% per annum is not due until maturity.One hundred eighty (180) days following the date of funding and thereafter, the note is convertible into common stock of the Company ("Common Stock"). The conversion price of the note is 61% of the Market Price (as defined in the note) for the Common Stock (a discount of 39%). The conversion price is determined on the basis of the average of the three (3) lowest closing bid prices for the Common Stock during the prior fifteen (15) trading day period. There is an ascending prepayment penalty percentage applied should the Company prepay the note during the first one hundred eighty (180) days after which the Company shall have no right of prepayment.The note holder is limited to receive upon conversion no more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock at the time of conversion at any one time. This convertible promissory note was paid off in 2020.
In December 2019, the Company signed a $45,000 convertible promissory note payable to a different finance company due twelve (12) months after issuance and received $40,000 net of closing fees. Interest at 10% per annum is not due until maturity.One hundred eighty (180) days following the date of funding and thereafter, the note is convertible into common stock of the Company ("Common Stock"). The conversion price of the note is 61% of the Market Price (as defined in the note) for the Common Stock (a discount of 39%). The conversion price is determined on the basis of the lowest traded price for the Common Stock during the prior twenty (20) trading day period. There is an ascending prepayment penalty percentage applied should the Company prepay the note during the first one hundred eighty (180) days after which the Company shall have no right of prepayment.The note holder is limited to receive upon conversion no more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock at the time of conversion at any one time. This convertible promissory note was paid off in 2020.
In October of 2020, the Company signed a $53,000 convertible promissory note payable to a different finance company due twelve (12) months after issuance and received $50,000 net of closing fees. Interest at 10% per annum is not due until maturity.One hundred eighty (180) days following the date of funding and thereafter, the note is convertible into common stock of the Company ("Common Stock"). The conversion price of the note is 61% of the Market Price (as defined in the note) for the Common Stock (a discount of 39%) determined on the basis of the average of the two (2) lowest traded prices for the Common Stock during the prior twenty (20) trading day period. There is an ascending prepayment penalty percentage applied should the Company prepay the note during the first one hundred eighty (180) days after which the Company shall have no right of prepayment.The note holder is limited to receive upon conversion no more than 4.99% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock at the time of conversion at any one time.