ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that are included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including without limitation those described in Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussions of matters pertaining to the year ended December 31, 2018 and year-to-year comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are not included in this Form 10-K, but can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 that was filed on March 2, 2020.
Management Overview
We were incorporated in Delaware on November 4, 2011. We provide land-based contract drilling services for oil and natural gas producers targeting unconventional resource plays in the United States. We own and operate a premium fleet comprised of modern, technologically advanced drilling rigs.
Our rig fleet includes 24 marketed AC powered (“AC”) rigs plus five additional AC rigs that require significant upgrades in order to meet our AC pad-optimal specifications that we do not plan to market absent a material improvement in market conditions. Our first rig began drilling in May 2012.
We currently focus our operations on unconventional resource plays located in geographic regions that we can efficiently support from our Houston, Texas and Midland, Texas facilities in order to maximize economies of scale. Currently, our rigs are operating in the Permian Basin, the Haynesville Shale and the Eagle Ford Shale; however, our rigs have previously operated in the Mid-Continent and Eaglebine regions as well.
Our business depends on the level of exploration and production activity by oil and natural gas companies operating in the United States, and in particular, the regions where we actively market our contract drilling services. The oil and natural gas exploration and production industry is historically cyclical and characterized by significant changes in the levels of exploration and development activities. Oil and natural gas prices and market expectations of potential changes in those prices significantly affect the levels of those activities. Worldwide political, regulatory, economic, and military events, as well as natural disasters have contributed to oil and natural gas price volatility historically, and are likely to continue to do so in the future. Any prolonged reduction in the overall level of exploration and development activities in the United States and the regions where we market our contract drilling services, whether resulting from changes in oil and natural gas prices or otherwise, could materially and adversely affect our business.
Significant Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (“COVID-19”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The continued spread of the COVID-19 virus and the responses taken to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place orders, and shutdowns, has caused significant declines in global demand for crude oil. This reduction in demand has occurred concurrent with the initiation of a crude oil price war between members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and Russia (collectively, the “OPEC+” group). Even with the production cuts announced by the OPEC+ group and others on April 9, 2020, and the cessation to the crude oil price war, crude oil inventories have continued to rise and to test storage capacity and logistics networks. These factors led to a collapse in oil prices, with the WTI price for May delivery closing at negative $37.63 per barrel on April 20, 2020. This resulted in an unprecedented decline in the U.S. land rig count reaching an all-time low of 231 on August 14, 2020. Our operating rig count experienced a similar collapse, bottoming at three operating rigs during the third quarter of 2020. Although oil prices have recently recovered with the WTI price reaching $60.07 on February 16, 2021 supported by production cuts by OPEC, the U.S. land rig count remains very low and has only modestly improved, reaching 381 rigs on February 19, 2021. The long-term effects on production and demand are unknown at this time. Currently, there is considerable uncertainty regarding measures to contain the virus and what potential future measures may be put in place, as well as uncertainty on how long OPEC+ will continue to maintain current production cuts, therefore we cannot predict when worldwide supply and demand for oil will stabilize.
In response to these adverse market conditions and uncertainty, our customers reduced planned capital expenditures and drilling activity. As a result, demand for our services rapidly declined in the first half of 2020 and into the beginning of the third quarter of 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, our operating rig count reached a peak of 22 rigs and temporarily reached a low of three rigs during the third quarter of 2020. During the third quarter, oil and natural gas prices began to stabilize, and demand for our products began to modestly improve from their historic lows, which allowed us to reactivate additional rigs during the back half of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had eleven contracted rigs. However, due to the lack of visibility and confidence towards customer intentions and the unknown future impacts of COVID-19 and changes to OPEC production cuts on economic conditions and oil and gas demand and drilling activity, we cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain this operating rig count or that our operating rig count will continue to improve in the future. Two contracts that expired at the end of 2020 had higher dayrates than prevailing spot rates. As a result, although our operating rig count has been increasing, these rigs are being contracted at prevailing market rates that remain depressed, therefore, we expect to see our average revenue per day decline as compared to our legacy contracts.
Due to these rapidly declining market conditions, we took the following actions at the end of the first quarter of 2020 in order to reduce our cost structure:
•Salary or compensation reductions for substantially all our employees, including members of executive management;
•Suspension of all cash-based incentive compensation, including all members of executive management;
•Reduced the number of executive management positions by two;
•Reduced the number of directors from seven to five, which became effective following director elections at our 2020 Annual Meeting of Stockholders;
•Reduced annual compensation reductions for our directors; and
•Reduced headcount for non-field-based personnel by approximately 40%.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.” The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. We deferred $0.8 million of employer social security payments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The CARES Act did not have a material impact on our income taxes. Management will continue to monitor future developments and interpretations for any further impacts on our financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity.
We cannot predict the length of time that the market disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic will continue; or when, or if, oil and gas prices and demand for our contract drilling services will decline, continue to improve or return to pre-COVID-19 levels. The extent to which our operating and financial results are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on various factors and consequences beyond our control, such as the duration and scope of the pandemic; additional actions by businesses and governments in response to the pandemic; and the speed and effectiveness of responses to combat the virus. As a result, our business, operating results and financial conditions are subject to various risks, many of which are aggravated as a result of the declining market conditions and significant uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
PPP Loan
On April 27, 2020, we entered into an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”), sponsored by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) as guarantor of loans under the PPP. The PPP is part of the CARES Act, and it provides for loans to qualifying businesses in a maximum amount equal to the lesser of $10.0 million and 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The proceeds of the loan may only be used for payroll costs, rent, utilities, mortgage interests, and interest on other pre-existing indebtedness (the “permissible purposes”).
The application for these funds required us to, in good faith, certify that current economic uncertainty made the loan request necessary to support our ongoing operations. The receipt of these funds, and the forgiveness of the loan attendant to these funds, is dependent on the Company having initially qualified for the loan and qualifying for the forgiveness of such loan based on our future adherence to the forgiveness criteria. The PPP Loan is subject to any new guidance and new requirements released by the Department of the Treasury who has indicated that all companies that have received funds in excess of $2.0 million will be subject to a government (SBA) audit to further ensure PPP loans are limited to eligible borrowers in need. On October 7, 2020, the SBA released guidance clarifying the deferral period for PPP loan payments. The Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of 2020 extended the deferral period for loan payments to either (1) the date that SBA remits the borrower's loan forgiveness amount to the lender or (2) if the borrower does not apply for loan forgiveness, ten months after the end of the
borrower's loan forgiveness covered period. We intend to apply for forgiveness and we believe our first payment related to any unforgiven portion would be due during the fourth quarter of 2021, with a loan maturity date of April 27, 2022.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement
On November 11, 2020, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Commitment Purchase Agreement”) and a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Tumim Stone Capital LLC (“Tumim”). Pursuant to the Commitment Purchase Agreement, the Company has the right to sell to Tumim up to $5,000,000 (the “Total Commitment”) in shares of its common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Shares”) (subject to certain conditions and limitations) from time to time during the term of the Commitment Purchase Agreement. Sales of common stock pursuant to the Commitment Purchase Agreement, and the timing of any sales, are solely at our option and we are under no obligation to sell securities pursuant to this arrangement. Shares may be sold by the Company pursuant to this arrangement over a period of up to 24 months, commencing on December 1, 2020.
Under the applicable rules of the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”), in no event may we issue more than 1,234,546 shares of our common stock, which represents 19.99% of the shares of our common stock outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the Commitment Purchase Agreement (the “Exchange Cap”), to Tumim under the Commitment Purchase Agreement, unless (i) we obtain stockholder approval to issue shares of our common stock in excess of the Exchange Cap or (ii) the price of all applicable sales of our common stock to Tumim under the Commitment Purchase Agreement equals or exceeds the lower of (A) the official closing price on the NYSE immediately preceding the delivery by us of an applicable purchase notice under the Commitment Purchase Agreement and (B) the average of the closing prices of our common stock on the NYSE for the five business days immediately preceding the delivery by us of an applicable purchase notice under the Commitment Purchase Agreement, in each case plus $0.128, such that the transactions contemplated by the Commitment Purchase Agreement are exempt from the Exchange Cap limitation under applicable NYSE rules. In any event, the Commitment Purchase Agreement specifically provides that we may not issue or sell any shares of our common stock under the Commitment Purchase Agreement if such issuance or sale would breach any applicable rules or regulations of the NYSE. The Company has also limited the aggregate number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the Commitment Purchase Agreement to 1,500,000 shares without subsequent board approval.
In all instances, we may not sell shares of our common stock to Tumim under the Commitment Purchase Agreement if it would result in Tumim beneficially owning more than 4.99% of the common stock (the “Beneficial Ownership Cap”).
The proceeds under the Commitment Purchase Agreement will depend on the frequency and prices at which the Company sells shares of its stock to Tumim. We determined that the right to sell additional shares represents a freestanding put option under ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging, but has a fair value of zero, and therefore no additional accounting was required. Transaction costs of $0.5 million, incurred in connection with entering into the Purchase Agreement were expensed as selling, general and administrative expense.
Third Amendment to Term Loan Credit Agreement
On June 4, 2020, we entered into a Third Amendment, dated as of June 4, 2020 (the “Third Amendment”), to the Credit Agreement, dated as of October 1, 2018 (the “Term Credit Loan Agreement”), to permit us, at our option, subject to required prior notice and a maximum available liquidity condition (including availability under our revolving credit agreement and available cash), to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest, solely during one three-consecutive-month period immediately following such notice, in kind (the “PIK Amount”). In connection with the amendments, we agreed to pay an additional amount equal to 0.75% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans under the Term Loan Credit Agreement plus all PIK Amounts, if any, that are added to such principal amount being repaid or prepaid on either the maturity date or upon the occurrence of an acceleration of obligations under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
ATM Offering
On June 5, 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement (the “Agreement”) with Piper Sandler & Co. (the “Agent”), through its Simmons Energy division. Pursuant to the Agreement, we were able to offer and sell through the Agent shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $11,000,000 (the “Shares”). We began offering shares under this program during the second quarter of 2020 and completed this offering process during the third quarter of 2020, raising an aggregate $11 million of gross proceeds and issuing an aggregate of 2.4 million shares at an average gross offering price of $4.66 per share. We have used and plan to continue using the net proceeds from the sales pursuant to the Agreement, after deducting the sales agent’s commissions and our offering expenses, for general corporate purposes, which may include, among other things, repayment of indebtedness and capital expenditures.
The Agreement contained customary representations, warranties and agreements by the Company, indemnification obligations of the Company and the Agent, including for liabilities under the Securities Act, other obligations of the parties and termination provisions. Under the terms of the Agreement, we paid the Agent a commission equal to 3% of the gross sales price of the Shares sold.
Reverse Stock Split
Following approval by our stockholders on February 6, 2020, our Board of Directors approved a 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our common stock. The reverse stock split reduced the number of shares of common stock issued and outstanding from 77,523,973 and 76,241,045 shares, respectively, to 3,876,196 and 3,812,050 shares, respectively, and reduced the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 shares to 50,000,000 shares.
Sidewinder Merger Effects and Merger Consideration Amendment
We completed the merger with Sidewinder Drilling LLC on October 1, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we recorded $2.7 million and $13.6 million, respectively, of merger-related expenses comprised primarily of severance, professional fees and various other integration related expenses. There were no merger expenses recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Certain intangible liabilities were recorded in connection with the Sidewinder merger for drilling contracts in place at the closing date of the transaction that had unfavorable contract terms as compared to then current market terms for comparable drilling rigs. The intangible liabilities were amortized to operating revenues over the remaining underlying contract terms. During the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, $1.1 million and $2.0 million, respectively, of intangible revenue was recognized as a result of this amortization. The intangible liabilities were fully amortized in the second quarter of 2019.
In addition, at the time of consummation of the Sidewinder Merger, Sidewinder owned various mechanical rig assets and related equipment (the "Mechanical Rigs") located principally in the Utica and Marcellus plays. As these assets were not consistent with ICD’s core strategy or geographic focus, ICD agreed that these assets could be disposed of, with the Sidewinder unitholders receiving the net proceeds. As a result of this arrangement, on the merger date, we recorded the fair value of the Mechanical Rigs less costs to sell, as assets held for sale, with a related liability in contingent consideration. Subsequently, these assets were sold at auction for substantially less than the appraised fair values on the merger date. As a result, in the second quarter of 2020, the contingent consideration liability was reduced by the appraised fair values on the merger date and the proceeds were recorded as merger consideration payable to an affiliate on our consolidated balance sheets.
On June 4, 2020, we entered into a letter agreement (the “Merger Consideration Amendment”) with MSD Credit Opportunity Master Fund, L.P. to allow for the deferral of payment of the Mechanical Rig net proceeds of $2.9 million, to the earlier of (i) June 30, 2022 and (ii) a change of control transaction (as defined therein) (such applicable date, the “Payment Date”), and requires us to pay an additional amount in connection with such deferred payment equal to interest accrued on the amount of Mechanical Rig net proceeds during the period between May 1, 2020 and the Payment Date, which interest shall accrue at a rate of 15% per annum, compounded quarterly, during the period beginning on May 1, 2020 and ending on December 31, 2020 and at a rate of 25% per annum, compounded quarterly, during any period following December 31, 2020. The Mechanical Rig net proceeds were previously payable in the second quarter of 2020.
Asset Impairment
As a result of the rapidly deteriorating market conditions described in "COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update," we concluded that a triggering event occurred as of March 31, 2020 and, accordingly, an interim asset impairment test was performed. As a result, we recognized impairment of $3.3 million associated with the decline in the market value of our assets held for sale based upon the market approach method and $13.3 million related to the remaining assets on rigs removed from our marketed fleet, as well as certain other component equipment and inventory; all of which was deemed to be unsaleable and of zero value based upon the current macroeconomic conditions and uncertainties surrounding COVID-19.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, due to the highly competitive market and in an effort to minimize capital spending, management drafted and approved a plan to upgrade our existing fleet by utilizing the primary components needed to complete the upgrades from five of our existing rigs and these five rigs were removed from our marketed fleet. We recorded an impairment charge of $21.9 million related to the remaining assets on these non-marketed rigs. Additionally, we recorded a $2.4 million asset impairment based upon the market approach method on certain capital spare parts, all of which were deemed to be incompatible with our upgraded fleet. Due to the uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic and current market conditions, we may have to make further impairment charges in future periods relating to, among other things, fixed assets and inventory.
In the first and second quarters of 2019, we recorded $2.0 million and $1.1 million, respectively, of asset impairment expense in conjunction with the sale of miscellaneous drilling equipment at auctions.
In the second quarter of 2019, in light of the softening demand for contract drilling services, we recorded an impairment charge of $4.4 million relating to certain components on our SCR rigs and various other equipment. Management determined that these rigs could not be competitively marketed in the then current environment as SCR rigs and we removed them from our marketed fleet. Due to the high volume of idle SCR drilling equipment on the market at the time, management did not believe that the SCR drilling equipment could be sold for a material amount in the then current market environment, and therefore took the impairment charge.
We performed a goodwill impairment test during the third quarter of 2019 and recorded an impairment charge of $2.3 million, which represented the impairment of 100% of our previously recorded goodwill. The impairment was primarily the result of the downturn in industry conditions since the consummation of the Sidewinder Merger in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the subsequent related decline in the price of our common stock as of September 30, 2019.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded impairments totaling $25.9 million relating primarily to our decision to remove two rigs from our marketed fleet, as well as a plan to sell or otherwise dispose of rigs and related component equipment, much of which was acquired in connection with the Sidewinder Merger.
Assets Held for Sale
As a result of the rapidly deteriorating market conditions described in "COVID-19 Pandemic and Market Conditions Update", we recognized impairment of $3.3 million as of March 31, 2020 associated with the decline in the market value of our assets held for sale. Throughout 2020, we sold $2.6 million of assets held for sale and received cash proceeds of $1.3 million, resulting in $1.3 million of loss on sale of assets. Additionally during 2020, assets held for sale were reduced by $2.8 million related to the remaining fair value of mechanical rigs acquired in the Sidewinder Merger which was recorded as a reduction in the related contingent consideration liability on our consolidated balance sheets.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, in conjunction with our plan to sell certain non-pad optimal rigs or partial rigs and related equipment acquired in the Sidewinder Merger, we impaired the related assets to fair value less estimated cost to sell and recorded $5.9 million of assets held for sale on our consolidated balance sheet. Assets held for sale as of December 31, 2019 also included the remaining $2.8 million of unsold mechanical rigs belonging to Sidewinder unitholders as part of the Sidewinder Merger agreement.
Our Revenues
We earn contract drilling revenues pursuant to drilling contracts entered into with our customers. We perform drilling services on a “daywork” basis, under which we charge a specified rate per day, or “dayrate.” The dayrate associated with each of our contracts is a negotiated price determined by the capabilities of the rig, location, depth and complexity of the wells to be drilled, operating conditions, duration of the contract and market conditions. The term of land drilling contracts may be for a defined number of wells or for a fixed time period. We generally receive lump-sum payments for the mobilization of rigs and other drilling equipment at the commencement of a new drilling contract. Revenue and costs associated with the initial mobilization are deferred and recognized ratably over the term of the related drilling contract once the rig spuds. Costs incurred to relocate rigs and other equipment to an area in which a contract has not been secured are expensed as incurred. If a contract is terminated prior to the specified contract term, early termination payments received from the customer are only recognized as revenues when all contractual obligations, such as mitigation requirements, are satisfied. While under contract, our rigs generally earn a reduced rate while the rig is moving between wells or drilling locations, or on standby waiting for the customer. Reimbursements for the purchase of supplies, equipment, trucking and other services that are provided at the request of our customers are recorded as revenue when incurred. The related costs are recorded as operating expenses when incurred. Revenue is presented net of any sales tax charged to the customer that we are required to remit to local or state governmental taxing authorities.
Our Operating Costs
Our operating costs include all expenses associated with operating and maintaining our drilling rigs. Operating costs include all “rig level” expenses such as labor and related payroll costs, repair and maintenance expenses, supplies, workers' compensation and other insurance, ad valorem taxes and equipment rental costs. Also included in our operating costs are certain costs that are not incurred at the “rig level.” These costs include expenses directly associated with our operations management team as well as our safety and maintenance personnel who are not directly assigned to our rigs but are responsible for the oversight and support of our operations and safety and maintenance programs across our fleet.
Our operating costs also include costs and expenses associated with construction activities at our Galayda yard location to the extent that construction activities cease or are not continuous. During 2020, our operating costs also included approximately $0.6 million of costs associated with the decommissioning of rigs and $1.4 million of costs associated with the reactivation of idle rigs. Reactivation costs include costs associated with recommissioning the rig, the hiring and training of new crews and the purchase of supplies and other consumables required for the operation of the rigs.
How We Evaluate our Operations
We regularly use a number of financial and operational measures to analyze and evaluate the performance of our business and compensate our employees, including the following:
•Safety Performance. Maintaining a strong safety record is a critical component of our business strategy. We measure safety by tracking the total recordable incident rate for our operations. In addition, we closely monitor and measure compliance with our safety policies and procedures, including "near miss" reports and job safety analysis compliance. We believe our Risk-Based HSE management system provides the required control, yet needed flexibility, to conduct all activities safely, efficiently and appropriately.
•Utilization. Rig utilization measures the total amount of time that our rigs are earning revenue under a contract during a particular period. We measure utilization by dividing the total number of Operating Days for a rig by the total number of days the rig is available for operation in the applicable calendar period. A rig is available for operation commencing on the earlier of the date it spuds its initial well following construction or when it has been completed and is actively marketed. “Operating Days” represent the total number of days a rig is earning revenue under a contract, beginning when the rig spuds its initial well under the contract and ending with the completion of the rig’s demobilization.
•Revenue Per Day. Revenue per day measures the amount of revenue that an operating rig earns on a daily basis during a particular period. We calculate revenue per day by dividing total contract drilling revenue earned during the applicable period by the number of Operating Days in the period. Revenues attributable to costs reimbursed by customers are excluded from this measure.
•Operating Cost Per Day. Operating cost per day measures the operating costs incurred on a daily basis during a particular period. We calculate operating cost per day by dividing total operating costs during the applicable period by the number of Operating Days in the period. Operating costs attributable to costs reimbursed by customers are excluded from this measure.
•Operating Efficiency and Uptime. Maintaining our rigs’ operational efficiency is a critical component of our business strategy. We measure our operating efficiency by tracking each drilling rig’s unscheduled downtime on a daily, monthly, quarterly and annual basis.
Results of Operations
The following summarizes our financial and operating data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Number of marketed rigs as of December 31, 2020 decreased by five rigs as compared to the number of marketed rigs as of December 31, 2019. Marketed rigs exclude idle rigs that will not be reactivated until upgrades or conversions are complete or market conditions substantially improve.
(2)Rig operating days represent the number of days our rigs are earning revenue under a contract during the period, including days that standby revenues are earned.
(3)Average number of operating rigs is calculated by dividing the total number of rig operating days in the period by the total number of calendar days in the period.
(4)Rig utilization is calculated as rig operating days divided by the total number of days our drilling rigs are available during the applicable period.
(5)Average revenue per operating day represents total contract drilling revenues earned during the period divided by rig operating days in the period. Excluded in calculating average revenue per operating day are revenues associated with the reimbursement of (i) out-of-pocket costs paid by customers of $9.0 million, and $15.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (ii) revenues associated with the amortization of intangible revenue acquired in the Sidewinder Merger of zero and $1.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and (iii) early termination revenues of $3.3 million and $1.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(6)Average cost per operating day represents total operating costs incurred during the period divided by rig operating days in the period. The following costs are excluded in calculating average cost per operating day: (i) out-of-pocket costs reimbursed by customers of $9.0 million and $15.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (ii) new crew training costs of $0.2 million and $0.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (iii) construction overhead costs expensed due to reduced rig construction activity of $1.9 million and $1.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and (iv) rig decommissioning costs associated with stacking deactivated rigs and rig reactivation costs associated with the redeployment of previously stacked rigs of $2.0 million and $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(7)WTI spot price as reported by the United States Energy Information Administration.
(8)Henry Hub spot price as reported by the United States Energy Information Administration.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $83.4 million, representing a 59.0% decrease over revenues of $203.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was attributable to a decrease in operating days to 3,739 days as compared to 8,985 days in 2019. The decrease in operating days was primarily attributable to the drastic downturn in market conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the concurrent initiation of a crude oil price war between members of the “OPEC+” group. On a revenue per operating day basis, which excludes the impact of early termination and intangible revenues, our revenue per operating day decreased to $19,000 during 2020 compared to revenue per operating day of $20,628 during 2019. This decrease in average revenue per day resulted from a significant decline in spot dayrates during 2020, including the expiration of various higher dayrate legacy term contracts during 2020.
Operating Costs
Operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $65.4 million, representing a 54.9% decrease over operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $144.9 million. This decrease was attributable to a decrease in operating days to 3,739 days as compared to 8,985 days in 2019. On a cost per operating day basis, our cost per day decreased to $13,984 during 2020, compared to cost per day of $14,202 during 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to cost reduction activities instituted by us at the beginning of the second quarter of 2020 as well as increased labor costs associated with inefficiencies and transitory downtime during 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13.5 million, representing a 16.0% decrease over selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $16.1 million. This decrease was primarily related to cost cutting initiatives implemented by us at the beginning of the second quarter of 2020.
Severance and Merger-related Expenses
Severance expense of $1.1 million was recorded during 2020 in connection with our cost reduction measures instituted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and deteriorating market conditions.
Merger-related expenses of $2.7 million incurred during 2019 represent expenses associated with the Sidewinder Merger consisting primarily of severance, professional fees and other merger-related expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $43.9 million, representing a 3.2% decrease compared to $45.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of the asset impairments incurred in 2019 and 2020, offset by increases related to the introduction of new drilling rigs upgraded by us in 2019. We begin depreciating our rigs on a straight-line basis when they commence drilling operations.
Asset Impairment, net
Asset impairment expense of $41.0 million was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $35.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For further discussion, see “Significant Developments - Asset Impairments” in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Loss on Disposition of Assets, net
A loss on the disposition of assets totaling $0.7 million and $4.9 million was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the current and prior year period the loss relates primarily to the sale of certain surplus assets, acquired in the Sidewinder Merger, as well as various other miscellaneous sales.
Other Expense
Other expense was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to the settlement of a lawsuit.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This interest expense primarily related to our $130.0 million term loan facility.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $0.1 million compared to income tax benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective tax rate was 0.2% for the year ended 2020 compared to 0.2% for the year ended 2019. Taxes in both years relate to Louisiana state income tax and Texas margin tax.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity as of December 31, 2020 included approximately $7.5 million of availability under our $40.0 million ABL Credit Facility, based on a borrowing base of $7.7 million, a $15.0 million committed accordion under our existing term loan facility, $5.0 million available under our Commitment Purchase Agreement, $12.3 million of cash and $7.3 million of other net working capital.
We expect our future capital and liquidity needs to be related to operating expenses, maintenance capital expenditures, working capital and general corporate purposes. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operating activities and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility will adequately finance all of our anticipated purchase commitments, capital expenditures and other cash requirements over the next twelve months from issuance.
You should read "Item 1A Risk Factors" in particular, "Risks Related to Our Liquidity", for additional information regarding risks surrounding our operations and financial liquidity.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we had contractual obligations as described below.
Our obligations include "off-balance sheet arrangements" whereby the liabilities associated with unconditional purchase obligations are not fully reflected in our consolidated balance sheets.
Our long-term debt as of December 31, 2020 consisted of amounts due under our Term Loan Facility (as defined and further described below). Interest on long-term debt is related to our estimated future contractual interest obligations on long-term indebtedness outstanding as of December 31, 2020 under our Term Loan Facility. Interest payment obligations on our Term Loan Facility were estimated based on the 9.0% interest rate that was in effect at December 31, 2020, and the principal balance of $130 million at December 31, 2020, and assuming repayment of the outstanding balance occurs at October 1, 2023. On April 27, 2020, we entered into the PPP Loan in the aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million pursuant to the PPP,
sponsored by the SBA as guarantor of loans under the PPP. The PPP is part of the CARES Act, and it provides for loans to qualifying businesses in a maximum amount equal to the lesser of $10.0 million and 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The proceeds of the loan may only be used for payroll costs, rent, utilities, mortgage interests, and interest on other pre-existing indebtedness. Additionally, included in our contractual obligations are finance leases on vehicles and certain drilling equipment. These leases generally have a term of 36 months and are paid monthly.
Our purchase obligations relate primarily to outstanding purchase orders for rig equipment or components ordered but not received. We have made progress payments on these orders of approximately $0.2 million that could be forfeited if we were to cancel these orders.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Factors affecting changes in operating cash flows are similar to those that impact net earnings, with the exception of non-cash items such as depreciation and amortization, impairments, gains or losses on disposals of assets, stock-based compensation, deferred taxes and amortization of deferred financing costs. Additionally, changes in working capital items such as accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expense, accounts payable and accrued liabilities can significantly affect operating cash flows. Cash flows from operating activities during 2020 were lower as a result of an increase in net loss of $35.9 million, adjusted for non-cash items of $88.5 million, compared to $89.1 million in 2019. Additionally, working capital changes that increased cash flows from operating activities were $8.4 million in 2020 compared to working capital changes that decreased cash flows from operating activities of $0.4 million in 2019.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our primary investing activities in 2020 related to minor rig upgrades and maintenance capital expenditures. Cash payments of $14.2 million for capital expenditures were offset by proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $5.1 million and the collection of principal on note receivable of $0.1 million. Cash payments during 2020 included approximately $8.1 million associated with equipment purchased in 2019. During 2019, cash payments of $38.3 million for capital expenditures were offset by proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $9.0 million and proceeds from insurance claims of $1.0 million.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used in financing activities of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, we made borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility of $11.0 million and under the PPP Loan of $10.0 million, offset by repayments under our Revolving Credit Facility of $11.0 million, common stock issuance costs of $0.8 million, received proceeds from issuance of common stock of $11.0 million, had restricted stock units withheld for taxes paid of $44.0 thousand, purchased $0.1 million of treasury stock and made payments for finance lease obligations of $4.3 million.
Long-term Debt
On October 1, 2018, we entered into a Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) for an initial term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $130.0 million, (the “Term Loan Facility”) and (b) a delayed draw term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $15.0 million (the “DDTL Facility”, and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Term Facilities”). The Term Facilities have a maturity date of October 1, 2023, at which time all outstanding principal under the Term Facilities and other obligations become due and payable in full.
At our election, interest under the Term Loan Facility is determined by reference at our option to either (i) a “base rate” equal to the higher of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.05%, (b) the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) with an interest period of one month, plus 1.0%, and (c) the rate of interest as publicly quoted from time to time by the Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate” in the United States, plus an applicable margin of 6.5%, or (ii) a “LIBOR rate” equal to LIBOR with an interest period of one month, plus an applicable margin of 7.5%.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement contains financial covenants, including a liquidity covenant of $10.0 million and a springing fixed charge coverage ratio covenant of 1.00 to 1.00 that is tested when availability under the ABL Credit Facility (defined below) and the DDTL Facility is below $5.0 million at any time that a DDTL Facility loan is outstanding. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also contains other customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, fundamental changes, asset dispositions, restricted payments, investments and transactions with affiliates. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also provides for customary events of default, including breaches of material covenants, defaults under the ABL Credit Facility or other material agreements for indebtedness, and a change of control.
The obligations under the Term Loan Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority lien on collateral (the “Term Priority Collateral”) other than accounts receivable, deposit accounts and other related collateral pledged as first priority collateral (“Priority Collateral”) under the ABL Credit Facility (defined below) and a second priority lien on such Priority Collateral, and are unconditionally guaranteed by all of our current and future direct and indirect subsidiaries. MSD PCOF Partners IV, LLC (an affiliate of MSD Partners) is the lender of our $130.0 million Term Loan Facility. MSD Partners, together with MSD Capital, own approximately 15% of the outstanding shares of our common stock.
In July 2019, we revised our Term Loan Credit Agreement to explicitly permit the repurchase of equity interests by the Company pursuant to the stock purchase program that was approved by our Board of Directors.
In June 2020, we revised our Term Loan Credit Agreement to elect to pay accrued and unpaid interest, solely during one three-consecutive-month period immediately following such notice, in kind (the “PIK Amount”). We agreed to pay an additional amount equal to 0.75% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans under the Term Loan Credit Agreement plus all PIK Amounts, if any, that are added to such principal amount being repaid or prepaid on either the maturity date or upon the occurrence of an acceleration of obligations under the Term Loan Credit Agreement. As such, the additional amount, approximately $1.0 million, was recorded as a direct deduction from the face amount of the Term Loan Facility and as a long-term payable on our consolidated balance sheets. The additional amount will be amortized as interest expense over the term of the Term Loan Facility.
Additionally on October 1, 2018, we entered into a $40.0 million revolving Credit Agreement (the “ABL Credit Facility”), including availability for letters of credit in an aggregate amount at any time outstanding not to exceed $7.5 million. Availability under the ABL Credit Facility is subject to a borrowing base calculated based on 85% of the net amount of our eligible accounts receivable, minus reserves. The ABL Credit Facility has a maturity date of the earlier of October 1, 2023 or the maturity date of the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
At our election, interest under the ABL Credit Facility is determined by reference at our option to either (i) a “base rate” equal to the higher of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.05%, (b) LIBOR with an interest period of one month, plus 1.0%, and (c) the prime rate of Wells Fargo, plus in each case, an applicable base rate margin ranging from 1.0% to 1.5% based on quarterly availability, or (ii) a revolving loan rate equal to LIBOR for the applicable interest period plus an applicable LIBOR margin ranging from 2.0% to 2.5% based on quarterly availability. We also pay, on a quarterly basis, a commitment fee of 0.375% (or 0.25% at any time when revolver usage is greater than 50% of the maximum credit) per annum on the unused portion of the ABL Credit Facility commitment.
The ABL Credit Facility contains a springing fixed charge coverage ratio covenant of 1.00 to 1.00 that is tested when availability is less than 10% of the maximum credit. The ABL Credit Facility also contains other customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, fundamental changes, asset dispositions, restricted payments, investments and transactions with affiliates. The ABL Credit Facility also provides for customary events of default, including breaches of material covenants, defaults under the Term Loan Agreement or other material agreements for indebtedness, and a change of control. We are in compliance with our financial covenants as of December 31, 2020.
The obligations under the ABL Credit Facility are secured by a first priority lien on Priority Collateral, which includes all accounts receivable and deposit accounts, and a second priority lien on the Term Priority Collateral, and are unconditionally guaranteed by all of our current and future direct and indirect subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted-average interest rate on our borrowings was 9.00%. At December 31, 2020, the borrowing base under our ABL Credit Facility was $7.7 million, and we had $7.5 million of availability remaining of our $40.0 million commitment on that date.
In addition, on April 27, 2020, we entered into an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the PPP, sponsored by the SBA as guarantor of loans under the PPP. The PPP is part of the CARES Act, and it provides for loans to qualifying businesses in a maximum amount equal to the lesser of $10.0 million and 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The proceeds of the loan may only be used for payroll costs, rent, utilities, mortgage interests, and interest on other pre-existing indebtedness (the “permissible purposes”) during the covered period ending October 13, 2020. Interest on the PPP Loan is equal to 1.0% per annum. All or part of the loan is forgivable based upon the level of permissible expenses incurred during the covered period and changes to the Company's headcount during the period from January 1, 2020 to February 15, 2020.
The application for these funds required us to, in good faith, certify that current economic uncertainty made the loan request necessary to support our ongoing operations. The receipt of these funds, and the forgiveness of the loan attendant to these funds, is dependent on the Company having initially qualified for the loan and qualifying for the forgiveness of such loan based on our future adherence to the forgiveness criteria. The PPP Loan is subject to any new guidance and new requirements released by the Department of the Treasury who has indicated that all companies that have received funds in excess of $2.0 million will be subject to a government (SBA) audit to further ensure PPP loans are limited to eligible borrowers in need. On October 7, 2020, the SBA released guidance clarifying the deferral period for PPP loan payments. The Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of 2020 extended the deferral period for loan payments to either (1) the date that SBA remits the borrower's loan forgiveness amount to the lender or (2) if the borrower does not apply for loan forgiveness, ten months after the end of the borrower's loan forgiveness covered period. We intend to apply for forgiveness and we believe our first payment related to any unforgiven portion would be due during the fourth quarter of 2021, with a loan maturity date of April 27, 2022.
Additionally, included in our long-term debt are finance leases. These leases generally have initial terms of 36 months and are paid monthly.
Critical Accounting Policies and Accounting Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies and estimates and assumptions used by management during their preparation. These estimates and assumptions are evaluated on an on-going basis. Estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities if not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The following is a discussion of the critical accounting policies and estimates used in our consolidated financial statements. Other significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Revenue and Cost Recognition
We earn contract drilling revenues pursuant to drilling contracts entered into with our customers. We perform drilling services on a “daywork” basis, under which we charge a specified rate per day, or “dayrate.” The dayrate associated with each of our contracts is a negotiated price determined by the capabilities of the rig, location, depth and complexity of the wells to be drilled, operating conditions, duration of the contract and market conditions. The term of land drilling contracts may be for a defined number of wells or for a fixed time period. We generally receive lump-sum payments for the mobilization of rigs and other drilling equipment at the commencement of a new drilling contract. Revenue and costs associated with the initial mobilization are deferred and recognized ratably over the term of the related drilling contract once the rig spuds. Costs incurred to relocate rigs and other equipment to an area in which a contract has not been secured are expensed as incurred. Our contracts provide for early termination fees in the event our customers choose to cancel the contract prior to the specified contract term. We record a contract liability for such fees received up front, and recognize them ratably as contract drilling revenue over the initial term of the related drilling contract or until such time that all performance obligations are satisfied. While under contract, our rigs generally earn a reduced rate while the rig is moving between wells or drilling locations, or on standby waiting for the customer. Reimbursements for the purchase of supplies, equipment, trucking and other services that are provided at the request of our customers are recorded as revenue when incurred. The related costs are recorded as operating expenses when incurred. Revenue is presented net of any sales tax charged to the customer that we are required to remit to local or state governmental taxing authorities.
Our operating costs include all expenses associated with operating and maintaining our drilling rigs. Operating costs include all “rig level” expenses such as labor and related payroll costs, repair and maintenance expenses, supplies, workers' compensation and other insurance, ad valorem taxes and equipment rental costs. Also included in our operating costs are certain costs that are not incurred at the rig level. These costs include expenses directly associated with our operations management team as well as our safety and maintenance personnel who are not directly assigned to our rigs but are responsible for the oversight and support of our operations and safety and maintenance programs across our fleet.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment, including renewals and betterments, are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. All property, plant and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the assets. The cost of maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Major overhauls and upgrades are capitalized and depreciated over their remaining useful life.
Depreciation of property, plant and equipment is recorded based on the estimated useful lives of the assets as follows:
We review our assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The recoverability of assets that are held and used is measured by comparison of the estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset to the carrying amount of the asset. If the carrying value of such assets is less than the estimated undiscounted cash flow, an impairment charge is recorded in the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds their estimated fair value.
Asset impairment expense of $41.0 million was recorded for 2020, as compared to $35.7 million for 2019. For further discussion, see “Significant Developments - Asset Impairments” in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, we record deferred income taxes based upon differences between the financial reporting basis and tax basis of assets and liabilities, and use enacted tax rates and laws that we expect will be in effect when we realize those assets or settle those liabilities. We review deferred tax assets for a valuation allowance based upon management’s estimates of whether it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax asset will be fully realized in a future period.
We recognize the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant taxing authority would more-likely-than-not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to the unrecognized tax benefits within the income tax expense (benefit) line item in our consolidated statement of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record compensation expense over the requisite service period for all stock-based compensation based on the grant date fair value of the award. The expense is included in selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statement of operations or capitalized in connection with rig construction activity.
Other Matters
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are party to certain arrangements defined as “off-balance sheet arrangements” that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors. These arrangements relate to non-cancelable operating leases with terms of less than twelve months and unconditional purchase obligations not fully reflected on our consolidated balance sheets. See Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, as additional guidance on the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments. The new guidance requires the measurement of all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable supportable forecasts. In addition, the guidance amends the accounting for credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities and purchased financial assets with credit deterioration. The new guidance is effective for all public companies for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018. In October 2019, the FASB approved a proposal which grants smaller reporting companies additional time to implement FASB standards on current expected credit losses (CECL) to January 2023. As a smaller reporting company, we will defer adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 until January 2023. We are currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, to simplify the accounting for income taxes. The amendments in the update are effective for public companies for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this guidance on January 1, 2021 and there has been no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
On April 1, 2020, we adopted the new standard, ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform: Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting, which provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform (e.g. discontinuation of LIBOR) if certain criteria are met. As of December 31, 2020, we have not yet elected any optional expedients provided in the standard. We will apply the accounting relief as relevant contract and hedge accounting relationship modifications are made during the reference rate reform transition period. We do not expect the standard to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity, to simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in Subtopic 470-20, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options, for convertible instruments. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.