Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those described under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics to treat progressive non-viral liver diseases with high unmet medical need utilizing our proprietary bile acid chemistry. Our first marketed product, Ocaliva® (obeticholic acid or “OCA”), is a farnesoid X receptor (“FXR”) agonist approved in the United States, the European Union and several other jurisdictions for the treatment of primary biliary cholangitis (“PBC”) in combination with ursodeoxycholic acid (“UDCA”) in adults with an inadequate response to UDCA or as monotherapy in adults unable to tolerate UDCA. In addition to commercializing OCA for PBC under the Ocaliva brand name, we are currently developing OCA for additional indications, including nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (“NASH”). We are also developing several product candidates in various stages of clinical and preclinical development. We believe that OCA and our other product candidates have the potential to treat orphan and other more prevalent liver diseases such as NASH for which there are currently limited therapeutic options.
Ocaliva was approved for PBC by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in May 2016 under the accelerated approval pathway. We commenced sales and marketing of Ocaliva in the United States shortly after receiving approval, and Ocaliva is now available to U.S. patients primarily through a network of specialty pharmacy distributors. Ocaliva received conditional approval for PBC from the European Commission in December 2016 and we commenced our European commercial launch in January 2017. We have submitted dossiers and obtained, or are otherwise pursuing, reimbursement from a number of national authorities in Europe. Since January 2017, Ocaliva has also received regulatory approval in several of our target markets outside the United States and Europe, including Canada, Israel and Australia, and we are pursuing marketing approval of Ocaliva for PBC in our other international target markets. Ocaliva received orphan drug designation in both the United States and the European Union for the treatment of PBC. In addition, we continue to work to execute on our post-marketing regulatory commitments with respect to Ocaliva in the U.S. and Europe.
Our lead product candidate is OCA for the potential treatment of NASH. In February 2019, we announced topline results from the planned 18-month interim analysis of our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial of OCA in patients with liver fibrosis due to NASH, known as the REGENERATE trial. In the primary efficacy analysis, once-daily OCA 25 mg met the primary endpoint agreed with the FDA of fibrosis improvement by at least one stage with no worsening of NASH at the planned 18-month interim analysis. Adverse events were generally mild to moderate in severity and the most common were consistent with the known profile of OCA. Interim analysis results at 18 months were based on surrogate endpoints and the impact on clinical outcomes has not been confirmed. The REGENERATE trial is ongoing and is expected to continue through clinical outcomes for verification and description of the clinical benefit of OCA. OCA also achieved the primary endpoint in a Phase 2b clinical trial for the treatment of NASH that completed in late July 2014, known as the FLINT trial, which was sponsored by the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, a part of the National Institutes of Health. OCA has received breakthrough therapy designation from the FDA for the treatment of NASH patients with liver fibrosis. In September 2019, we submitted a New Drug Application (“NDA”) to the FDA seeking accelerated approval of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH. In November 2019, the FDA accepted our NDA for filing and granted a priority review designation of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH. In December 2019, we submitted a Marketing Authorization Application (“MAA”) to the European Medicines Agency (the “EMA”) seeking conditional approval of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH. In January 2020, the EMA validated our MAA and thereby confirmed that our MAA was sufficiently complete to begin the formal review process. In June 2020, we received a complete response letter (“CRL”) from the FDA stating that our NDA for OCA for the treatment of liver fibrosis due to NASH could not be approved in its present form. The CRL indicated that, based on the data the FDA had reviewed, the FDA has determined that the predicted benefit of OCA based on a surrogate histopathologic endpoint remains uncertain and does not sufficiently outweigh the potential risks to support accelerated approval for the treatment of patients with liver fibrosis due to NASH. At that time, the FDA recommended that we submit additional post-interim analysis efficacy and safety data from the
ongoing REGENERATE trial in support of potential accelerated approval and that the long-term outcomes phase of the trial should continue. We are in discussions with the FDA with respect to the potential resubmission of our NDA seeking accelerated approval of OCA for the treatment of liver fibrosis due to NASH. We had our end of review meeting with the FDA in October 2020 to discuss the FDA’s risk-benefit assessment in the CRL based on its review of the available data, as well as our proposed resubmission of our NDA for the treatment of liver fibrosis due to NASH. The meeting was constructive and the FDA has provided us with helpful guidance regarding supplemental data we can provide to further characterize OCA’s efficacy and safety profile that could support resubmission based on our Phase 3 REGENERATE 18-month biopsy data, together with a safety update from our ongoing studies. We are advancing accordingly and plan to hold additional meetings with the FDA with the goal of achieving sufficient alignment to proceed on this basis and potentially resubmit our NDA for the treatment of liver fibrosis due to NASH by the end of 2021. In addition, we continue to work collaboratively with the EMA on its review of our MAA.
As part of our product development activities, we expect to continue to invest in evaluating the potential of OCA in progressive non-viral liver diseases. We are currently conducting a Phase 3 clinical trial in NASH patients with compensated cirrhosis, known as the REVERSE trial. In January 2020, we announced that we completed enrollment of the REVERSE trial with over 900 patients randomized. We are also studying OCA in combination with bezafibrate, a pan-peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonist, in patients with PBC and potentially may study such combination in other liver diseases. In addition, we have other compounds in early stages of research and development in our pipeline.
Capital Markets Activities During the Periods Under Review
In May 2019, we issued and sold (i) 2,760,000 shares of common stock in a registered public offering (including 360,000 shares issued and sold upon the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares), at a price to the public of $83.50 per share (the “2019 Public Offering”) and (ii) 119,760 shares of common stock (the “2019 Private Placement Shares”) in a concurrent private placement of common stock (the “2019 Concurrent Private Placement”) exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), at a purchase price per share equivalent to the price to the public set in the 2019 Public Offering and pursuant to a securities purchase agreement (the “2019 Securities Purchase Agreement”) that the Company entered into with Samsara BioCapital, L.P. (“Samsara”), one of our existing stockholders. Pursuant to the 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement, we granted to Samsara certain registration rights requiring us, upon request of Samsara on or after July 9, 2019 and subject to certain terms and conditions, to register the resale by Samsara of its 2019 Private Placement Shares. Such registration rights expire upon the earlier of (i) May 8, 2020 and (ii) the date that all of the 2019 Private Placement Shares have been sold or can be sold publicly under Rule 144 of the Securities Act on a single day. We received net proceeds from the 2019 Public Offering and the 2019 Concurrent Private Placement of approximately $227.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses of approximately $13.9 million.
In May 2019, we also issued and sold $230.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 Convertible Notes”). We received net proceeds from the sale of the 2026 Convertible Notes of $223.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses of approximately $6.6 million.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We commenced our commercial launch of Ocaliva for the treatment of PBC in the United States in June 2016. In December 2016, the European Commission granted conditional approval for Ocaliva for the treatment of PBC and we commenced our European commercial launch in January 2017. Since January 2017, Ocaliva has also received regulatory approval in several of our target markets outside the United States and Europe, including Canada, Israel and Australia. We sell Ocaliva to a limited number of specialty pharmacies which dispense the product directly to patients. The specialty pharmacies are referred to as our customers.
Product Revenue, Net
We recognize revenue upon shipment of Ocaliva to our customers. We provide the right of return to our customers for unopened product for a limited time before and after its expiration date.
Under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), we have written contracts with each of our customers that have a single performance obligation - to deliver products upon receipt of a customer order - and these obligations are satisfied when delivery occurs and the customer receives Ocaliva. We evaluate the creditworthiness of each of our customers to determine whether collection is reasonably assured. We estimate variable revenue by calculating gross product revenues based on the wholesale acquisition cost that we charge our customers for Ocaliva, and then estimating our net product revenues by deducting (i) estimated government rebates and discounts related to Medicare, Medicaid and other government programs, (ii) estimated costs of incentives offered to certain indirect customers including patients and (iii) trade allowances, such as invoice discounts for prompt payment and customer fees.
We recognized net sales of Ocaliva of $312.7 million, $249.6 and $177.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We have received paragraph IV certification notice letters from several generic drug manufacturers indicating that each such company has submitted to the FDA an Abbreviated New Drug Application (“ANDA”) seeking approval to manufacture and sell a generic version of our 5 mg and 10 mg dosage strengths of Ocaliva® (obeticholic acid) for PBC prior to the expiration of certain patents protecting Ocaliva. We have initiated patent infringement suits against each of these generic drug manufacturers in the United States District Court for the District of Delaware. While we intend to vigorously defend and enforce our intellectual property rights protecting Ocaliva, we can offer no assurance as to when the lawsuits will be decided, whether the lawsuits will be successful, or that a generic equivalent of Ocaliva will not be approved and enter the market before the expiration of such patents. See Note 19 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Licensing Revenue
In March 2011, we entered into an exclusive license agreement (the “Sumitomo Agreement”) with Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd. (“Sumitomo Dainippon”), pursuant to which we granted to Sumitomo Dainippon an exclusive license to research, develop and commercialize OCA for the treatment of PBC and NASH in Japan and China (excluding Taiwan) and an option to research, develop and commercialize OCA in certain countries outside of such territories (the “Country Option”). We received an upfront payment from Sumitomo Dainippon of $15.0 million under the terms of the Sumitomo Agreement. In October 2019, we and Sumitomo Dainippon mutually agreed to terminate with immediate effect the Sumitomo Agreement. In connection with the termination of the Sumitomo Agreement, Sumitomo Dainippon agreed to return to us the rights to develop and commercialize OCA in China and we agreed to forego any further milestone or royalty payments relating to the development and commercialization of OCA in China. No payment was due from us to Sumitomo Dainippon as a result of the termination of the Sumitomo Agreement.
We recognized licensing revenue of $0, $2.4 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant selling, general and administrative expenses as a result of, among other initiatives, the launch and commercialization of Ocaliva for PBC in the United States, Europe and our other target markets. In addition, we have incurred significant selling, general and administrative expenses and may in the future incur similar expenses in connection with the preparation for the potential commercialization of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, if approved, and our other future approved products, if any, and any build-out of our general and administrative infrastructure in the United States and abroad.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused significant resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, pursuing regulatory approvals and engaging in other product development activities. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant research and development expenses as a result of, among other initiatives, our clinical development programs for OCA for PBC and NASH, our other earlier stage research programs and our regulatory approval efforts.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
Product revenue, net was $312.7 million and $249.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, product revenue, net was comprised of U.S. Ocaliva net sales of $234.0 million and $187.5 million, respectively, and ex-U.S. Ocaliva net sales of $78.7 million and $62.1 million, respectively. We commenced our commercial launch of Ocaliva for the treatment of PBC in the United States and certain European countries in June 2016 and January 2017, respectively. Since January 2017, Ocaliva has also received regulatory approval in several of our target markets outside the United States and Europe, including Canada, Israel and Australia. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, licensing revenue was $0 and $2.4 million, respectively. In the case of the year ended December 31, 2019, revenues were related to the amortization of upfront payments under the Sumitomo Agreement.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was $5.3 million and $4.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 consisted primarily of packaging, labeling, materials and related expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $332.5 million and $317.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $15.1 million net increase between periods was primarily driven by increases in expenses during the first half of 2020 relating to our launch preparation activities associated with the potential approval and commercialization of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $191.5 million and $242.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $51.3 million net decrease between periods was primarily driven by UK R&D tax credits of $22.0 million recognized as a reduction of research and development expenses and lower NASH development costs, including the conclusion of enrollment activities for the REGENERATE and REVERSE studies.
Restructuring expenses
Restructuring expenses were $14.6 million and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase between periods was primarily driven by severance costs and other related termination benefits incurred in conjunction with the 2020 Workforce Plan.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $48.1 million and $41.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense related to the $230.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 Convertible Notes”) that we issued in May 2019 and the $460.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (the “2023 Convertible Notes” and together with the 2026 Convertible Notes, the “Convertible Notes”) that we issued in July 2016.
Other income, net
Other income, net was $4.4 million and $8.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Such income is primarily attributable to interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and investment debt securities.
Income taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, no income tax expense or benefit was recognized. Our deferred tax assets are comprised primarily of net operating loss carryforwards. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets since we have not yet achieved sustained profitable operations. As a result, we have not recorded any income tax benefit since our inception.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Revenues
Product revenue, net was $249.6 million and $177.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, product revenue, net was comprised of U.S. Ocaliva net sales of $187.5 million and $140.8 million, respectively, and ex-U.S. Ocaliva net sales of $62.1 million and $37.0 million, respectively. We commenced our commercial launch of Ocaliva for the treatment of PBC in the United States and certain European countries in June 2016 and January 2017, respectively. Since January 2017, Ocaliva has also received regulatory approval in several of our target markets outside the United States and Europe, including Canada, Israel and Australia. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, licensing revenue was $2.4 million and $2.0 million, respectively, in each case, related to the amortization of upfront payments under the Sumitomo Agreement.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was $4.2 million and $2.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 consisted primarily of packaging, labeling, materials and related expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $317.4 million and $255.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The $61.9 million net increase between periods was primarily driven by increases in expenses relating to our launch preparation activities associated with the potential approval and commercialization of OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $242.8 million and $207.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The $35.5 million net increase between periods was primarily driven by increases in OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH development program expenses and costs associated with the preparation of the NASH NDA submission.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $41.1 million and $30.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense related to the 2026 Convertible Notes that we issued in May 2019 and the $460.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (the “2023 Convertible Notes” and together with the 2026 Convertible Notes, the “Convertible Notes”) that we issued in July 2016. For the year ended December 31, 2018, interest expense related only to the 2023 Convertible Notes.
Other income, net
Other income, net was $8.9 million and $6.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Such income is primarily attributable to interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and investment debt securities.
Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, no income tax expense or benefit was recognized. Our deferred tax assets are comprised primarily of net operating loss carryforwards. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets since we have not yet achieved sustained profitable operations. As a result, we have not recorded any income tax benefit since our inception.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities of $170.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of our $274.9 million net loss, partially offset by $60.8 million in stock-based compensation, $16.6 million for accretion of the discount on the 2023 Convertible Notes, $9.4 million for accretion of the discount on the 2026 Convertible Notes, $6.1 million for non-cash operating lease costs, $3.1 million of depreciation and a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $2.0 million. Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 include cash receipts of $20.7 million reflecting payments from the HMRC for the U.K. R&D tax credit claims.
Net cash used in operating activities of $236.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily a result of our $344.7 million net loss and a gain on lease termination of $2.0 million, partially offset by $56.0 million in stock-based compensation, a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $19.3 million, $15.3 million for accretion of the discount on the 2023 Convertible Notes, $5.9 million for accretion of the discount on the 2026 Convertible Notes, $5.4 million for non-cash operating lease costs, $3.7 million of depreciation and $2.7 million for loss on the disposal of fixed assets.
Net cash used in operating activities of $240.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily a result of our $309.2 million net loss and a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $2.8 million, partially offset by $49.9 million in stock-based compensation, $14.0 million for accretion of the discount on the 2023 Convertible Notes, and $4.6 million of depreciation.
Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities primarily reflects the sales and maturities of investment debt securities of $497.4 million, partially offset by the purchases of investment debt securities of $330.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities primarily reflects the purchases of investment debt securities of $603.0 million, partially offset by the sales of investment debt securities of $415.2 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities primarily reflects the purchase of investment debt securities of $436.1 million, partially offset by the sale of investment debt securities of $388.2 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $2.0 million from payments of employee withholding taxes related to stock-based awards offset by $1.3 million of net proceeds from the exercise of options to purchase common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of net proceeds received from the 2019 Public Offering and 2019 Concurrent Private Placement in May 2019 of $227.3 million and net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Convertible Notes of $223.4 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted primarily of net proceeds of approximately $261.4 million from the 2018 Public Offering and 2018 Concurrent Private Placement in April 2018 and $2.2 million from the exercise of options to purchase common stock net of payments of employee withholding taxes related to stock-based awards.
2019 Public Offerings and 2019 Concurrent Private Placement
In May 2019, we issued and sold an aggregate of 2,879,760 shares of common stock in the 2019 Public Offering and 2019 Concurrent Private Placement. We received net proceeds from the 2019 Public Offering and the 2019 Concurrent Private Placement of approximately $227.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses of approximately $13.9 million.
2026 Convertible Notes
In May 2019, we issued and sold $230.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 Convertible Notes”). We received net proceeds from the sale of the 2026 Convertible Notes of $223.4 million, after deducting underwriter discounts, commissions, and estimated offering expenses of approximately $6.6 million.
The 2026 Convertible Notes were issued pursuant to a Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 14, 2019 (the “Second Supplemental Indenture”), which supplements the Indenture (the “Base Indenture”), as supplemented by a First Supplemental Indenture (the “First Supplemental Indenture” and collectively with the Base Indenture and the Second Supplemental Indenture, the “Indenture”), each dated as of July 6, 2016, by and between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The 2026 Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations of ours, bear interest at a fixed rate of 2.00% per annum (payable semi-annually on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on November 15, 2019) and will mature on May 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. The 2026 Convertible Notes are convertible at the option of holders, under certain circumstances and during certain periods, into cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. The initial conversion rate of the 2026 Convertible Notes is 9.2123 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2026 Convertible Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $108.55 per share of our common stock. The conversion rate is subject to adjustment in some events but will not be adjusted for any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date, we will increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 2026 Convertible Notes in connection with such a corporate event in certain circumstances. If we undergo a fundamental change (as defined in the Indenture), holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their 2026 Convertible Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount
of the 2026 Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date. In addition, if certain make-whole fundamental changes occur, we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for any 2026 Convertible Notes converted in connection with such make-whole fundamental change. We may not redeem the 2026 Convertible Notes prior to May 20, 2023. We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2026 Convertible Notes, at our option, on or after May 20, 2023, under certain circumstances at a redemption price equal to 100% or the principal amount of the 2026 Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. The Indenture provides for customary events of default.
2018 Public Offering and 2018 Concurrent Private Placement
In April 2018, we issued and sold an aggregate of 4,257,813 shares of common stock in the 2018 Public Offering and 2018 Concurrent Private Placement. We received net proceeds from the 2018 Public Offering and the 2018 Concurrent Private Placement of approximately $261.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses of approximately $11.1 million.
Future Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we had $477.2 million in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and investment debt securities. We currently expect to continue to incur significant operating expenses in the fiscal year ending December 31, 2021. These expenses are planned to support, among other initiatives, the continued commercialization of Ocaliva for PBC in the United States and our other markets, our continued clinical development of OCA for PBC and NASH and our other earlier stage research and development programs. Although we believe that our existing capital resources, together with our net sales of Ocaliva for PBC, will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating requirements for the next twelve months following the filing of this report, we may need to raise additional capital to fund our operating requirements beyond that period. Furthermore, in light of our receipt of the CRL from the FDA in June 2020 with respect to our NDA for OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH and the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development and commercialization, any delays in, or unanticipated costs associated with, our development, regulatory or commercialization efforts could significantly increase the amount of capital required by us to fund our operating requirements. Accordingly, we may seek to access the public or private capital markets whenever conditions are favorable, even if we do not have an immediate need for additional capital at that time.
Our forecasts regarding the period of time that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to meet our operating requirements and the timing of our future funding requirements, both near and long-term, will depend on a variety of factors, many of which are outside of our control. Such factors include, but are not limited to:
● our ability to successfully commercialize Ocaliva for PBC;
● our ability to maintain our regulatory approval of Ocaliva for PBC in the United States, Europe, Canada, Israel, Australia and other jurisdictions in which we have or may receive marketing authorization;
● our ability to timely and cost-effectively file for and obtain regulatory approval of our product candidates on an accelerated basis or at all, including OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH following the issuance of the CRL by the FDA; any advisory committee recommendation or dispute resolution determination that our product candidates, including OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, should not be approved or approved only under certain conditions; or any future determination that the regulatory applications and subsequent information we submit for our product candidates, including OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, do not contain adequate clinical or other data or meet applicable regulatory requirements for approval;
● conditions that may be imposed by regulatory authorities on our marketing approvals for our products and product candidates, including OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, such as the need for clinical outcomes data (and not just results based on achievement of a surrogate endpoint), any risk mitigation programs such as a REMS, and any related restrictions, limitations and/or warnings contained in the label of any of our products or product candidates;
● any potential side effects associated with Ocaliva for PBC, OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH or our other product candidates that could delay or prevent approval, require that an approved product be taken off the market, require the inclusion of safety warnings or precautions or otherwise limit the sale of such product or product candidate, including in connection with the NISS relating to Ocaliva identified by the FDA in May 2020;
● the initiation, timing, cost, conduct, progress and results of our research and development activities, preclinical studies and clinical trials, including any issues, delays or failures in identifying patients, enrolling patients, treating patients, retaining patients, meeting specific endpoints in the jurisdictions in which we intend to seek approval or completing and timely reporting the results of our NASH or PBC clinical trials;
● the outcomes of ongoing discussions with the FDA and the EMA regarding the feasibility of the COBALT and 401 trials;
● our ability to establish and maintain relationships with, and the performance of, third-party manufacturers, contract research organizations and other vendors upon whom we are substantially dependent for, among other things, the manufacture and supply of our products, including Ocaliva for PBC and, if approved, OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, and our clinical trial activities;
● our ability to identify, develop and successfully commercialize our products and product candidates, including our ability to successfully launch OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, if approved;
● our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for our products and product candidates, including our ability to cost-effectively file, prosecute, defend and enforce any patent claims or other intellectual property rights;
● the size and growth of the markets for our products and product candidates and our ability to serve those markets;
● the degree of market acceptance of Ocaliva for PBC and, if approved, OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH or our other product candidates among physicians, patients and healthcare payors;
● the availability of adequate coverage and reimbursement from governmental and private healthcare payors for our products, including Ocaliva for PBC and, if approved, OCA for liver fibrosis due to NASH, and our ability to obtain adequate pricing for such products;
● our ability to establish and maintain effective sales, marketing and distribution capabilities, either directly or through collaborations with third parties;
● competition from existing drugs or new drugs that become available;
● our ability to prevent system failures, data breaches or violations of data protection laws;
● costs and outcomes relating to any disputes, governmental inquiries or investigations, regulatory proceedings, legal proceedings or litigation, including any securities, intellectual property, employment, product liability or other litigation;
● our collaborators’ election to pursue research, development and commercialization activities;
● our ability to establish and maintain relationships with collaborators with development, regulatory and commercialization expertise;
● our need for and ability to generate or obtain additional financing;
● our estimates regarding future expenses, revenues and capital requirements and the accuracy thereof;
● our use of cash and short-term investments;
● our ability to acquire, license and invest in businesses, technologies, product candidates and products;
● our ability to attract and retain key personnel to manage our business effectively;
● our ability to manage the growth of our operations, infrastructure, personnel, systems and controls;
● our ability to obtain and maintain adequate insurance coverage;
● the impact of COVID-19, including any impact on our results of operations or financial position, related quarantines and government actions, delays relating to our regulatory applications, disruptions relating to our ongoing clinical trials or involving our contract research organizations, study sites or other clinical partners, disruptions relating to our supply chain or involving our third-party manufacturers, distributors or other distribution partners, facility closures or other restrictions, and the extent and duration thereof;
● the impact of general U.S. and foreign economic, industry, market, regulatory or political conditions, including the potential impact of Brexit; and
● the other risks and uncertainties identified under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in our other periodic filings filed with the SEC.
We have no committed external sources of funding and additional funds may not be available when we need them on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all. In addition, in recent months global markets have experienced significant volatility in connection with concerns over the impact of COVID-19, and such concerns may in the future materially and adversely affect our ability to raise funds. If adequate funds are not available to us, we may not be able to make scheduled debt payments on a timely basis, or at all, and may be required to delay, limit, reduce or cease our operations.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of obligations under the Convertible Notes, and lease agreements. The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future years:
(1) For a description of our material operating leases, see “Properties” above. The obligations represent payments for all operating leases, including short-term operating leases exempt under ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”) and leases that have yet to commence. Operating expenses associated with our leased office buildings are not included in the table above.
(2) Represents 2023 Convertible Notes and 2026 Convertible Notes (including future interest payments at a fixed rate of 3.25% and 2.00% per year, respectively).
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for our clinical trials, contract manufacturing organizations for the manufacture and supply of our clinical and commercial product needs and other vendors for other research and development and commercial activities, as well as services and products for operating
purposes. Our agreements generally provide for termination with notice. Such agreements are cancelable contracts and are not included as purchase commitments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, we began recognizing revenue under ASC 606. The core principle of this revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (v) recognize revenue when the company satisfies a performance obligation.
Product Revenue, Net
Under ASC 606, we have written contracts with each of our customers that have a single performance obligation - to deliver products upon receipt of a customer order - and these obligations are satisfied when delivery occurs and the customer receives Ocaliva. We evaluate the creditworthiness of each of our customers to determine whether collection is reasonably assured. The wholesale acquisition cost that we charge our customers for Ocaliva is adjusted to arrive at our estimated net product revenues by deducting (i) estimated government rebates and discounts, (ii) estimated costs of incentives offered to certain indirect customers including patients, and (iii) trade allowances, such as invoice discounts for prompt payment and customer fees.
Rebates and Discounts
We contract with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and other government agencies to make Ocaliva available to eligible patients. As a result, we estimate any rebates and discounts and deduct these estimated amounts from our gross product revenues at the time the revenues are recognized. Our estimates of rebates and discounts are based on the government mandated discounts, which are statutorily-defined and applicable to these government funded programs, and our historical experience with actual payments and redemptions. These estimates are recorded in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
We have been distributing and selling Ocaliva in Europe through our EU marketing authorization since 2017 and are engaged in ongoing price discussions regarding the final price of Ocaliva within one of those jurisdictions. We recognize net product revenues based on our estimate of consideration we expect to retain through final negotiations in that
jurisdiction that will not be subject to a significant reversal. Our estimate is based on benchmarks of pricing approved in other relevant European jurisdictions. We expect the difference between the amounts collected at the invoiced price and the final price for OCA will be returned to the local government. If our estimates regarding the amounts to be refunded to the government change, we will reflect the effect of the change in estimate in net product revenues in the period in which the change in estimate occurs and will include any adjustments against all prior sales. These estimates are recorded in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Other Incentives
Other incentives that we offer to indirect customers include co-pay assistance cards provided by us for PBC patients who reside in states that permit co-pay assistance programs. Our co-pay assistance program is intended to reduce each participating patient’s portion of the financial responsibility for Ocaliva purchase price to a specified dollar amount. We estimate the amount of co-pay assistance provided to eligible patients based on the terms of the program when product is dispensed by the specialty pharmacies to the patients. These estimates are based on redemption information provided by third-party claims processing organizations and are recorded in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Trade Allowances
We provide invoice discounts on Ocaliva sales to certain of our customers for prompt payment and record these discounts as a reduction to gross product revenues. These discounts are based on contractual terms. Reserves for prompt payment discounts are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and accounts receivable.
Valuation of Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model on the date of the grant. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of assumptions, including with respect to stock price volatility, assumed dividend yield, the expected term of options and the risk-free interest rate, as described below:
• The expected volatility is estimated based on actual historical volatility information of our own ordinary shares.
• The assumed dividend yield is based on our expectation of not paying dividends for the foreseeable future.
• The expected term of options granted represents the period of time the options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the simplified method.
• The risk-free interest rate was based on the rate for U.S. Treasury securities at the date of grant with maturity dates
approximately equal to the expected term of the award at the grant date.
Restricted stock unit awards and restricted stock awards without a market condition are valued based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of the grant. The fair value of time-based equity awards is recognized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. The fair value of awards with market conditions is estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation method and expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. The Company accounts for all forfeitures when they occur. Ultimately, the actual expense recognized over the vesting period will be for only those shares that vest and are not forfeited.
We expect to continue to grant stock options and other stock-based awards and the impact of stock-based compensation may fluctuate in future periods due to changes in the value of our common stock, changes to our headcount and the number and value of awards granted.
Convertible Senior Notes
The Convertible Notes are accounted for in accordance with ASC Subtopic 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. ASC Subtopic 470-20 requires the issuer of convertible debt that may be settled in shares or cash upon conversion at the issuer’s option, such as the Convertible Notes, to account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components separately. The value assigned to the debt component is the estimated fair value, as of the issuance date, of a similar debt instrument without the conversion option. The amount of the equity component (and resulting debt discount) is calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the convertible debt instrument. The resulting debt discount is amortized as additional non-cash interest expense over the expected life of the notes utilizing the effective interest method. For additional information, see Note 9 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
We determine the need for a valuation allowance by assessing the probability of realizing deferred tax assets, taking into consideration all available positive and negative evidence, including historical operating results, expectations of future taxable income, carryforward periods available, various income tax strategies and other relevant factors. Significant judgment is required in making this assessment and to the extent future expectations change, we would have to assess the recoverability of our deferred assets at that time. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
Our tax returns are subject to examination by U.S. Federal, state, and foreign taxing jurisdictions. The impact of an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return must be recognized in our financial statements at the largest amount that is more likely than not to be sustained. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized in our financial statements unless it is more likely than not to be sustained. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no reserves for unrecognized tax benefits.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption and expected effects, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition.