Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Please see the “Risk Factors” section for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware in November 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business-combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business-combination target. We may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry or sector, but given the experience of our management team, we expect to focus on acquiring a business combination target within the financial services industry and related sectors, including potentially the FinTech sector, with an enterprise value of approximately $500 million to $1 billion. Our management believes that this relative size of target opportunities will enable us to pursue companies that are the most attractive from a return standpoint and are less pursued by larger, more established sources of capital.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our entire activity since inception has been to prepare for our initial public offering, which was consummated on January 28, 2021.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from October 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate our initial public offering. Following our initial public offering, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses in the pursuit of our acquisition plans.
For the period from October 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,236, which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $38,388. Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of our founder shares to our sponsor and a $126,413 loan from our sponsor.
On November 6, 2020, our sponsor purchased 2,156,250 shares of our Class B common stock, or founder stock, for $25,000 in cash, or approximately $0.012 per share, in connection with our formation. Also on November 6, 2020, we issued an unsecured promissory note to our sponsor, pursuant to which we were able to borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the initial public offering. This loan was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due at the earlier of June 30, 2021 or the closing of the initial public offering. As of January 27, 2021, we had drawn down $151,000 under the promissory note with our sponsor to pay for offering expenses. On January 28, 2021, in connection with the closing of the initial public offering, we repaid the full $151,000 loan to the sponsor.
On January 28, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 10,350,000 units. Each unit consists of one share of our Class A common stock and one redeemable warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock for $11.50 per share. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $103,500,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 5,738,000 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, in a private placement to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $5,738,000.
Following the closing of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, an aggregate amount of $105,570,00 (which amount includes the deferred underwriting discount) was placed in the trust account established in connection with the initial public offering. Transaction costs amounted to $6,233,747, consisting of $2,070,00 in underwriting discount, $3,622,500 in deferred underwriting discount, the fair value of the shares issued to the underwriters of $1,000 deemed as underwriters’ compensation, and $540,247 of other offering costs. In addition, $974,008 of cash is held outside of the trust account and is available for the payment of offering costs and for working capital purposes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account not previously released to us (less taxes payable) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, we may apply the balance of the cash released to us from the trust account for general corporate purposes, including for maintenance or expansion of operations of the post-transaction company, the payment of principal or interest due on indebtedness incurred in completing our initial business combination, to fund the purchase of other companies or for working capital.
We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate, complete a business combination, and implement our plan of dissolution.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required. Such loans, or working capital loans, would be convertible into private placement-equivalent warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant (which, for example, would result in the holders being issued 1,500,000 warrants if $1,500,000 of notes were so converted), at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. In the event that a business combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans.
Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the trust account that may be released to the Company to pay its franchise and income tax obligations (less up to $50,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), the proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants will not be released from the trust account until the earliest of (a) the completion of the Company’s initial business combination, (b) the redemption of any public shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation, and (c) the redemption of the Company’s public shares if the Company is unable to complete the initial business combination within 15 months from the closing of the initial public offering (or up to 21 months from the closing of the initial public offering if the Company extends the period of time to consummate a business combination), subject to applicable law. The proceeds deposited in the trust account could become subject to the claims of the Company’s creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of the Company’s public stockholders.
Our sponsor has agreed to (i) waive its redemption rights with respect to its founder shares and public shares in connection with the completion of the Company’s initial business combination, (ii) waive its redemption rights with respect to
its founder shares and public shares in connection with a stockholder vote to approve an amendment to the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation (A) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to redeem 100% of its public shares if the Company does not complete its initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the initial public offering (or up to 21 months from the closing of the initial public offering if the Company extends the period of time to consummate a business combination) or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity and (iii) waive its rights to liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to its founder shares if the Company fails to complete its initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the initial public offering (or up to 21 months from the closing of the initial public offering if the Company extends the period of time to consummate a business combination). In addition, our sponsor has agreed to vote any founder shares held by them and any public shares purchased during or after the initial public offering (including in open market and privately negotiated transactions) in favor of the Company’s initial business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
We did not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities at December 31, 2020.
The underwriter of our initial public offering is entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2.0% ($2,070,00) was paid at the closing of our initial public offering, and 3.5% ($3,622,500) was deferred. The deferred underwriting discount will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriter is not entitled to any interest accrued on the deferred underwriting discount.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.