Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the related notes thereto, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause future results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” For the purposes of this section, “we,” “us,” “our,” “Onyx,” the “Company” and “PARTS iD” each refer to Onyx prior to the closing of the Business Combination and PARTS iD, Inc. following the closing of the Business Combination, as the context indicates, unless the context otherwise refers to Legacy Acquisition Corp.
Overview
PARTS iD, Inc. is a technology-driven, digital commerce company focused on creating custom infrastructure and unique user experiences within niche markets. PARTS iD was originally founded in 2008 as Onyx Enterprises, Int’l, Corp. Its vision was to create a one-stop digital commerce destination for the automotive parts and accessories market. The success of CARiD.com has inspired pursuit of our long-term strategy to scale into similar markets via our proprietary built, modular digital commerce technology platform.
While our core focus continues to be automotive, in August 2018, we launched seven new verticals (including BOATiD.com, MOTORCYCLEiD.com, CAMPERiD.com and more) which demonstrates fungibility of our technology platform. These verticals address similar market challenges and focus on the enthusiasts’ needs through our seamless shopping experience using proprietary tools and techniques.
Although the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused an economic downturn on a global scale, disrupted global supply chains, and created significant uncertainty, volatility, and disruption across economies, due to the further adoption of online shopping by consumers, it has had a positive effect on the Company’s e-commerce business operations, including a substantial increase in net sales, profitability and cash flows. To date, the Company has largely been successful in managing its supply chain, despite increases in order cancellations and delivery times.
We made significant investments in 2020 to provide an enhanced experience to our diverse base of DIY, DIFM and PRO customers. We added 155 new product vendors and 267 additional shipping locations to provide our customers enhanced product selection across all verticals and faster delivery based on customer proximity nationwide. Our proprietary fulfillment algorithm picks the closest distribution location to the customer, increasing availability of the desired inventory, providing faster delivery speed and decreasing the total cost to the customer. Our core focus in 2020 was to improve our product offerings in the catalog specifically for new verticals, original equipment (“OE”) and repair parts business, which resulted in revenue growth of 39% in 2020 compared to 2019. Our revenue from the seven new verticals more than tripled in 2020 compared to 2019.
We have also been focused on increasing our presence in the DIFM segment of the automotive aftermarket industry and our partnerships, and we chose to invest in a tire installation network as our first step. Through partnerships with tire installer businesses, we added 1,100 tire installer locations in 2020 and 1,017 locations in 2021 through February 28, 2021. Using our purpose-built data architecture and differentiated technology, consumers are able to visit CARiD.com, research and choose from a wide variety of tires, and in the same transaction select a tire installation center near them and schedule an appointment. This initiative is one of many programs we are working on to advance CARiD.com’s position as a one-stop shop and seamless solution for all car enthusiast needs.
In 2020, we also took steps to diversify our marketing mix and boost brand building. We launched our first TV commercial test in the spring, followed by another campaign in the winter. These campaigns leveraged programmatic, platform and publisher direct media buys. In addition, we significantly increased social media advertising efforts and implemented automated bidding strategies across most Google Ads campaigns to improve performance and streamline management. Together these efforts helped support a 29.5% increase in Direct traffic to CARiD.com.
Management is focused on several efforts to drive growth, including product cultivation, vendor optimization, distribution network expansion and marketing diversification.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The global spread of COVID-19 and related measures to contain its spread (such as government-mandated business closures and shelter-in-place guidelines) have created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. Although the COVID-19 pandemic and related measures to contain its spread have not adversely affected the Company’s results of operations to date, they have adversely affected certain components of the Company’s business, including by increasing cancellations (which can result in an increase in advertisement costs) and shipping times. In future periods, the pandemic might cause shipping difficulties, including slowed deliveries to customers; the potential for increased cancellations by customers; and the ability of consumers to pay for products. Although consumer demand for and the inventory of the Company’s products have remained stable, in future periods the COVID-19 pandemic could have an adverse impact on the Company through reduced consumer demand for or inventory of its products. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused the Company to require employees to work remotely for an indefinite period of time, which could negatively impact its business and harm productivity and collaboration. If there is a prolonged impact of COVID-19, it could adversely affect the Company’s business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, perhaps materially. The future impact of COVID-19 and these containment measures cannot be predicted with certainty and may increase the Company’s borrowing costs, if any, and other costs of capital and otherwise adversely affect its business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the Company cannot assure that it will have access to external financing at times and on terms it considers acceptable, or at all, or that it will not experience other liquidity issues going forward. For more information on the risks the COVID-19 pandemic poses to the business, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this report.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
We measure our business using financial and operating metrics, as well as non-GAAP financial measures. See “Results of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for more information on non-GAAP financial measures. We monitor several key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions, including the following:
Traffic and Engagement Metrics
We use the metrics above to gauge our ability to acquire targeted traffic and keep users engaged. This information informs us of how effective our proprietary technology, data, and content is, and helps us define our strategic roadmap and key initiatives.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Revenues increased $113.0 million, or 39.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a 24.3% increase in website traffic and a 19.0% increase in the conversion rate compared to the year 2019.
The increase in website traffic and the conversion rate was primarily attributable to product growth in new verticals, search engine bidding automation and optimization, and increased e-commerce adoption due to COVID-19.
Apart from consumer behavior, sales promotions such as free shipping, discounted shipping and discounted product pricing can impact conversion rates, average order value, sales volume and margin in varying amounts depending on the type of promotion, the effective promotional value, the length of the promotion, the specific products, brands and categories the promotions are applied to, and the promotional and pricing strategies and activities of competitors for the same or similar products during the period. PARTS iD measures the impact from pricing and promotional strategies using methods like A/B testing, discount code redemptions and sequential analysis among others.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold is composed of product cost, the associated fulfillment and handling costs charged by vendors, if any, and shipping costs. In the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of goods sold increased by $88.4 million, or 39.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily driven by an increased sourcing of products sold, which led to a 39.3% increase in revenues compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the cost of goods sold was 78.6% of revenues, consistent with 78.7% of revenues in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased $24.6 million, or 40.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to the 39.3% increase in revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin in the year ended December 31, 2020 of 21.4% was slightly higher than the gross margin of 21.3% in 2019.
Operating Expenses
Advertising expenses increased $12.4 million, or 59.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in advertising costs was primarily attributable to (i) an increase in paid traffic in the year ended December 31, 2020, (ii) a change in the mix of advertising channels used, and (iii) testing of new social media advertising campaigns and development of commercials for connected TV marketing.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased $9.1 million, or 25.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of (i) $2.7 million in merchant services provider processing fees in line with the increase in revenue, (ii) $5.5 million of Business Combination deal expenses, and (iii) small changes in other operational costs. Despite the $5.5 million in Business Combination deal expenses, as a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses decreased from 12.2% to 11.0%, reflecting greater operating cost leverage on higher revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation expenses increased $1.0 million, or 17.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to prior years’ website and software development combined with a marginal increase in website and software development costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $26.1 thousand, or 75.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease in terms of dollar amount was not material.
Income Tax Expenses
Income tax expenses decreased by $0.7 million, or 457.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily attributable to deferred tax benefits relating to startup cost incurred by Legacy prior to closing of the Business Combination. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective income tax rate was (61.1%) compared to 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in rate was primarily attributable to differences in expenses not deductible for income tax purposes and recognition of benefits accruing due to start-up costs incurred by the Company for the period prior to the closing of the Business Combination.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
This report includes non-GAAP financial measures that differ from financial measures calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). These non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similar measures reported by other companies and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, other measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Management uses non-GAAP financial measures internally to evaluate the performance of the business. Additionally, management believes certain non-GAAP measures provide meaningful incremental information to investors to consider when evaluating the performance of the Company.
To this end, we provide EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. EBITDA consists of net income (loss) plus (a) interest expense; (b) income tax provision (or less benefit); and (c) depreciation expense. Adjusted EBITDA consists of EBITDA plus costs, fees, expenses, write offs and other items that do not impact the fundamentals of our operations, as described further below following the reconciliation of these metrics. Management believes these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to investors in their assessment of the performance of our business. The exclusion of certain expenses in calculating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparisons on a period-to-period basis as these costs may vary independent of business performance. Accordingly, we believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider these measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Although depreciation is a non-cash charge, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in our working capital;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect income tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect depreciation and interest expenses associated with the lease financing obligations; and
● Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated.
(1) Represents the expenses incurred solely related to the Business Combination that closed in November 2020. It primarily includes investment banker fees, legal fees, professional fees for accountants and SEC and Hart-Scott-Rodino filing fees.
(2) Represents the excess compensation paid to one of the two founders of Onyx over the amount management believes would have been the compensation of an independent professional CEO for the applicable reporting periods.
(3) Represents legal and settlement expenses and gains related to significant matters that do not impact the fundamentals of our operations, pertaining to: (i) expenses of $596,043 ($104,776 for 2019) relating to causes of action between certain of the Company’s shareholders and which involves claims directly against the Company seeking the fulfillment of alleged indemnification obligations with respect to these matters, (ii) expenses of $278,086 ($0 in 2019) relating to trademark and IP protection cases, (iii) expenses of $87,952 ($0 in 2019) relating to the forgone sales of certain private label products pursuant to a settlement of a trademark claim, and (iv) gains of $237,000 (expense of $312,000 in 2019) relating to settlements of CARB and EPA matters. We are involved in routine IP litigation, commercial litigation and other various litigation matters. We review litigation matters from both a qualitative and quantitative perspective to determine if excluding the losses or gains will provide our investors with useful incremental information. Litigation matters can vary in their characteristics, frequency and significance to our operating results.
(4) Includes write-offs of advances and certain fraud loss claims from earlier years that we determined were uncollectible.
Free Cash Flow
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we have also disclosed here and elsewhere in this report free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capital expenditures (which consist of purchases of property and equipment and site and software development costs). We have provided a reconciliation below of free cash flow to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
We have included free cash flow in this report because it is an important indicator of our liquidity as it measures the amount of cash we generate. Accordingly, we believe that free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management.
Free cash flow has limitations as a financial measure, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. There are limitations to using non-GAAP financial measures, including that other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate free cash flow differently. Because of these limitations, you should consider free cash flow alongside other financial performance measures, including net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, capital expenditures and our other GAAP results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by or used in operating activities to free cash flow for each of the periods indicated.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand of $22.2 million as of December 31, 2020, cash generated from operations and changes in operating assets and liabilities. We believe our current resources will be sufficient to fund our cash needs for current operations for at least the next 12 months. Our primary uses of cash are for investment in website and software development.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the key cash flow metrics from our statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The net cash provided by operating activities consist of our net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation as well as the effect of changes in working capital and other activities. Operating cash flows can be volatile and are sensitive to many factors, including changes in working capital and our net income (loss). We have a negative working capital model (current liabilities exceed current assets). Any profitable growth in revenue results in incremental cash for the Company, as we receive funds when customers place orders on the website, while accounts payable are paid over a period time, based on vendor terms, which range on average from one week to eight weeks.
Cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.0 million and was driven primarily by cash provided by operating assets and liabilities of $13.8 million and the impact of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $6.9 million.
Cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was $4.3 million and was driven primarily by the impact of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $5.8 million, partially offset by cash used by operating assets and liabilities of $0.8 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $7.3 million and $7.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash used in investing activities varies depending on the timing of technology and product development cycles.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.1 million, compared to $0.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to a cash payout of $5.6 million for the cancellation of Legacy common stock warrants.
Critical Accounting Estimates
SEC guidance defines Critical Accounting Estimates as those estimates made in accordance with GAAP that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operation of the registrant. These items require the application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, management has made estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
In preparing these financial statements, management has utilized available information, including our past history, industry standards and the current and projected economic environments, among other factors, in forming its estimates, assumptions and judgments, giving due consideration to materiality. Because the use of estimates is inherent in GAAP, actual results could differ from those estimates. In addition, other companies may utilize different estimates, which may impact comparability of our results of operations to those of companies in similar businesses. A summary of the accounting estimates that management believes are critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements is set forth below. PARTS iD’s other significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 of the Notes to the Unaudited Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”). This new standard replaced all previous accounting guidance on this topic, eliminated all industry-specific guidance and provided a unified model to determine how revenue is recognized. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In doing so, companies need to use more judgment and make more estimates than under prior guidance. Judgments include identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of consideration to include in the transaction price, and allocating the transaction price to each performance obligation.
Effective January 1, 2019, PARTS iD elected to adopt ASU 2014-09 using the modified retrospective method which applied to all new contracts initiated on or after January 1, 2019 and all open contracts which had remaining obligations as of that date. Prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with PARTS iD’s historical accounting practices under Topic 605. The adoption of ASU 2014-09 did not have a material impact on PARTS iD’s balance sheets and financial results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and there was no cumulative effect to retained earnings on the date of adoption.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under its agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identify contracts with customers; (ii) identify performance obligation(s); (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s); and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
We recognize revenue on product sales through our website as the principal in the transaction, as we have concluded we control the product before it is transferred to the customer. We control products when we are the entity responsible for fulfilling the promise to the customer and take responsibility for the acceptability of the goods, assume inventory risk from shipment through the delivery date, have discretion in establishing prices, and select the product vendors of products sold.
Our revenue recognition is impacted by estimates of unshipped and undelivered orders at the end of the applicable reporting period. If actual unshipped and undelivered orders are not consistent with our estimates, the impact on our revenue for the applicable reporting period could be material. Unshipped and undelivered orders as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $16.2 million and $8.6 million, respectively, which are reflected as customer deposits on our balance sheets.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the outstanding days from the order date of our unshipped and undelivered orders were, on average, 12.7 days and 10.0 days, respectively. The increase in time between order and year end 2020 over 2019 was caused by delayed supplies and shipments due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales discounts earned by customers at the time of purchase and taxes collected from customers, which are remitted to governmental authorities, are deducted from gross revenue in determining net revenue. Allowances for sales returns are estimated and recorded based on historical experience and reduce product revenue, inclusive of shipping fees, by expected product returns. Net allowances for sales returns at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $1,062,077 and $495,697, respectively.
If actual sales returns are not consistent with our estimates or adjustments, we may incur future losses or gains that could be material. Adjustments to return allowances for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Website and Software Development
We capitalize certain costs associated with website and software (technology platform including the catalog) developed for internal use in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350-50, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Website Development Costs, and ASC 350-40, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal Use Software, when both the preliminary project design and the testing stage are completed and management has authorized further funding for the project, which it deems probable of completion and to be used for the function intended. Capitalized costs include amounts directly related to website and software development such as contractors’ fees, payroll and payroll-related costs for employees who are directly associated with and who devote time to the internal-use software project. Capitalization of such costs ceases when the project is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Capitalized costs are amortized over a three-year period commencing on the date that the specific module or platform is placed in service. Costs incurred during the preliminary stages of development and ongoing maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Determinations as to when a project is substantially complete and what constitutes ongoing maintenance require judgments and estimates by management. We periodically review the carrying values of capitalized costs and makes judgments as to ultimate realization. The amount of capitalized software costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
PARTS iD is not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for information on how recent accounting pronouncements have affected or may affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.