Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
OVERVIEW
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Selected Financial Data, the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto contained in this Form 10-K.
Throughout the following discussion and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we refer to “recurring revenues” and “non-current patent royalties.” For all periods presented, recurring revenues are comprised of “current patent royalties” and “current technology solutions revenue,” while "non-current patent royalties" are comprised of past sales royalties and static fixed-fee agreement royalties.
Business
InterDigital, Inc. ("InterDigital") is a research and development company that licenses its innovations to the global wireless and consumer electronics industries. We design and develop advanced technologies that enable connected, immersive experiences in a broad range of communications and entertainment products and services. Since our founding in 1972, our engineers have designed and developed a wide range of innovations that are used in wireless products and networks, from the earliest digital cellular systems to 5G and, today, solutions that we believe will shape the world beyond 5G. With the acquisition of the patent licensing business of visual technology industry leader Technicolor SA ("Technicolor") in 2018 (the "Technicolor Patent Acquisition"), followed by the acquisition of their Research & Innovation unit in 2019 (the "R&I Acquisition" and, together with the Technicolor Patent Acquisition, the "Technicolor Acquisitions"), we are now a leader in video processing, encoding/decoding, and display technology, with a significant Artificial Intelligence ("AI") research effort that intersects with both wireless and visual technologies.
InterDigital is one of the largest pure research & development and licensing companies in the world, with one of the most significant patent portfolios in the wireless and video industries. As of December 31, 2020, InterDigital's wholly owned subsidiaries held a portfolio of approximately 28,000 patents and patent applications related to wireless communications, video coding, display technology, and other areas relevant to the wireless and consumer electronics industries. Our portfolio includes numerous patents and patent applications that we believe are or may be essential or may become essential to standards established by many Standards Development Organizations ("SDOs"), including cellular and other wireless communications and video technology standards. Those wireless standards include 3G, 4G and the IEEE 802 suite of standards, as well as patents and patent applications that we believe are or may become essential to 5G standards that currently exist and as they continue to develop. Our video technology portfolio includes patents and applications relating to standards established by ISO/IEC Moving Picture Expert Group (MPEG), the ITU-T Video Coding Expert Group (VCEG), the Joint Collaborative Team on Video Coding (JCT-VC) and the Joint Video Expert Team (JVET), among others.
Our wireless portfolio has largely been built through internal development, supplemented by joint development projects with other companies, and select acquisitions of patents and companies. Products incorporating our patented inventions in wireless include: mobile devices, such as cellular phones, tablets, notebook computers and wireless personal digital assistants; wireless infrastructure equipment, such as base stations; components, dongles and modules for wireless devices; and Internet of Things ("IoT") devices and software platforms. Our video technology portfolio largely represents patents and applications that InterDigital obtained through the Technicolor Patent Acquisition, supplemented by internal development. Our patented inventions in video are incorporated in a range of products and services, including cellular phones, notebook computers, televisions, gaming consoles, set-top boxes, streaming devices and other consumer electronics.
Revenue
In 2020, 2019, and 2018, our total revenues were $359.0 million, $318.9 million, and $307.4 million, respectively. Our recurring revenues in 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $336.8 million, $298.2 million, and $280.3 million, respectively. In 2020, 2019, and 2018, we recognized $21.6 million, $19.8 million and $26.3 million, respectively, of non-current patent royalties as more fully discussed below. In 2020, fixed-fee royalties accounted for approximately 89% of our recurring revenues. These fixed-fee revenues are not affected by the related licensees’ success in the market or the general economic climate. The majority of the remaining portion of our recurring revenue was variable in nature due to the per-unit structure of the related license agreements.
New Agreements
Direct Licenses
During first quarter 2020, we entered into a multi-year, worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty bearing patent license agreement with Fairphone B.V. (“Fairphone”). The agreement covers Fairphone’s sale of its 3G and 4G handsets.
Also during first quarter 2020, we entered into a multi-year, worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty bearing patent license agreement with Humax Co., Ltd. (“Humax”). The agreement covers the sale of Humax’s HEVC digital set-top boxes.
During second quarter 2020, we entered into a multi-year, worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-bearing patent license with Huawei Investment & Holding Co., Ltd. (“Huawei”). In addition to agreement on terms for dismissal of the litigations and other proceedings between the parties, the agreement covers the sale of certain of Huawei’s 3G, 4G, and 5G terminal unit products, including the use of Wi-Fi and HEVC in those products.
During fourth quarter 2020, we entered into a multi-year, worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-bearing patent license with a mobile handset company covering 3G and 4G handsets, as well as 802.11 and HEVC technologies incorporated into such products.
Also during fourth quarter 2020, we entered into a multi-year, worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-bearing, patent license agreement with Blu Products, Inc. (“Blu”). The agreement covers Blu’s sale of its 3G, 4G and 5G handsets, including the use of Wi-Fi and HEVC in those products.
Licenses Through Platforms
During third quarter 2020, as part of the Madison Arrangement, we entered into a non-exclusive, royalty-bearing patent license agreement with a manufacturer covering certain of the licensee’s sales of digital televisions in U.S., Mexico, and Canada.
Refer to the "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Revenue Recognition" section below for details of our revenue recognition accounting policies and additional information on agreements with multiple performance obligations, as well as the estimates and methods used to determine the fair value of patents acquired, when applicable.
Expiration of License Agreements
Our patent license agreements with seven licensees expired during 2020, including LG. Collectively, all seven agreements accounted for $38.0 million, or approximately 11% of our recurring revenue in 2020, including LG who contributed $31.8 million, or approximately 9%, of our recurring revenue in 2020. In January 2021, it was reported that LG confirmed that it is considering exiting the smartphone market.
Our patent license agreements with six licensees are scheduled to expire during 2021. Collectively, all six agreements expiring in 2021 accounted for $30.3 million, or approximately 9%, of our recurring revenue in 2020.
We are actively working to renew these agreements consistent with the licensees' current product utilization and market position.
Intellectual Property Rights Enforcement
If we believe a party is required to license our patents in order to manufacture, use and/or sell certain products and such party refuses to do so, we typically offer such party to have royalty rates, or other terms, set by third party adjudicators (such as arbitrators). If the party refuses that offer and we believe they are unwilling to agree to a patent license on a fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory basis, we may have no other viable recourse but to institute legal action against them to enforce our patent rights. This legal action has typically taken the form of a patent infringement lawsuit or an administrative proceeding. In addition, we and our licensees, in the normal course of business, might seek to resolve disagreements as to the rights and obligations of the parties under the applicable license agreement through arbitration or litigation. Such legal actions ultimately may be decided by the presiding court, third party adjudicator, or a negotiated resolution between the parties.
In 2019 we were engaged in litigation with ZTE, Huawei, and Lenovo. During 2020, we filed patent infringement actions against Xiaomi. The matters are more fully discussed in Note 12, “Litigation and Legal Proceedings,” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included below in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K and/or our 2019 Form 10-K. We filed these actions after lengthy periods of negotiation and after the refusal of our counterparties to accept our various proposals to them, including our proposal to have a third party adjudicator set a royalty rate and resolve certain other terms upon which we could not mutually agree. We negotiated resolutions to the matters involving ZTE and Huawei in December 2019 and April 2020, respectively, while our matters with Lenovo and Xiaomi continue to proceed.
In 2020, our intellectual property enforcement costs increased to $28.6 million, from $25.4 million and $17.6 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. These costs represented 17% of our total patent administration and licensing costs of $170.2 million in 2020. Intellectual property enforcement costs will vary depending upon activity levels, and it is likely they will continue to be a significant expense for us in the future.
Cash and Short-Term Investments
As of December 31, 2020, we had $0.9 billion of cash, restricted cash and short-term investments and up to an additional $227.8 million of payments due under signed agreements, including $16.0 million recorded in accounts receivable which includes estimates related to our fourth quarter 2020 variable patent royalty revenue. A portion of our cash and short-term investments include fixed royalty payments we have received related to revenue we will record in the future. As a result, our future cash receipts from existing licenses subject to fixed patent royalties will be lower than if the royalty payments were structured to coincide with the underlying sales. During 2020, we recorded $377.8 million of cash receipts related to patent licensing and technology solutions agreements as follows (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $326.2 million of our $328.0 million deferred revenue balance as of December 31, 2020 related to dynamic fixed-fee royalty payments that were scheduled to amortize as follows (in thousands):
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") as a pandemic, and it continues to significantly impact the United States and the rest of the world. Though the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken to reduce its transmission, such as the imposition of social distancing and orders to work-from-home and shelter-in-place, have altered our business environment and overall working conditions, we continue to believe that our strategic strengths, including talent, our strong balance sheet, stable revenue base, and the strength of our patent portfolio, will allow us to weather a rapidly changing marketplace.
While the environment in which we conduct our business and our overall working conditions have changed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a limited impact on our operations and financial position during fiscal year 2020. Fixed-fee royalties accounted for 89% of our revenues in 2020. These fixed-fee revenues are not directly affected by our related licensees’ success in the market or the general economic climate. To that end, in fiscal year 2020, we did not experience a significant impact on our revenue due to COVID-19. Meanwhile, we have taken steps to protect the health and safety of our employees and their families, with our entire worldwide workforce continuing to work remotely with limited exceptions. Despite these remote working conditions, our business activities have continued to operate with minimal interruption, and we expect them to continue to operate efficiently. Nearly all work-related travel continues to remain suspended, and we have conducted our licensing negotiations, investor presentations and participation in standards organizations and industry events virtually. Between March 12, 2020, when we began to work almost entirely remotely, and December 31, 2020, we successfully concluded five new patent license agreements that we estimate will result in revenues exceeding $170.0 million over the two to four year terms of those agreements. Our financial position remains strong, we have sufficient access to capital if needed, and we remain committed to our efforts around cost discipline.
Comparability of Financial Results
When comparing our 2020 financial results against the financial results of other periods, the following items should be taken into consideration:
•the Technicolor Patent Acquisition and the R&I Acquisition, which closed on July 30, 2018 and May 31, 2019, respectively, contributed $20.5 million to our 2020 revenue and $69.4 million to our 2020 operating expenses. The $69.4 million of operating expenses is comprised of $64.6 million of recurring costs, of which $17.4 million relates to patent amortization, $2.3 million relates to one-time transaction-related and integration costs, and $2.5 million relates to revenue sharing from the Madison Arrangement;
•a net $5.6 million gain, primarily resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions of our long-term strategic investments, which was included within “Other Income, Net” in the consolidated statement of income;
•a $8.1 million of charges related to disposal of assets, primarily patents as part of on-going patent portfolio management and shutting down our San Diego office, which is included in "Operating Expenses" in the consolidated statement of income;
•our 2020 revenue includes $21.6 million of non-recurring revenue, which primarily relates to the Huawei PLA discussed above; and
•the 2020 tax provision includes discrete benefits of $20.9 million, which primarily relates to the expected amendment of a prior year tax return to utilize a tax asset generated in the current year, as well as the reversal of a tax reserve.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of GAAP, which require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in both our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results could differ from these estimates and any such differences may be material to the financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and New Accounting Guidance" within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. We believe the accounting policies that are of particular importance to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and that may involve a higher degree of complexity and judgment in their application compared to others are those relating to revenue recognition, compensation, business combinations and goodwill, and income taxes. If different assumptions were made or different conditions existed, our financial results could have been materially different.
Revenue Recognition
We derive the vast majority of our revenue from patent licensing. The timing and amount of revenue recognized from each licensee depends upon a variety of factors, including the specific terms of each agreement and the nature of the deliverables and obligations. Such agreements are often complex and include multiple performance obligations. These agreements can include, without limitation, performance obligations related to the settlement of past patent infringement liabilities, patent and/or know-how licensing royalties on covered products sold by licensees, access to a portfolio of technology as it exists at a point in time, and access to a portfolio of technology at a point in time along with promises to provide any technology updates to the portfolio during the term.
In accordance with US GAAP, we use a five-step model to achieve the core underlying principle that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers at an amount that the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. These steps include (1) identifying the contract with the customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue as the entity satisfies the performance obligation(s). Additionally, we have elected to utilize certain practical expedients in the application of ASC 606. In evaluating the presence of a significant financing component in our agreements, we utilize the practical expedient to exclude any contracts wherein the gap between payment by our customers and the delivery of our performance obligation is less than one year. We have also elected to utilize the practical expedient related to costs of obtaining a contract where an entity may recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that the entity otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. Timing of revenue recognition may differ significantly from the timing of invoicing to customers. Contract assets are included in accounts receivable and represent unbilled amounts expected to be received from customers in future periods, where the revenue recognized to date exceeds the amount billed, and right to payment is subject to the underlying contractual terms. Contract assets are classified as long-term assets if the payments are expected to be received more than one year from the reporting date. Contract assets due within less than twelve months of the balance sheet date are included within accounts receivable in our consolidated balance sheets. Contract assets due more than twelve months after the balance sheet date are included within other non-current assets.
Patent License Agreements
Upon signing a patent license agreement, we provide the licensee permission to use our patented inventions in specific applications. We account for patent license agreements in accordance with the guidance indicated above. Certain patent license agreements contain revenue from non-financial sources in the form of patents received from the customer. Under our patent license agreements, we typically receive one or a combination of the following forms of payment as consideration for permitting our licensees to use our patented inventions in their applications and products:
Consideration for Past Patent Royalties
Consideration related to a licensee’s product sales from prior periods may result from a negotiated agreement with a licensee that utilized our patented inventions prior to signing a patent license agreement with us or from the resolution of a disagreement or arbitration with a licensee over the specific terms of an existing license agreement. We may also receive consideration for past patent royalties in connection with the settlement of patent litigation where there was no prior patent license agreement. In each of these cases, we record the consideration as revenue as prescribed by the five-step model.
Fixed-Fee Agreements
Fixed-fee license agreements include fixed, non-refundable royalty payments that fulfill the licensee’s obligations to us under a patent license agreement for a specified time period or for the term of the agreement for specified products, under certain patents or patent claims, for sales in certain countries, or a combination thereof - in each case for a specified time period (including for the life of the patents licensed under the agreement).
Dynamic fixed-fee license agreements contain a single performance obligation that represents ongoing access to a portfolio of technology over the license term, since our promise to transfer to the licensee access to the portfolio as it exists at inception of the license, along with promises to provide any technology updates to the portfolio during the term, are not separately identifiable. Upon entering a new agreement, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations delivered at signing (e.g. our existing patent portfolio) and future performance obligations (e.g. the technology updates). We use a time-based input method of progress to determine the timing of revenue recognition, and as such we recognize the future deliverables on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement. We utilize the straight-line method as we believe that it best depicts efforts expended to develop and transfer updates to the customer evenly throughout the term of the agreement.
Static fixed-fee license agreements are fixed-price contracts that generally do not include updates to technology we create after the inception of the license agreement or in which the customer does not stand to substantively benefit from those updates during the term. Although we have few static fixed-fee license agreements, we generally satisfy our performance obligations under such agreements at contract signing, and as such revenue is recognized at that time.
Variable Agreements
Upon entering a new variable patent license agreement, the licensee typically agrees to pay royalties or license fees on licensed products sold during the term of the agreement. We utilize the sales- or usage- based royalty exception for these agreements and recognize revenues during the contract term when the underlying sale or usage occurs. Our licensees under variable agreements provide us with quarterly royalty reports that summarize their sales of covered products and their related royalty obligations to us. We typically receive these royalty reports subsequent to the period in which our licensees’ underlying sales occurred. As a result, we are required to estimate revenues, subject to the constraint on our ability to estimate such amounts.
Technology Solutions
Technology solutions revenue consists of revenue from royalty payments, software licenses, engineering services and product sales. The nature of these contracts and timing of payments vary. We recognize revenue from royalty payments and license agreements using the same methods described above under our policy for recognizing revenue from patent license agreements. We recognize revenue from engineering services using percentage of completion method.
Patent Sales
Our business strategy of monetizing our intellectual property includes the sale of select patent assets. As patent sales executed under this strategy represent a component of our ongoing major or central operations and activities, we will record the related proceeds as revenue. We will recognize the revenue in accordance with the five-step model, generally upon closing of the patent sale transaction.
Agreements with Multiple Performance Obligations
During 2020, we signed five new agreement that had multiple performance obligations. Consistent with the revenue recognition policies disclosed above, we (1) identified the contract with the customer, (2) identified the performance obligations, (3) determined the transaction price, (4) allocated the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (5) recognized revenue as we satisfy the performance obligations. We allocated the transaction price to each performance obligation for accounting purposes using our best estimate of the term and value. The process for determining the value of the standalone selling prices of identified performance obligations in dynamic fixed-fee license agreements requires the exercise of significant judgment when evaluating the valuation methods and assumptions, including the assumed royalty rates, projected sales volumes, discount rate, identification of comparable market transactions which are not directly observable and other relevant factors. Changes in any of a number of these assumptions could have had a substantial impact on the relative fair value assigned to each performance obligation for accounting purposes. These inputs and assumptions represent management's best estimates at the time of the transaction.
The impact that a five percent change in the aggregate amount allocated to past patent royalties under these agreements would have had on 2020 revenue is summarized in the following table (in thousands):
Revenue from Non-financial Sources
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, our patent licensing royalties were derived from patent license agreements ("PLAs") with 76, 69 and 66 independent licensees, respectively. We recognized revenue from five, four and three PLAs in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, for which patents generally comprised less than forty-percent of the total consideration paid or due to us under those agreements. In addition, during 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recognized revenue from one PLA that was executed in 2014 in connection with a patent purchase agreement ("PPA") with the licensee. Total cash paid to our licensee under this PPA is approximately 56% of the total cash due to us under this licensee's PLA. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately 7%, 6% and 3%, respectively, of our total revenue was based on the estimated fair value of the patents in the above transactions.
The process for determining the value of revenue from non-financial sources requires estimating the fair value of patents received. We estimated the fair value of the patents in the above transactions using one of, or a combination of, an analysis of comparable market transactions (the market approach), a discounted cash flow analysis (the income approach) and/or by quantifying the amount of money required to replace the future service capability of the assets (the cost approach). For the market approach, judgment was applied as to which market transactions were most comparable to the transaction. For the income approach, the inputs and assumptions used to develop these estimates were based on a market participant perspective and included estimates of projected royalties, discount rates, economic lives and income tax rates, among others. For the cost approach, we utilized the historical cost of assets of similar technologies to determine the estimated replacement cost, including research, development, testing and patent application fees. The development of a number of these inputs and assumptions requires a significant amount of management judgment and is based upon a number of factors, including identification of comparable market transactions, assumed royalty rates, projected sales volumes, economic lives of the patents and other relevant factors. Changes in any of a number of these assumptions could have had a substantial impact on the fair value assigned to the patents for accounting purposes. These inputs and assumptions represent management's best estimates at the time of the transaction.
The impact that a five-percent change in the estimated aggregate value of the patents acquired would have had on 2020 revenue, patent amortization and pre-tax income is summarized in the following table (in thousands).
Compensation Programs
We use a variety of compensation programs to attract, retain and motivate our employees, and to align employee compensation more closely with company performance. These programs include, but are not limited to, short-term incentives tied to performance goals, cash awards to inventors for filed patent applications and patent issuances, and long-term incentives in the form of stock option awards, time-based restricted stock unit (“RSU”) awards, performance-based awards and cash awards, noting equity awards are granted pursuant to the terms and conditions of our Equity Plans (as defined within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K). Our long-term incentives, including equity awards, typically include annual equity and cash award grants with three to five year vesting periods; as a result, in any one year, we are typically accounting for at least three active cycles.
The aggregate amount of performance compensation expense we record in a period, under both short-term and long-term incentive compensation programs, requires the input of subjective assumptions and is a function of our estimated progress toward performance compensation goals at both the beginning and the end of the period. Our estimated progress toward goals under performance equity grants is based on meeting a minimum confidence level in accordance with accounting rules for share-based compensation. Achievement rates can vary by performance cycle and from period to period, resulting in variability in our compensation expense.
If we had accrued all performance compensation costs throughout 2020 on the assumption that all plans and active cycles thereunder would be paid out at 100%, we would have recorded approximately $4.5 million more in compensation expense in 2020 than we actually recorded.
We account for compensation costs associated with share-based compensation based on the fair value of the instruments issued. The estimated value of stock options includes assumptions around expected life, stock volatility and dividends. The expected life of our stock option awards is based on the simplified method as prescribed by Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 14. In all periods, our policy has been to set the value of RSUs and restricted stock awards equal to the value of our underlying common stock on the date of measurement. For grants with graded vesting, we amortize the associated unrecognized compensation cost using an accelerated method. For grants that cliff vest, we amortize the associated unrecognized compensation cost on a straight-line basis over their vesting term.
In the event of canceled awards, we adjust compensation expense recognized to date as they occur. Tax windfalls and shortfalls related to the tax effects of employee share-based compensation are included in our tax provision. On the consolidated statements of cash flows, tax windfalls and shortfalls related to employee share-based compensation awards are included within operating activities and cash paid to tax authorities for shares withheld are included within financing activities. The inclusion of windfalls and shortfalls in the tax provision could increase our earnings volatility between periods. Tax windfalls related to share-based compensation for the years ended 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $0.2 million, $0.2 million and $1.8 million, respectively.
The below table summarizes our supplemental compensation expense for 2020, 2019 and 2018, in thousands:
(a) For 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately 12%, 5%, and 28%, respectively, of the aggregate expense associated with time-based and performance-based awards related to cash awards.
Business Combinations and Goodwill
Acquisitions that qualify as a business combination are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. The fair value of consideration transferred for an acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair value as of the acquisition date. Goodwill is recorded as the difference, if any, between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the net tangible and identified intangible assets acquired under a business combination.
Under the acquisition method of accounting, the Company completes valuation procedures for an acquisition to determine the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. These valuation procedures require management to make assumptions and apply significant judgment to estimate the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. If the estimates or assumptions used should significantly change, the resulting differences could materially affect the fair value of net assets. We estimate the fair value of the intangible assets acquired generally through a combination of a discounted cash flow analysis (the income approach) and an analysis of comparable market transactions (the market approach). For the income approach, we base the inputs and assumptions used to develop these estimates on a market participant perspective which includes estimates of projected revenues, discount rates, economic lives and income tax rates, among others, all of which require significant management judgment. For the market approach, we apply judgment to identify the most comparable market transactions to the transaction. Definite-lived intangible assets, which are primarily comprised of patents, are amortized over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method and are assessed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable.
Goodwill is not amortized but is reviewed for impairment annually on the first day of the fourth quarter, or when events or changes in the business environment indicate that the carrying value of a reporting unit may exceed its fair value. We first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether a quantitative goodwill impairment test is necessary. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, we need not perform the quantitative assessment. If based on the qualitative assessment we believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative assessment test is required to be performed. This assessment requires us to compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value including allocated goodwill. We determine the fair value of our reporting units generally using a combination of the income and market approaches. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, a goodwill impairment charge will be recorded for the difference up to the carrying value of goodwill.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the consolidated statement of income in the period in which the change was enacted. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets if management has determined that it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized.
In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. We are subject to examinations by the U.S. IRS and other taxing jurisdictions on various tax matters, including challenges to various positions we assert in our filings. In the event that the IRS or another taxing jurisdiction levies an assessment in the future, it is possible the assessment could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
The financial statement recognition of the benefit for an uncertain tax position is dependent upon the benefit being more likely than not to be sustainable upon audit by the applicable tax authority. If this threshold is met, the tax benefit is then measured and recognized at the largest amount that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. In the event that the IRS or another taxing jurisdiction levies an assessment in the future, it is possible the assessment could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
Between 2014 and 2020, we paid approximately $134.3 million in foreign taxes to foreign governments that have tax treaties with the U.S., for which we have claimed foreign tax credits against our U.S. tax obligations, and for which the tax treaty procedures are still open. It is possible that as a result of tax treaty procedures, the U.S. government may reach an agreement with the related foreign governments that will result in a partial refund of foreign taxes paid with a related reduction in our foreign tax credits. Due to foreign currency fluctuations, any such agreement could result in foreign currency gain or loss.
On November 8, 2019, the Company received notification that its request for competent authority pertaining to Article 25 (Mutual Agreement Procedure) of the United States-Republic of Finland Income Tax Convention had been reviewed by the IRS and an agreement has been reached (the “Finland Competent Authority Proceeding”). As a result of this agreement, the Company does not anticipate any tax consequences.
On July 24, 2018, the Company received notification that its request for competent authority pertaining to Article 27 (Mutual Agreement 14 Table of Contents Procedure) of the United States-Republic of Korea Income Tax Convention had been reviewed by the IRS and an agreement had been reached (the "Korea Competent Authority Proceeding"). As a result of this agreement, the Company received refunds of $97.4 million, inclusive of interest. In addition, we have recorded a net tax benefit of $14.7 million in our full year 2018. In September 2019, the amended tax returns for tax years covered by this agreement were filed and an additional benefit of $2.2 million was recorded related to the final refund the Company expects to receive.
New Accounting Guidance
Refer to Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and New Accounting Guidance" within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting guidance.
Legal Proceedings
We are routinely involved in disputes associated with enforcement and licensing activities regarding our intellectual property, including litigations, arbitrations and other proceedings. These litigations, arbitrations and other proceedings are important means to enforce our intellectual property rights. We are a party to other disputes and legal actions not related to our intellectual property, but also arising in the ordinary course of our business. Refer to Note 12, “Litigation and Legal Proceedings,” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included below in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a description of our material legal proceedings.
FINANCIAL POSITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, as well as cash generated from operations. We believe we have the ability to obtain additional liquidity through debt and equity financings. Based on our past performance and current expectations, we believe our available sources of funds, including cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and cash generated from our operations, will be sufficient to finance our operations, capital requirements, debt obligations, existing stock repurchase program and dividend program for the next twelve months.
Cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term investments
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had the following amounts of cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term investments (in thousands):
The net decrease in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term investments was attributable to cash used in financing activities of $132.9 million and cash used in investing activities, excluding sales and purchases of short-term investments, of $37.2 million. These uses were partially offset by cash provided by operating activities of $163.5 million. Cash used in financing activities primarily related to repayment of our 2020 Notes, and dividend payments. Cash used in investing activities, excluding sales and purchases of short-term investments, primarily related to capital investments for patents and fixed assets. Refer to the sections below for further discussion of these items.
Cash flows from operations
We generated the following cash flows from our operating activities in 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Our cash flows provided by operating activities are principally derived from cash receipts from patent license and technology solutions agreements, offset by cash operating expenses and income tax payments. The $74.0 million change in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by higher cash receipts primarily related to new patent license agreements signed over the last twelve months, as well as the timing of cash receipts related to patent license agreements. The table below sets forth the significant items comprising our cash flows provided by operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands).
(a) Cash operating expenses include operating expenses less depreciation of fixed assets, amortization of patents, and non-cash compensation.
(b) Income taxes paid include foreign withholding taxes.
(c) Working capital includes $69.6 million of tax receivables at December 31, 2020, compared to $38.0 million at December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by or used in investing and financing activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $310.0 million, a $578.3 million change from $268.3 million net cash provided by investing activities in 2019. During 2020, we purchased $272.8 million of short-term marketable securities, net of sales and received net proceeds of $4.3 million from our long-term strategic investments. During 2019, we sold $296.6 million of short-term marketable securities, net of purchases and also received initial proceeds of $10.0 million related to the sale of our Hillcrest product business.
Net cash used in financing activities for 2020 was $132.9 million, a $43.5 million change from net cash used in financing activities of $89.3 million in 2019. This change was primarily attributable to net proceeds of $140.2 million from the debt refinancing (net of related expenses) and $15.7 million proceeds from non-controlling interests received in 2019. These activities were partially offset by a reduction of $195.9 million in share repurchases, a $94.9 million payment on long-term debt related to the repayment of our 2020 Notes, and $5.3 million of proceeds from non-controlling interests received in 2020.
Other
Our combined short-term and long-term deferred revenue balance at December 31, 2020 was approximately $328.0 million, an increase of $57.7 million from December 31, 2019. Based on current license agreements, we expect the amortization of dynamic fixed-fee royalty payments to reduce the December 31, 2020 deferred revenue balance of $328.0 million by $192.1 million over the next twelve months.
Convertible Notes
Our Convertible Notes are included in the dilutive earnings per share calculation using the treasury stock method. Under the treasury stock method, we must calculate the number of shares of common stock issuable under the terms of the 2024 Notes (as defined herein) based on the average market price of our common stock during the applicable reporting period and include that number in the total diluted shares figure for the period. At the time we issued the 2024 Notes, we entered into the 2024 Call Spread Transactions (defined in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K). The 2024 Call Spread Transactions were designed to have the economic effect of reducing the net number of shares that will be issued in excess of the principal amount of converted Notes in the event of conversion of the 2024 Notes if the market price per share of our common stock is greater than the strike price of the 2024 Note Hedge Transactions by, in effect, increasing the conversion price of the 2024 Notes from our economic standpoint. However, under GAAP, since the impact of the 2024 Note Hedge Transactions (the "Note Hedge Transactions") is anti-dilutive, we exclude from the calculation of fully diluted shares the number of shares of our common stock that we would receive from the counterparties to these agreements upon settlement.
During periods in which the average market price of our common stock is above the applicable conversion price of the 2024 Notes ($81.29 per share as of December 31, 2020) or above the strike price of the warrants ($109.43 per share for the 2024 Warrant Transactions as of December 31, 2020), the impact of conversion or exercise, as applicable, would be dilutive and such dilutive effect is reflected in diluted earnings per share. As a result, in periods where the average market price of our common stock is above the conversion price or strike price, as applicable, under the treasury stock method, we calculate the number of shares issuable under the terms of the 2024 Notes and the warrants based on the average market price of the stock during the period, and include that number in the total diluted shares outstanding for the period.
Under the treasury stock method, changes in the price per share of our common stock can have a significant impact on the number of shares that we must include in the fully diluted earnings per share calculation. As described in Note 10, "Obligations" within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, as of December 30, 2020, we made the irrevocable election to settle all conversions of the 2024 Notes through a combination settlement of cash and shares of common stock, with a specified dollar amount of $1,000 per $1,000 principal amount of the 2024 Notes and any remaining amounts in shares ("net share settlement"). Assuming net share settlement upon conversion, the following table illustrates how, based on the $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes as of December 31, 2020, and the approximately 4.9 million warrants related to the 2024 Notes, outstanding as of the same date, changes in our stock price would affect (i) the number of shares issuable upon conversion of the 2024 Notes, (ii) the number of shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants subject to the 2024 Warrant Transactions (the "Warrant Transaction"), (iii) the number of additional shares deemed outstanding with respect to the 2024 Notes, after applying the treasury stock method, for purposes of calculating diluted earnings per share ("Total Treasury Stock Method Incremental Shares"), (iv) the number of shares of common stock deliverable to us upon settlement of the Note Hedge Transactions, and (v) the number of shares issuable upon concurrent conversion of the Convertible Note, exercise of the warrants subject to the Warrant Transactions, and settlement of the Note Hedge Transactions (shares in thousands):
(a) Represents incremental shares issuable upon concurrent conversion of convertible notes, exercise of warrants and settlement of the hedge agreements.
Contractual Obligations
We issued $400.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.00% Senior Convertible Notes due 2024 ("the 2024 Notes"). The 2024 Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.00% per year, payable in cash on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on December 1, 2019, and mature on June 1, 2024, unless earlier converted or repurchased.
For more information on the 2024 Notes, see Note 10, “Obligations,” within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(a)Refer to Note 5, "Business Combinations and Other Transactions," within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for details of our defined benefit plan obligations. Estimated future benefit payments included above are through 2030.
(b)Purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods and services that are legally binding on us, as well as accounts payable. Our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 includes a $3.8 million non-current liability for uncertain tax positions. The future payments related to uncertain tax positions have not been presented in the table above due to the uncertainty of the amounts and timing of cash settlement with the taxing authorities.
As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded long-term debt of $24.2 million related to the Technicolor Patent Acquisition. Additionally, we are subject to a revenue-sharing arrangement with Technicolor resulting from the Technicolor Acquisitions. There is no liability associated with the revenue-share agreement at December 31, 2020 as there are no minimum or maximum payments under the revenue-sharing arrangement, and, except in certain circumstances, the arrangement continues through December 31, 2038. Refer to Note 5, "Business Combinations and Other Transactions," within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. Due to the uncertainty regarding the timing and amount of future payments related to these items, the amounts are excluded from the contractual obligations table above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 Compared with 2019
Revenues
The following table compares 2020 revenues to 2019 revenues (in thousands):
(a) Recurring revenues are comprised of current patent royalties, inclusive of Dynamic Fixed-Fee Agreement royalties, and current technology solutions revenue.
(b) Non-recurring revenues are comprised of non-current patent royalties, which primarily include past patent royalties and royalties from static agreements, as well as patent sales.
The $40.1 million increase in total revenue was primarily driven by a $38.6 million increase in recurring revenue and a $1.8 million a increase in non-current patent royalties both primarily driven by ten new patent license agreements signed over the last fifteen months, including Huawei and ZTE. The increase in non-current patent royalties was also due to the inclusion of a $5.5 million net charge recorded as contra non-recurring revenue during 2019 related to a restructured licensing arrangement with a long-term customer.
In 2020 and 2019, 68% and 70% of our total revenues, respectively, were attributable to companies that individually accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues. In 2020 and 2019, the following licensees or customers accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues:
Operating Expenses
The following table summarizes the change in operating expenses by category (in thousands):
Operating expenses increased 8% to $303.8 million in 2020 from $281.1 million in 2019. The $22.7 million increase in total operating expenses was primarily due to increases/(decreases) in the following items (in thousands):
The $22.7 million increase in operating expenses was primarily driven by the Technicolor Acquisitions, which contributed $69.4 million to 2020 operating expenses following our May 2019 R&I Acquisition and July 2018 Technicolor Patent Acquisition. This compares to $63.0 million of operating expenses in 2019. The $69.4 million of operating expenses in 2020 resulting from the Technicolor Acquisitions is comprised of $64.6 million of recurring costs, of which $17.4 million relates to patent amortization. The remaining $4.8 million of operating expenses relates to $2.3 million of transaction and integration costs during 2020 and $2.5 million of revenue sharing for the Madison Arrangement. The $63.0 million of operating expenses in 2019 resulting from the Technicolor Patent Acquisition was comprised of $48.3 million of recurring costs, of which $16.6 million related to patent amortization. The remaining $14.7 million of operating expenses relates to $8.4 million of transaction and integration costs and $6.3 million of revenue sharing for the Madison Arrangement.
In 2020, we had a one-time $7.5 million non-cash charge to write-off the remaining book value of patents we disposed of as part of our on-going patent portfolio management. Performance-based incentive compensation increased by $4.2 million, primarily due to increased performance accruals driven by the Huawei PLA signed in 2020. We incurred $4.0 million of additional costs attributable to corporate initiatives as part of its on-going efforts to optimize its cost structure, including the closure of our San Diego office. The $3.2 million increase in intellectual property enforcement costs was primarily driven by the on-going Lenovo and Xiaomi litigations. Amortization expense increased by $1.6 million and was largely driven by patents acquired over the last twelve-months. Lastly, corporate initiatives to optimize our cost structure drove a $4.5 million decrease in personnel-related costs.
Patent administration and licensing expense: The $15.2 million increase in patent administration and licensing expense primarily resulted from the above-noted increases related to the non-cash charge to write-off the remaining book value of patents we disposed of as part of our on-going patent portfolio management, intellectual property enforcement costs, patent amortization, and performance-based incentive compensation, as well as increased patent maintenance costs.
Development expense: The $9.8 million increase in development expense primarily resulted from the above-noted increases related to the Technicolor Acquisitions, performance-based compensation and corporate initiatives. These increases were partially offset by lower personnel-related costs, primarily related to our second quarter 2019 sale of the Hillcrest product business and reductions in other non-cellular research areas.
Selling, general and administrative expense: The $2.3 million decrease in selling, general and administrative expense primarily resulted from the above-noted reduction in personnel-related costs, as well as lower one-time costs associated with the Technicolor Acquisitions. These decreases were partially offset by the above-noted increases in performance-based incentive compensation and corporate initiatives.
Non-Operating Expense
The following table compares 2020 non-operating income (expense) to 2019 non-operating income (expense) (in thousands):
The increase in non-operating expense between periods was primarily driven by the recognition of an aggregate $22.7 million gain on asset acquisition and sale of business during the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $14.2 million relates to the R&I Acquisition in second quarter 2019 and $8.5 million relates to the gain on sale of our Hillcrest product business in third quarter 2019. These gains were partially offset by the recognition of a $5.5 million loss on extinguishment of debt recognized in connection with the settlement of a portion of our 2020 Notes in second quarter 2019.
Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $5.6 million of gains resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions of one of our long-term strategic investments. Comparatively, during the year ended December 31, 2019 we recognized a net loss of $2.6 million resulting from the partial impairment of one of our strategic investments partially offset by a gain on sale of a separate strategic investment. These items are included in the "Other income (expense), net" caption in the table above. Interest expense remained flat and relates to interest on the 2024 Notes and interest incurred on long-term debt resulting from the Technicolor Patent Acquisition.
Income Taxes
In 2020, based on the statutory federal tax rate net of discrete federal and state taxes, our effective tax rate is a benefit of 21.2%. The negative effective tax rate was driven by a net benefit of $19.7 million that primarily relates to the expected amendment of a prior year tax return to utilize a tax asset generated in the current year, as well as the reversal of a tax reserve. As a result of the difference in timing between deduction of certain expenses between US GAAP and the tax law, the Company’s estimate of current taxable income is zero. The Company was unable to benefit from the favorable rates associated with Foreign Derived Intangible Income (“FDII”) as a result of having zero taxable income. The current year tax benefit is compared to an effective tax rate provision of 42.4% in 2019. The effective tax rate for 2019 was unfavorably impacted by an $8.0 million provision associated with valuation allowances on the Company’s losses in jurisdictions for which the Company receives no benefit. As a result of the difference in timing between US GAAP revenue and tax revenue, the Company's estimate of current taxable income is zero. The Company was unable to benefit from favorable rates associated with Foreign Derived Intangible Income ("FDII") as a result of having zero taxable income.
2019 Compared with 2018
Revenues
The following table compares 2019 revenues to 2018 revenues (in thousands):
(a) Recurring revenues are comprised of current patent royalties, inclusive of Dynamic Fixed-Fee Agreement royalties, and current technology solutions revenue.
(b) Non-recurring revenues are comprised of non-current patent royalties, which primarily include past patent royalties and royalties from static agreements, as well as patent sales.
The $11.5 million increase in total revenue was driven by an increase in recurring revenue of $17.8 million, primarily attributable to fixed-fee royalties and current technology solutions revenue. Fixed-fee royalty revenue increased by $17.9 million, primarily resulting from a dynamic fixed-fee agreement signed in each of the fourth quarters of 2018 and 2019. The increase in current technology solutions revenue related to the inclusion of engineering services revenue attributable to our on-going relationship with Technicolor. These increases were partially offset by a decrease variable patent royalties, which was primarily due to a restructured licensing arrangement with a long-term customer in first quarter 2019 whose revenues are now classified as fixed-fee royalty revenue and have declined as compared to prior year. This decrease in variable patent royalties was partially negated by the inclusion of variable patent royalties assumed as part of the Technicolor Patent Acquisition. Additionally, non-current patent royalties decreased by $6.5 million primarily due to a $5.5 million net charge recorded as contra non-recurring revenue during first quarter 2019 related to a restructured licensing arrangement with a long-term customer.
In 2019 and 2018, 70% and 71% of our total revenues, respectively, were attributable to companies that individually accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues. In 2019 and 2018, the following licensees or customers accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues:
Operating Expenses
The following table summarizes the change in operating expenses by category (in thousands):
Operating expenses increased 15% to $281.1 million in 2019 from $244.8 million in 2018. The $36.3 million increase in total operating expenses was primarily due to increases/(decreases) in the following items (in thousands):
The $36.3 million increase in operating expenses was primarily driven by the Technicolor Acquisitions, which contributed $63.0 million to 2019 operating expenses following the R&I Acquisition. This compares to $34.0 million of operating expenses in 2018 following our July 2018 Technicolor Patent Acquisition. The $63.0 million of operating expenses in 2019 resulting from the Technicolor Acquisitions is comprised of $48.3 million of recurring costs, of which $16.6 million relates to patent amortization, $8.4 million relates to transaction and integration costs during 2019, and the remaining $6.3 million relates to revenue sharing for the Madison Arrangement. The $34.0 million of operating expenses in 2018 resulting from the Technicolor Patent Acquisition was comprised of $16.2 million for five months of recurring costs, of which $6.8 million related to patent amortization, and the remaining $17.8 million related to transaction and integration costs. The $7.1 million increase in intellectual property enforcement and non-patent litigation was primarily due to the enforcement proceedings we initiated against Lenovo and Huawei in second half 2019. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily related to severance and related expenses associated with ongoing efforts to optimize our cost structure, as well as one-time costs associated with the sale of our Hillcrest product business.
Patent administration and licensing expense: The $30.9 million increase in patent administration and licensing expense primarily resulted from the above-noted increases related to the Technicolor Acquisitions and intellectual property enforcement costs.
Development expense: The $5.2 million increase in development expense primarily resulted from the above-noted increases related to the Technicolor Acquisitions, as discussed above, partially offset by reduced spending on development of commercial solutions driven by the sale our Hillcrest product business.
Selling, general and administrative expense: The $0.3 million increase in selling, general and administrative expense primarily resulted from the above-noted increases related to the Technicolor Acquisitions and increased personnel-related costs, discussed above.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
The following table compares 2019 non-operating income (expense) to 2018 non-operating income (expense) (in thousands):
The change in non-operating income (expense) between periods was primarily driven by the recognition of an aggregate $22.7 million gain on asset acquisition and sale of business during the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $14.2 million relates to the R&I Acquisition in second quarter 2019 and $8.5 million relates to the gain on sale of our Hillcrest product business in third quarter 2019. These gains were partially offset by the recognition of a $5.5 million loss on extinguishment of debt recognized in connection with the settlement of a portion of our 2020 Notes in second quarter 2019.
Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a net loss of $2.6 million resulting from the partial impairment of one of our strategic investments partially offset by a gain on sale of a separate strategic investment. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized an aggregate $8.4 million loss resulting from the sale of our entire ownership interest in one of our strategic investments and the impairment of a separate strategic investment. These items are included in the "Other income (expense), net" caption in the table above. Higher interest expense relates to interest on the 2024 Notes and interest incurred on long-term debt resulting from the Technicolor Patent Acquisition.
Income Taxes
In 2019, based on the statutory federal tax rate net of discrete federal and state taxes, our effective tax rate was a provision of 42.4%. The effective tax rate for 2019 was unfavorably impacted by an $8.0 million provision associated with valuation allowances on the Company’s losses in jurisdictions for which the Company receives no benefit. As a result of the difference in timing between US GAAP revenue and tax revenue, the Company's estimate of current taxable income is zero. The Company was unable to benefit from favorable rates associated with FDII as a result of having zero taxable income.
This is compared to an effective tax rate benefit of 85.5% in 2018, based on the statutory federal tax rate net of discrete federal and state taxes. The effective tax rate for 2018 was impacted by an $18.0 million benefit associated with the FDII deduction provisions contained within the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, or TCJA, and a $14.7 million benefit from expected amended returns related to the Korea Competent Authority Proceeding settlement discussed above.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Such statements include certain information in “Part I, Item 1. Business” and “Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and other information regarding our current beliefs, plans and expectations, including, without limitation, the matters set forth below. Words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “intend,” “plan,” “forecast,” “believe,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “if,” “may,” “might,” “future,” “target,” “goal,” “trend,” “seek to,” “will continue,” “predict,” “likely,” “in the event,” variations of any such words or similar expressions contained herein are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K include, without limitation, statements regarding:
(i) our objective to continue to be a leading designer and developer of technology solutions and innovation for the mobile, video and consumer electronics industries and to monetize those solutions and innovations through a combination of licensing, sales and other revenue opportunities;
(ii) our plans for executing on our business strategy, including our plans to develop and source innovative technologies related to wireless and video, establish and grow our patent-based revenue, pursue commercial opportunities for our advanced platforms and solutions, and maintain a collaborative relationship with key industry players and worldwide standards bodies;
(iii) our belief that our portfolio includes a number of patents and patent applications that are or may be essential or may become essential to cellular, other wireless and video standards, including 3G, 4G, 5G, HEVC and the IEEE 802 suite of standards, as well as patents and patent applications that we believe may become essential to standards that are under development;
(iv) our belief that a number of our CDMA and OFDM/OFDMA inventions are, may be or may become essential to the implementation of CDMA and OFDM/OFDMA-based systems in use today;
(v) our belief that companies making, importing, using or selling products compliant with the standards covered by our patent portfolio require a license under our patents and will require licenses under patents that may issue from our pending patent applications;
(vi) our belief that our ongoing research efforts and associated patenting activities enable us to sell patent assets that are not vital to our core licensing programs, as well as to execute patent swaps that can strengthen our overall portfolio;
(vii) our belief that our commercial initiatives are potential revenue opportunities;
(viii) the estimated growth of the IoT market, including the size of the connected device installed base and number of connected device shipments, over the next several years;
(ix) the types of licensing arrangements and various royalty structure models that we anticipate using under our future license agreements;
(x) the possible outcome of audits of our license agreements when underreporting or underpayment is revealed;
(xi) our belief that our facilities are suitable and adequate for our present purposes and our needs in the near future;
(xii) our expectations and estimations regarding the income tax effects, and the impact on the Company, of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, or TCJA, and our belief that we currently expect a significant portion of our income to qualify as FDII and thus be subject to the 13.1% tax rate;
(xiii) our expectation that we will continue to pay a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock comparable to our quarterly $0.35 per share cash dividend in the future;
(xiv) our belief that intellectual property enforcement costs, including litigation costs, will likely continue to be a significant expense for us in the future;
(xv) our belief that we have the ability to obtain additional liquidity through debt and equity financings;
(xvi) our belief that our available sources of funds will be sufficient to finance our operations, capital requirements, debt obligations, existing stock repurchase program and dividend program for the next twelve months;
(xvii) our expectations regarding the potential effects of new accounting standards on our financial statements or results of operations;
(xviii) our expectation that the amortization of fixed-fee royalty payments will reduce our deferred revenue balance over the next twelve months;
(xix) our belief in our ability to continue to expand into the consumer electronics market, and the opportunities that market presents;
(xx) our projections of amounts to be owed to Technicolor under our revenue sharing arrangement;
(xxi) the expected timing, outcome and impact of our various litigation, arbitration and administrative matters; and
(xxii) our belief that there will be a level of concentration in worldwide shipments of 5G handsets similar to the current level of concentration in worldwide shipments of 3G and 4G handsets.
Although the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such statements can only be based on facts and factors currently known by us. Consequently, forward-looking statements concerning our business, results of operations and financial condition are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties. We caution readers that actual results and outcomes could differ materially from those expressed in or anticipated by such forward-looking statements due to a variety of factors, including, without limitation, the following:
(i) uncertainty and decline in U.S.-China relations and/or increased economic uncertainty in China;
(ii) unanticipated difficulties or delays related to the further development of our technologies;
(iii) the failure of the markets for our technologies to materialize to the extent or at the rate that we expect;
(iv) changes in our plans, strategy or initiatives;
(v) the challenges related to entering into new and renewed patent license agreements and unanticipated delays, difficulties or acceleration in the negotiation and execution of patent license agreements;
(vi) our ability to leverage our strategic relationships and secure new patent license and technology solutions agreements on acceptable terms;
(vii) the impact of current trends in the industry that could result in reductions in and/or caps on royalty rates under new patent license agreements;
(viii) changes in the market share and sales performance of our primary licensees, delays in product shipments of our licensees, delays in the timely receipt and final reviews of quarterly royalty reports from our licensees, delays in payments from our licensees and related matters;
(ix) the timing and/or outcome of our various litigation, arbitration, regulatory or administrative proceedings, including any awards or judgments relating to such proceedings, additional legal proceedings, changes in the schedules or costs associated with legal proceedings or adverse rulings in such legal proceedings;
(x) the determination of royalty rates, or other terms, under our patent license agreements through arbitration or other third-party adjudications, or the establishment by arbitrators or other third-party adjudicators of patent royalty rates at levels lower than our agreed or historical rates;
(xi) the impact of potential patent legislation, USPTO rule changes and international patent rule changes on our patent prosecution and licensing strategies;
(xii) the impact of rulings in legal proceedings, potential legislation affecting the jurisdiction and authority of the USITC and potential changes to the IPR policies of worldwide standards bodies on our investments in research and development and our strategies for patent prosecution, licensing and enforcement;
(xiii) changes in our interpretations of, and assumptions and calculations with respect to the impact on the Company of, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, or TCJA, as well as further guidance that may be issued regarding the TCJA;
(xiv) the timing and/or outcome of any state or federal tax examinations or audits, changes in tax laws and the resulting impact on our tax assets and liabilities;
(xv) the effects of any dispositions, acquisitions or other strategic transactions by the Company;
(xvi) decreased liquidity in the capital markets; and
(xvii) unanticipated increases in our cash needs or decreases in available cash.
You should carefully consider these factors as well as the risks and uncertainties outlined in greater detail in Part I, Item 1A, in this Form 10-K before making any investment decision with respect to our common stock. These factors, individually or in the aggregate, may cause our actual results to differ materially from our expected and historical results. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. In addition, you should not place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained herein, which are made only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to revise or update publicly any forward-looking statement for any reason, except as otherwise required by law.