ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis is presented in five sections as below and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains certain forward-looking information. See “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” above for certain information concerning those forward-looking statements.
● Overview
● Results of Operations
● Liquidity and Capital Resources
● Outlook
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
OVERVIEW
Ideanomics, Inc. (Nasdaq: IDEX) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on October 19, 2004. From 2010 through 2017, our primary business activities were providing premium content video on demand (“VOD”) services, with primary operations in the PRC, through our subsidiaries and variable interest entities under the brand name You-on-Demand (“YOD.”) We closed the YOD business during 2019.
Starting in early 2017, the Company transitioned its business model to become a next-generation financial technology (“fintech”) company. The Company built a network of businesses, operating principally in the trading of petroleum products and electronic components that the Company believed had significant potential to recognize benefits from blockchain and AI technologies including, for example, enhancing operations, addressing cost inefficiencies, improving documentation and standardization, unlocking asset value and improving customer engagement. During 2018 the Company ceased operations in the petroleum products and electronic components trading businesses and disposed of the businesses during 2019. As we looked to deploy fintech solutions in late 2018 and into 2019, we found a unique opportunity in the Chinese EV industry to facilitate large scale conversion of fleet vehicles from internal combustion engines to EV. This led us to establish our MEG business unit to take advantage of this opportunity, subsequently we have extended our EV business to the ASEAN countries and have made an acquisition in the U.S. in the first quarter of 2021.
Fintech continues to be an important area for us as we look to invest in and develop businesses that can improve the financial services industry, particularly as it relates to digital securities.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
Our business is expected to be impacted by both macroeconomic and Ideanomics-specific factors. The following factors have been part of the transformation of the Company which affected the results of our operations in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
● Our ability to transform our business and to meet internal or external expectations of future performance. In connection with this transformation, we are in the process of considerable changes, which include assembling a new management team in the United States and overseas, reconfiguring our business structure, continuing to further enhance our controls, procedures, and oversight during this transformation, and expanding our mission and business lines for continued growth. It is uncertain whether these efforts will prove beneficial or whether we will be able to develop the necessary business models, infrastructure and systems to support our businesses. To succeed, among other things, we will need to have or hire the right talent to execute our business strategy. Market acceptance of new product and service offerings will be dependent in part on our ability to include functionality and usability that address customer requirements, and optimally price our products and services to meet customer demand and cover our costs.
● Our ability to remain competitive. We will continue to face intense competition: these new technologies are constantly evolving, and our competitors may introduce new platforms and solutions that are superior to ours. In addition, our competitors may be able to adapt more quickly to new technologies or may be able to devote greater resources to the development, marketing and sale of their products than we can. We may never establish and maintain a competitive position in the hybrid financing and logistics management businesses.
● The fluctuation in earnings resulting from acquisitions, strategic equity investments, the formation of joint ventures, and in-licenses of technology. Our results of operations may fluctuate from period to period based on our entry into new transactions to expand our business. In addition, while we intend to contribute cash and other assets to our investments, we do not intend for our holding company to conduct significant research and development activities. In general we intend research and development activities to be conducted by our technology partners and licensors. These fluctuations in growth or costs and in our investments and partnerships may contribute to significant fluctuations in the results of our operations.
Liquidity Improvements
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company improved its liquidity position by raising a total of $225.5 million: $191.4 million through the issuance of common stock and exercise of warrants, $7.1 million from noncontrolling interest shareholders, and $27.0 million through the issuance of senior secured convertible notes. The Company converted senior secured convertible notes of $34.4 million plus accrued interest of $0.3 million to common stock. Additionally, the Company converted $4.6 million of convertible notes payable and accrued interest to related parties and an additional $1.5 million due to related parties to common stock. As a result of these actions, the Company reduced its the principal amount of its indebtedness by $50.9 million, and as of December 31, 2020, had cash and cash equivalents of $165.8 million, $163.8 million of which is held in U.S. financial institutions.
Based upon its business projections and its cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2020, the Company believes it has the ability to continue as a going concern.
Effects of COVID-19
Novel Coronavirus 2019 (“COVID-19”) is an infectious disease cause by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. The disease was first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, the capital of China’s Hubei province, and has since spread globally, resulting in the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As of March 21, 2021, over 122.9 million cases had been reported across the globe, resulting in 2.7 million deaths.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused significant disruption to society as a whole, including the workplace. The resulting impact to the global supply chain has disrupted most aspects of national and international commerce, with government-mandated social distancing measures imposing stay-at-home and work-from-home orders in almost every country. The effects of social distancing have shut down significant parts of the local, regional, national, and international economies, for limited or extended periods of time, with the exception of government designated essential services.
In many parts of the world, stay-at-home and work-from-home orders were relaxed during the summer of 2020 as the effects of the Coronavirus appeared to lessen, and economic activity began to recover. However, commencing in the autumn and fall of 2020, the U.S. as well as countries in Europe, South America and Asia began to experience an increase in new COVID-19 cases, and in some cases local, state, and national governments began to reinstate restrictive measures to stem the spread of the virus. The U.S. and other countries also experienced an increase in new COVID-19 cases after the fall and winter holiday season, with new, more infectious variants of COVID-19 identified. Various vaccines have been developed, with vaccinations programs in effect worldwide, though reaching acceptable levels for worldwide immunization against COVID-19 remains challenging.
The future effects of the virus are difficult to predict, due to uncertainty about the course of the virus, different variants that may evolve, and the supply of the vaccine on a local, regional, and global basis, as well as the ability to implement vaccination programs in a short time frame.
Many of the Company’s operations are in the development or early stage, have not had significant revenues to date, and the Company does not anticipate significant adverse effects on its operations’ revenue as compared to its business plan in the near- or mid-term, although the future effects of COVID-19 may result in regional restrictive measures which may constrain the Company’s operations.
The Company continues to monitor the overall situation with COVID-19 and its effects on both local, regional and global economies.
Information about segments
The Company’s chief operating decision maker has been identified as the chief executive officer, who reviews consolidated results when making decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance of the Company. Therefore, the Company operates in one segment with two business units: Ideanomics Mobility and Ideanomics Capital.
Our Unconsolidated Equity Investments
The investments where the Company exercises significant influence, but not control, are classified as long-term equity investments and accounted for using the equity method. Under the equity method, the investment is initially recorded at cost and adjusted for our share of undistributed earnings or losses of the investee. Investment losses are recognized until the investment is written down to nil, provided that we do not guarantee the investee’s obligations or we are committed to provide additional funding. Refer to Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Taxation
United States
Ideanomics, Inc., M.Y. Products, LLC, Grapevine Logic, Inc., Delaware Board of Trade Holdings, Inc., Fintech Village, LLC are United States companies subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. No provision for income taxes has been provided as none of the companies had taxable profit since inception. At the acquisition of Grapevine Logic, Inc. in 2018, deferred tax liabilities were recorded relating to intangible assets recorded for financial reporting purposes but not recognized for income tax purposes. The intangible assets consequently could not provide deductible amortization expense for income tax purposes. The deferred tax liabilities were recorded on the acquisition date to the extent that they could not be offset by usable net operating loss carryforwards acquired in the acquisition. These deferred tax liabilities were reduced, providing an income tax benefit, to the extent that the intangible assets were reduced by amortization expense and additional net operating loss carry forwards were created to offset the liabilities. These benefits include $152,875 in 2019. The 2019 amount related to activities in the first two quarters of 2019. Ideanomics, Inc. increased its ownership in Grapevine Logic, Inc. such that beginning with the third quarter of 2019, the result of which was that Grapevine Logic, Inc. activities would be included in the consolidated tax return of Ideanomics, Inc. As a result, the valuation allowance provided against Ideanomics’ deferred tax assets were reduced by $361,059, the amount of Grapevine Logic, Inc.’s remaining deferred tax liabilities as that portion of Ideanomics Inc.’s net operating loss carryovers could now be utilized to offset these liabilities.
The Tax Cut and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) of 2017 includes provision for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) under which taxes on foreign income are imposed on the excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of certain foreign subsidiaries. TCJA also enacted the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (“BEAT”) under which taxes are imposed on certain base eroding payments to related foreign companies, subject to certain requirements.
Based on current year financial results, the company has determined that there is no GILTI nor BEAT tax liability.
In addition, the TCJA now entitles U.S. companies that owns 10.0% or more of a foreign corporation a 100% dividends-received deduction for the foreign-source portion of dividends paid by such foreign corporation. Also, net operating losses (“NOLs”) arising after December 31, 2017 are deductible only to the extent of 80.0% of the taxpayer’s taxable income, and may be carried forward indefinitely but generally not allowed to be carried back.
Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands
Under current laws of the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands, the Company is not subject to tax on its income or capital gains. In addition, dividend payments are not subject to withholding tax in the Cayman Islands or British Virgin Islands.
Hong Kong
The Company’s subsidiaries incorporated in Hong Kong are subject to Profits Tax of 16.5%. Tax expense of $0.1 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019 relating to the income on one Hong Kong subsidiary relating to a gain recorded on the sale of VIE related assets. All other Hong Kong subsidiaries had losses for 2019 and the resulting deferred tax assets relating to the loss carryovers were fully offset by a valuation allowance.
The People’s Republic of China
Under the PRC’s Enterprise Income Tax Law, the company’s Chinese subsidiaries and VIEs are subject to an EIT of 25.0%.
The Company’s future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as tax legislation, geographic composition of its pre-tax income and non-tax deductible expenses incurred. The Company’s management regularly monitors these legislative developments to determine if there are changes in the statutory income tax rate.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, one of the Company’s PRC subsidiaries incurred a tax obligation of $0.6 million relating to its EV sales. The entity did not have operating loss carryovers and is not able to utilize the loss carryovers of other subsidiaries. The transactions under which the VIE agreements were terminated resulted in gains to one VIE entity, prior to deconsolidation, that triggered a tax expense of $0.2 million. Other PRC entities either had losses that created additional operating loss carryovers, where the related deferred tax assets were offset by a valuation allowance, or had income that would have resulted in a current tax liability, except that they were able to offset those liabilities with operating loss carryovers from prior years. The use of prior year carryovers, in all cases for which the related deferred tax assets all had previously been offset by a valuation allowance, avoided $0.2 million of income tax expense.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (USD in thousands, except per share amounts)
Revenues (USD in thousands)
n/m = Not Meaningful
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.8 million as compared to $44.6 million for the same period in 2019, a decrease of $17.8 million, or 40%. The decrease was due to a change to our business focus from digital asset management services to the EV business. The Company generated $19.5 million from the sale of EVs as compared to $2.7 million in the prior year, an increase of $16.8 million. In the current year, the Company earned revenues of $5.2 million from the sale of combustion engine vehicles; the sale of combustion engine vehicles is not the Company’s primary focus, however, from time to time, the Company will sell combustion engine vehicles if a client places an order. During 2020, the Company made its first sales of charging and battery equipment. The Company believes this is very encouraging development as the provision of charging, battery and battery swap services is an important strategic focus for the Company. Revenues from Grapevine, the Company’s business focused on digital advertising services were $1.6 million as compared to $1.2 million in the prior year, an increase of $0.5 million or 39%. Grapevine is considered a non-core asset for Ideanomics.
The revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were recorded on either a Principal or Agent basis, depending on the terms of the underlying transaction, including the ability to control the product and the level of inventory risk taken. The majority of the revenue from the sale of EVs, as well as revenue from the sale of the combustion engine vehicles and charging and batteries for the year ended December 31, 2020 were recorded on a Principal basis because the Company has inventory risk in the transactions. The revenue from the sale of EVs for the year ended December 31, 2019 was recorded on an Agent basis due to the terms of the transaction.
Cost of revenue (USD in thousands)
n/m = Not Meaningful
Cost of revenues was $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cost of revenues increased by $23.2 million. From a comparability perspective, the cost of revenue during 2019 is not indicative of the new business in 2020. The cost of revenue during 2019 was primarily associated with the digital asset management services and creator payments from the Grapevine business. The cost of revenue from the sale of EVs was $18.0 million; there was no cost of revenue recorded for the sale of EVs during 2019 as the company acted as agent in the sale of EVs in 2019 and consequently revenues were recorded on “net” basis without any corresponding cost of revenues. Cost of revenues from the sale of combustion engine vehicles was $5.1 million; there were no sales of combustion engine vehicles in the prior year. Cost of revenues for charging and batteries was $0.5 million; there were no sales of charging and batteries in the prior year. The cost of revenues for the digital advertising services provided by Grapevine were $1.1 million as compared to $1.0 million in the prior year, an increase of almost $0.1 million or 6.7%.
Gross profit (USD in thousands)
n/m = Not Meaningful
Gross profit ratio
The gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.1 million, as compared to $43.1 million during the same period in 2019, a decrease of $41.1 million. The decrease was due to the Company recorded service revenue from digital asset management services in 2019 which was not repeated in 2020 and had a low cost of revenue. The gross profit earned from the sale of EVs was $1.4 million a decrease of $1.3 million from the prior year. The Company acted in an agent capacity in the sale of EVs in 2019 and consequentially the revenue was recorded on a “net” basis without any cost of revenue which resulted in a higher gross profit and gross margin.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.4 million as compared to $24.9 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $7.5 million or 30%. The majority of the increase was due to increased stock based compensation expense, bonuses and sales commissions and salaries resulting from the increase in employee numbers and sales activity, and bad debt expense which was partially offset by lower spending on travel and entertainment due to the restrictions on travel and entertaining arising from COVID-19 and lower severance expense.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the fees paid for EV technical development and design.
Professional fees
Professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $12.5 million as compared to $5.8 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $6.7 million. The majority of this increase was due to increased expense for investor relations programs, legal fee expense related to regulatory enquires, fund raising and merger and acquisition activities, and class action lawsuits. Expenses for consultants and contractors increased as a result of the Company’s continued expansion.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $ 5.3 million as compared to $2.2 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $3.1 million. The increase was mainly due to the increase in amortization expense of $2.1 million arising from the shortening of the useful life on an intellectual property intangible asset.
Impairment losses
The following table summarizes the impairment losses recorded in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Additional information related to the impairment losses recorded in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020
● The Company recorded impairment losses of $16.7 million related to its equity method investments, Glory and BDCG. In the fourth quarter of 2020, Tree Technologies obtained its own domestic manufacturing license, and determined that it would not purchase vehicles from Tree Manufacturing, Glory’s subsidiary, and that the investment in Glory was therefore impaired. The Company evaluated the business prospects of BDCG in light of the continued political tensions between China and the U.S., and determined that its business prospects had diminished.
● The Company recorded impairment losses of $20.4 million related to intangible assets:
o An impairment loss of $12.5 million related to Tree Technologies marketing and distribution agreement with Tree Manufacturing after Tree manufacturing obtained its own domestic manufacturing license, and determining that it would not purchase vehicles from Tree Manufacturing.
o Impairment losses of $7.1 million related to DBOT’s intangible assets, its continuing membership agreement and customer list.
o An impairment loss of $0.8 million related to Grapevine’s influencer network, after determining that the attrition rate of the influencer network was higher than expected.
● The Company recorded an impairment loss of $9.3 million related to the goodwill of its consolidated subsidiary, DBOT, after evaluating its business prospects.
● The Company recorded impairment losses of $6.4 million related to right of use assets after ceasing to use the related real estate premises.
● The Company recorded impairment losses of $3.3 million related to its investment in Fintech Village, and recorded an impairment loss of $2.0 million for the related asset retirement cost.
● The Company recorded an impairment loss of $0.2 million related to a cost method investment after its price per share declined in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2019
● The Company recorded an impairment loss of $61.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to GTB which the Company had received in connections with a services agreement and an asset purchase agreement with GT Dollar Pte, a minority shareholder at the time of the transaction. On October 29, 2019, GTB had an unexpected significant decline in quoted price, from $17.00 to $1.84. This decline continued through the fourth quarter of 2019, and on December 31, 2019 the quoted price was $0.23. As a result of this decline in quoted price, and its inability to convert GTB into other digital currencies which were more liquid, or fiat currency, the Company performed an impairment analysis and recorded an impairment loss.
● The Company recorded a $13.1 million impairment loss in Glory, an equity method investment, in the fourth quarter of 2019, when it became apparent that Glory’s subsidiary, Tree Manufacturing, would not receive the land use rights to 250 acres of vacant land and other assets.
● The Company recorded a $5.7 million impairment loss related to a secure mobile financial information, social, and messaging platform that has been designed for streamlining financial-based communication for professional and retail users. Management determined these assets had no future use and recorded an impairment loss.
● The Company recorded impairment losses of $3.0 million in two non-marketable equity investments after management evaluated their performance.
● The Company recorded an impairment loss of $2.3 million in the third quarter of 2019 in connection with four buildings in Fintech Village, which were later demolished, and recorded an impairment loss of $1.5 million for the related asset retirement cost.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration, net
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Change in fair value of contingent consideration, net of $5.5 million represents the remeasurement loss of $1.5 million of the contingent consideration payable to the former DBOT shareholder and remeasurement gain of $7.0 million of the contingent consideration payable to the Tree Technology shareholders.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, Change in fair value of contingent consideration, net of $5.1 million represents the remeasurement of the contingent consideration payable to the former DBOT shareholders due to the decline in Ideanomics’ stock price.
Loss from operations
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $86.9 million as compared to loss of $68.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 an increase of $18.3 million. The increased Loss from Operations is due to number of factors, the gross profit for 2019 included revenues from digital asset services which had a gross profit margin of almost 100% which was not repeated in 2020, increased expenses for selling, general and administrative, research and development, professional fees, and depreciation and amortization expense partially offset by lower impairment charges and a gain resulting from a change in the fair value of contingent consideration.
Interest expense, net
Our interest expense increased $10.4 million to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $5.6 million during 2019. The interest expense increase during 2020 was primarily due to the amortization of beneficial conversion features and the interest associated with convertible notes issued in 2020. The following table summarizes the breakdown of the interest expense (in thousands):
Expense due to conversion of notes
Expense due to conversion of notes for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the expense recognized as a result of the reduction of conversion price to induce the conversion of the convertible notes from the related parties.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on the extinguishment of debt of $8.9 million, as it paid a promissory note prior to its scheduled maturity. The Company also settled several outstanding balances with vendors and recorded a gain of $0.5 million.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $3.9 million which resulted from modifications made to various convertible notes.
Impairment of and equity in loss of equity method investees
Impairment of and equity in loss of equity method investments increased by $3.0 million to $16.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $13.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to impairments losses of $16.7 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an impairment loss of $13.1 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019. Refer to “Impairment losses” above.
Gain (loss) on disposal of subsidiaries, net
The following table summarizes gains and (losses) recorded in “Gain (loss) on disposal of subsidiaries, net” in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Gain (loss) on disposal of subsidiaries was a gain of $0.3 million for year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss of $1.0 million in the same period in 2019.
Loss on remeasurement of DBOT investment
In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company increased its ownership in DBOT and consolidated DBOT in July 2019. Immediately prior to the consummation of the acquisition, the Company’s investment in DBOT had a fair value of $3.1 million, and the Company recorded a loss of $3.2 million to record the investment in DBOT to its fair value.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net increased $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 in comparison to the same period of 2019 mainly because of a gain of $4.9 million from the lease settlement of its New York City headquarters at 55 Broadway with the landlord, a gain of $0.8 million from the DBOT lease settlement with the landlord and sublease income $0.1 million.
Net (income)/loss attributable to non-controlling interest
Net (income)/loss attributable to non-controlling interests was a $7.8 million loss in 2020 as compared to a net income of $0.9 million in 2019. The loss in 2020 is primarily due to net loss from our investments in entities formed and acquired in 2019. The gain in 2019 is primarily due to the taxis commission revenue recognized in an entity we have 51% ownership during the third quarter of 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $165.8 million. Approximately $164.5 million was held in our Hong Kong, U.S., Malaysia and Singapore entities and $1.2 million was held in our PRC entities.
Due to the strict regulations governing the transfer of funds held in the PRC to other jurisdictions, the Company does not consider funds held in its PRC entities to be available to fund operations and investment outside of the PRC and consequently does not include them when evaluating the liquidity needs of its businesses operating outside of the PRC.
As a broker-dealer, DBOT has minimum capital requirements. DBOT had cash of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2020, which was necessary for DBOT to meet its minimum capital requirements. The Company consolidates a 51.0% owned investment in an entity which is based in Singapore. This entity venture had cash of $0.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The agreement of the Company’s partner in this entity is required prior to disbursement of this entity’s funds for certain defined expenditures.
The following table provides a summary of our net cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities (in thousands).
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities decreased by $27.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to (1) an increase in net loss from $96.8 million in 2019 to $106.0 million in 2020, (2) total non-cash adjustments to net loss was $75.9 million and $67.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively; and (3) total changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in an increase of $11.3 million and $15.1 million in cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $3.5 million for the year ended 2020 mainly due to the investment to Solectrac. Cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the payment of $1.8 million for Fintech Village.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company received $182.5 million from the issuance of common stock, $8.9 million from warrant and option exercise, $27.0 million from the issuance of convertible notes, $7.1 million from noncontrolling shareholders contribution and made repayments of $17.5 million, primarily of a $12.0 million convertible note and other borrowings. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company received $9.1 million from the issuance of convertible notes, $2.8 million in proceeds in a private placement from the issuance of common shares, warrant and options for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Effects of Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have had an effect on our business and we expect that inflation or changing prices could materially affect our business in the foreseeable future. Our management will closely monitor the price change and make efforts to maintain effective cost control in operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements are obligations the Company has with nonconsolidated entities related to transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements. The Company holds variable interests in investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The Company does not control these investments and therefore does not consolidate them.
We do not have other off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Contractual Obligations
The tabular presentation of contractual obligations is not required for Smaller Reporting Companies.
Seasonality
The Company expects that orders and sales will be influenced by the amount and timing of budgeted expenditure by its customers. Typically, the Company would expect to see higher sales at the start of the year when companies start executing on their capital programs and at the end of the year when companies are spending any surplus or uncommitted budget before the new budget cycle commences. The Company’s operating businesses are in the early stage of their development and consequently do not have sufficient trading histories to project seasonal buying patterns with any degree of confidence.
OUTLOOK
The Company believes that the investment made to build out its sales capacity in China and a related capability in sourcing and supply chain and related logistics in China will help drive growth in China using the Company's S2F2C business model and enable the Company to source high quality components and completed vehicles at competitive prices for its Medici, Treeletrik, WAVE and Solectrac businesses outside of China. The global focus on climate change and the related regulatory changes to encourage the adoption of EVs is very favorable for the Company's business, particularly the charging and battery businesses, which are critical to the widespread adoption of EVs. Providing customers with easy access to financing options for their purchases of vehicles, batteries and charging infrastructure is an important enabler for the deployment of EV and related technologies and the Company will continue to work to develop funding sources in conjunction with manufactures and established lenders.
Fintech continues to provide opportunities which could generate high rates of return through the deployment of technology to disrupt existing business models. The Company's acquisition of Timios in the first quarter of 2021 marks the first entrance into the real estate title agency and closing market. Management believes that through deployment of advanced technology and complimentary acquisitions it can increase Timios' value. The regulatory environment for the adoption of digital securities is improving with regulators and central bankers in the world's most developed economies acknowledging that digital securities should be part of the financial ecosystem. This change favors companies like Ideanomics that have assets such as DBOT that are fundamental building blocks of any move towards digital securities.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations governing, among other things, hazardous materials, environmental contamination and the protection of the environment. We have made, and expect to make in the future, expenditures to comply with such laws and regulations, but cannot predict the full amount of such future expenditures. We may also incur fines and penalties from time to time associated with noncompliance with such laws and regulations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the Company’s management to make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. Company management has identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of its financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of its financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. Company management believes the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of its financial statements. Company management has reviewed the critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company accounts for variable interest entities in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Boards (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 810, Consolidation. Management evaluates the relationships between the Company and the various VIEs and the economic benefit flow of the contractual arrangement with the VIEs. In connection with such evaluation, management also considers whether or not, as a result of such contractual arrangements, the Company controls the legal shareholders’ voting interests and has power of attorney in the VIEs, and therefore which counterparty is able to direct all business activities of the VIEs. As a result of such evaluation, management concluded that the Company is the primary beneficiary of certain VIEs, which are consolidated, and that the Company is not the primary beneficiary of one investment in which the Company holds a 60.0% interest, and of one investment in which the Company holds a 34.0% investment and which had a supply agreement with a consolidated entity. Both of these investments are accounted for as an equity method investments.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company has terminated the agreements with the PRC VIEs and will not consolidate them beyond that date.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of the promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine the amount and timing of revenue recognition for the arrangements that the Company determines are within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606,”) the Company performs the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with the customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the respective performance obligations.
A performance obligation may be satisfied over time or at a point in time. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied over time is generally evaluated by measuring our progress in satisfying the performance obligation as evidenced by the transfer of the goods or services to the customer. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time is recognized at the point in time when the customer obtains control over the promised good.
The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the promised goods or services, or the transaction price. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate consideration promised in a contract that includes a variable amount, or variable consideration, and estimate the amount of consideration that is due to us. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that we believe it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of revenue recognized will not occur.
Additionally, an analysis is performed in order to evaluate whether the Company is acting as a principal, in which case revenue is reported on a gross basis, or as an agent, in which case revenue is reported on a net basis. This analysis considers whether or not the Company obtains control of the specified goods or services before they are transferred to the customer, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in establishing price.
The Company’s contracts are typically with large enterprises and consequently are heavily negotiated as to the services to be provided; consequently the accounting treatment for the reporting of revenues may vary materially between contracts including whether the revenue is reported on a gross or net basis.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets, excluding goodwill, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows independent of other assets. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows generated from the assets are less than their carrying amount.
Factors which could result in the Company performing an impairment review include significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of use of the assets or the strategy for our business, and significant negative industry or economic trends.
The Company received a specific type of digital currency, GTB, as a result of two transactions in the three months ended March 31, 2019, and recorded the GTB currency as indefinite-lived intangible assets. On October 29, 2019, GTB had an unexpected significant decline in quoted price, from $17.00 to $1.84. This decline continued through the fourth quarter of 2019, and on December 31, 2020 the quoted price was $0.23. As a result of this decline in quoted price, and its inability to convert GTB into other digital currencies which were more liquid, or fiat currency, the Company performed an impairment analysis in the fourth quarter of 2019 and recorded an impairment loss of $61.1 million.
The assumptions and estimates used to determine future values and remaining useful lives of our intangible and other long-lived assets are complex and subjective. They can be affected by various factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our forecasts for future expansion development.
As a result of the impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded impairment losses related to land, asset retirement costs, influencer networks, a membership agreement, and a marketing and distribution agreement of $22.5 million.
As part of the impairment analyses discussed above in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also evaluated the remaining useful life of intangible assets, and determined that one intangible asset, intellectual property, no longer had a useful life and recorded amortization expense of $2.1 million.
As a result of the impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an impairment loss related to a secure mobile financial information, social and messaging platform of $5.7 million.
Acquisition accounting
Our consolidated financial statements include the operations of acquired businesses subsequent to the closing of the transaction. We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date including the identification of and our estimates for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, restructuring liabilities, pre-acquisition contingencies and contingent consideration, where applicable. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from our management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
When estimating fair value, depending on the nature and complexity of the asset or liability, we may use one or all of the following techniques:
● Income approach, which is based on the present value of a future stream of net cash flows;
● Market approach, which is based on market prices and other information from market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities; and
● Cost approach, which is based on the cost to acquire or construct comparable assets, less an allowance for functional and/or economic obsolescence.
Fair value methodologies depend on the following types of inputs:
● Quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets (Level 1 inputs);
● Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, or quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or inputs other than quoted prices that are directly or indirectly observable, or inputs that are derived principally from, or corroborated by, observable market data by correlation or other means (Level 2 inputs); and
● Unobservable inputs that reflect estimates and assumptions (Level 3 inputs).
The determination of fair value is extremely subjective and complex, and requires judgements concerning future events, including future cash flows, the appropriate discount factors and weighted average cost of capital, and market comparables, among other factors. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over fair value of identifiable net assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Application of goodwill impairment tests requires significant management judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assigning assets, liabilities and goodwill to reporting units and determination of fair value of each reporting unit. The Company performs goodwill impairment testing at the reporting unit level which is defined as the operating segment or one level below the operating segment. One level below the operating segment, or component, is a business for which discrete financial information is available and regularly reviewed by segment management. The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually (during the fourth quarter), or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit has declined below its carrying amount. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment using qualitative and/or quantitative testing procedures.
The Company has the option to first perform qualitative testing to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Judgment applied when performing the qualitative analysis includes consideration of macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, overall financial performance of the reporting unit, composition, personnel or strategy changes affecting the reporting unit and recoverability of asset groups within a reporting unit. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, the Company determines it is not more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, then performing the quantitative impairment test is unnecessary. However, if the Company concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform the quantitative impairment test by calculating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount.
The fair value of a reporting unit may be determined using externally quoted prices (if available), a discounted cash flow model, or a market approach. Judgments applied when performing the quantitative analysis includes estimating future cash flows, determining appropriate discount rates and making other assumptions. Changes in these judgments, estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit.
An impairment loss, if any, is recorded when the fair value of a reporting unit has declined below its carrying amount.
As a result of its goodwill impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded goodwill impairment losses of $9.3 million. The Company recorded no goodwill impairment losses in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Long-term Investments
The Company accounts for equity investments through which management exercises significant influence but does not have control over the investee under the equity method. Under the equity method, the investment is initially recorded at cost and adjusted for the Company’s share of undistributed earnings or losses of the investee. The Company’s share of losses is not recognized when the investment is reduced to zero since the Company does not guarantee the investees’ obligations nor is the Company committed to providing additional funding.
The equity investments which are not consolidated or accounted for under the equity method are either carried at fair value or under the measurement alternative upon the adoption of the Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments - Overall (Subtopic 825-10) (“ASU No 2016-01.”)
The Company utilizes the measurement alternative for equity investments that do not have readily determinable fair values and measures these investments at cost less impairment plus or minus observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of the same issuer.
Management periodically reviews long-term investments for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the investment may not be fully recoverable. Management considers impairment indicators such as negative changes in industry and market conditions, financial performance, business prospects, and other relevant events and factors. If indicators exist, further analysis must be performed in order to determine if the impairment, if any, is other-than-temporary. If the impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary, the fair value of the investment must be determined. In the absence of quoted market prices, management must use judgement to determine the fair value of the investment, considering such factors as current economic and market conditions, the operating performance of the entities, including current earnings trends and forecasted cash flows, and other company and industry specific information. If the fair value of the investment is below the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recorded to record the investment at fair value.
The Company recorded impairment losses of $0.2 million and $3.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for equity investments accounted for under the measurement alternative, and recorded impairment losses of $16.6 million and $13.1 in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for investments accounted for as equity method investments.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.