Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company with a business strategy focused on the clinical development, and ultimately the commercialization, of drug candidates for both oncology and rare disease indications characterized by small, well-defined patient populations with serious unmet medical needs. Our current focus is on our Toll-like receptor (“TLR”) agonist, tilsotolimod (IMO-2125), for oncology. We believe we can develop and commercialize targeted therapies on our own. To the extent we seek to develop drug candidates for broader disease indications, we have entered into and may explore additional collaborative alliances to support development and commercialization.
TLRs are key receptors of the immune system and play a role in innate and adaptive immunity. As a result, we believe TLRs are potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of a broad range of diseases. Using our chemistry-based platform, we designed both TLR agonists and antagonists to act by modulating the activity of targeted TLRs. A TLR agonist is a compound that stimulates an immune response through the targeted TLR. A TLR antagonist is a compound that inhibits an immune response by blocking the targeted TLR.
Our current TLR-targeted clinical-stage drug candidate, tilsotolimod, is an agonist of TLR9. We are currently developing tilsotolimod, via intratumoral injection, for the treatment of anti-PD1 refractory metastatic melanoma in combination with ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA4 antibody marketed as Yervoy® by Bristol Myers Squibb Company (“BMS”) in a Phase 3 registration trial. We are also evaluating intratumoral tilsotolimod in combination with nivolumab, an anti-PD1 antibody marketed as Opdivo® by BMS, and ipilimumab for the treatment of multiple solid tumors in a multicohort Phase 2 trial.
Historically, substantially all of our revenues have been from collaboration and license agreements, although we did not generate any such revenue in 2020, and we have received no revenues from the sale of commercial products. Going forward, we expect ongoing tilsotolimod (IMO-2125) external development expenses to be significant as our focus in 2021 continues to be on the clinical development of tilsotolimod, including preparing for an NDA submission with the FDA. See additional information below under the headings “Results of Operations” regarding research and development expenses to date and “Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources” regarding our future funding requirements.
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. For a discussion of results of operations for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018, please refer to Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020.
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Alliance Revenue
Historically, substantially all of our revenues have been from collaboration and license agreements, which we refer to as “alliance revenue.” Alliance revenues consist of revenue generated through collaborative research, development and/or commercialization agreements and other out-licensing arrangements. The terms of these agreements may include payment to us of one or more of the following: nonrefundable, up-front license fees; research, development and commercial milestone payments; and other contingent payments due based on the activities of the counterparty or the reimbursement by licensees of costs associated with patent maintenance.
We did not generate any alliance revenue for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Alliance revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $1.4 million and primarily related to the out-licensing of certain non-core technology to Licensee during the second quarter of 2019. See Note 9 of the Notes to Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Research and Development Expenses
For each of our research and development programs, we incur both direct and indirect expenses. We track direct research and development expenses by program, which include third party costs such as contract research, consulting and clinical trial and manufacturing costs. We do not allocate indirect research and development expenses, which may include regulatory, laboratory (equipment and supplies), personnel, facility and other overhead costs (including depreciation and amortization), to specific programs.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, our overall research and development expenses declined by 29% as compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in external development costs associated with tilsotolimod (IMO-2125). Specifically, this decrease is related to costs incurred with contract research organizations during the fiscal year 2020 to support: (i) our ongoing ILLUMINATE-301 trial, which we initiated in the first quarter of 2018 and completed enrollment in the first quarter of 2020, primarily due to decreased levels of clinical site activity following full enrollment; (ii) our ongoing ILLUMINATE-206 trial, which we initiated in the second quarter of 2019, primarily due to upfront start-up costs incurred during the 2019 period that were not incurred during 2020; (iii) our ILLUMINATE-204 trial, which was substantially completed by the end of the first quarter of 2020; and (iv) our ILLUMINATE-101 trial, which was completed by the end of 2019, all contributed to the decrease in costs incurred during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other drug development expenses in 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to decreases in internal employee and facility overhead related costs.
We anticipate that tilsotolimod (IMO-2125) external development expenses will continue to be significant, as we expect to continue the clinical development of tilsotolimod, including preparing for an NDA submission with the FDA.
In the table below, research and development expenses are set forth in the following categories: Tilsotolimod (IMO-2125), IMO-8400 (rare diseases, which has been discontinued), and other drug development expenses.
Tilsotolimod (IMO-2125) External Development Expenses.
These expenses include external expenses that we have incurred in connection with the development of tilsotolimod as part of our immuno-oncology program. These external expenses include payments to independent contractors and vendors for drug development activities conducted after the initiation of tilsotolimod clinical development in immuno-oncology, but exclude internal costs such as payroll and overhead expenses.
We commenced clinical development of tilsotolimod as part of our immuno-oncology program in July 2015, and from July 2015 through December 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $81.9 million in tilsotolimod external development expenses, including costs associated with the preparation for and conduct of ILLUMINATE-204, ILLUMINATE-101, ILLUMINATE-301, ILLUMINATE-206, and the manufacture of additional drug substance for use in our clinical trials and additional nonclinical studies.
IMO-8400 External Development Expenses.
We discontinued development of IMO-8400 in July 2018, and incurred no such expenses during 2020. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, these expenses included payments to independent contractors and vendors for drug development activities conducted after the initiation of IMO-8400 clinical development. Such expenses excluded internal costs such as payroll and overhead expenses.
Other Drug Development Expenses.
These expenses include internal costs, such as payroll and overhead expenses, associated with all of our clinical development programs. In addition, these expenses include external expenses, such as payments to contract vendors, associated with compounds that were previously being developed but are not currently being developed.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll, stock-based compensation expense, consulting fees and professional legal fees associated with our patent applications and maintenance, our corporate regulatory filing requirements, our corporate legal matters, and our business development initiatives. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses totaled $11.9 million and $12.5 million, respectively.
General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $0.6 million, or 4.5%, in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to lower employee related costs and legal fees, partially offset by increased commercial costs.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs consist primarily of severance and related benefit costs related to workforce reductions, contract termination and wind-down costs and asset impairments.
We did not incur any restructuring costs during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $0.2 million and resulted from our decision in July 2018 to wind-down our discovery operations, reduce the workforce in Cambridge, Massachusetts that supported such operations, and close our Cambridge facility.
Interest Income
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $0.2 million and $1.2 million, respectively. The decrease in 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to lower interest rates.
Amounts may fluctuate from period to period due to changes in average investment balances, including money market funds classified as cash equivalents, and composition of investments.
Warrant Revaluation Loss
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a non-cash warrant revaluation loss of approximately $3.7 million and $0.6 million, respectively. The non-cash charges relate to the revaluation of our liability-classified warrants issued in connection with the December 2019 Private Placement, as more fully described in Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of our outstanding warrants, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period. These fluctuations may be due to a variety of factors, including changes in our stock price and changes in estimated stock price volatility over the remaining life of the warrants. Warrant revaluation loss for 2020 and 2019 was driven primarily by an increase in our stock price during each period. More specifically, the significant warrant revaluation loss for the 2020 period was primarily due to the approximate 102% increase in our stock price during the period January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020. Warrant revaluation loss was much more modest during the 2019 period as the change in our stock price from December 22, 2019 (issuance date of securities) to December 31, 2019 was only approximately 19%.
Future Tranche Right Revaluation Loss
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a non-cash future tranche right revaluation loss of approximately $72.4 million and $11.0 million, respectively. The non-cash charges relate to the change in fair value during the respective period of the future tranche right liability (right to purchase preferred stock and warrants to an investor at future dates), associated with the Future Tranche Rights issued in connection with the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement, as more fully described in Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the future tranche rights, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period. These fluctuations may be due to a variety of factors, including changes in our stock price and changes in estimated stock price volatility over the remaining estimated lives of the future tranche rights. Changes in the fair value of the future tranche right liability and resulting future tranche right revaluation loss for 2020 and 2019 was driven primarily by an increase in our stock price during the periods. More specifically, the significant future tranche right revaluation loss for the 2020 period was primarily due to the approximate 102% increase in our stock price during the period January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020. Future tranche right revaluation loss was much more modest during the 2019 period as the change in our stock price from December 22, 2019 (issuance date of securities) to December 31, 2019 was only approximately 19%.
Net Loss and Net Loss Attributable to Common Stockholders
As a result of the factors discussed above, our net loss was $112.7 million and $56.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net loss attributable to common stockholders was $84.6 million, a difference of $28.0 million compared to net loss for the same period due to a deemed dividend related to the excess fair value provided to Baker Brothers in connection with the December 2019 Private Placement. See Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
We have completed several financings since the effective date of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which as of December 31, 2020, have resulted in ownership changes that will significantly limit our ability to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) and tax credit carryforwards. In December 2017, we completed a study which determined that ownership changes had occurred. The federal and state net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and related deferred tax assets discussed below and included in Note 14 to the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been adjusted to reflect the limitations that resulted from this study. The Company continues to monitor equity activity and potential ownership changes.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cumulative federal and state NOLs of approximately $328.7 million and $323.2 million available to reduce federal and state taxable income, respectively. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, federal net operating losses incurred for taxable years beginning after January 1, 2018 have an unlimited carryforward period, but can only be utilized to offset 80% of taxable income in future taxable periods. Of the $328.7 million of federal NOLs, $131.3 million have an unlimited carryforward and the remaining NOLs are still subject to expiration through 2037. State NOLs are still subject to expiration according to the laws of each respective jurisdiction. The Company files state tax returns in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania whereby both jurisdictions impose a 20-year carryforward period. All $323.2 million of state NOLs expire through 2040, with the first year of expiration being 2032 for $23.4 million of Massachusetts NOLs. In addition, at December 31, 2020, the Company had cumulative federal and state tax credit carryforwards of $25.0 million and $1.9 million, respectively, available to reduce federal and state income taxes, respectively, which expire through 2040 and 2033, respectively, for federal and state purposes, other than those that have an unlimited carryforward period.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $833.6 million. To date, substantially all of our revenues have been from collaboration and license agreements and we have received no revenues from the sale of commercial products. We generated no revenue for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
We have devoted substantially all of our efforts to research and development, including clinical trials, and we have not completed development of any commercial products. Our research and development activities, together with our general and administrative expenses, are expected to continue to result in substantial operating losses for the foreseeable future. These losses, among other things, have had and will continue to have an adverse effect on our stockholders’ equity, total assets and working capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drug candidates, and if approved, commercial products, we are unable to predict the extent of any future losses, whether or when any of our drug candidates will become commercially available or when we will become profitable, if at all.
Specifically, we have invested and intend to continue to invest a significant portion of our time and financial resources in the development and commercialization of tilsotolimod. Accordingly, our ability to generate product revenues will depend heavily on our ability to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize tilsotolimod. Developing, obtaining regulatory approval, and commercializing a drug candidate requires substantial time, effort and financial resources and is uncertain. Even if tilsotolimod receives approval from the FDA, European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) or other regulatory authorities for one or more indications, we will incur significant expenses to support the commercialization and launch of tilsotolimod, which investment may never be realized if sales are insufficient.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We require cash to fund our operating expenses and to make capital expenditures. Historically, we have funded our cash requirements primarily through the following:
(i) sale of common stock, preferred stock and warrants;
(ii) exercise of warrants;
(iii) debt financing, including capital leases;
(iv) license fees, research funding and milestone payments under collaborative and license agreements; and
(v) interest income.
We filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on August 4, 2020, which was declared effective on September 2, 2020, relating to the sale, from time to time, in one or more transactions, up to $150.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, depository shares and warrants. As of February 15, 2021, approximately $73.2 million remained available for issuance under this registration statement, assuming the full contractual amounts provided for under the LPC Purchase Agreement and the ATM Agreement (each as defined below) were to be sold.
LPC Purchase Agreement
On March 4, 2019, the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Lincoln Park has committed to purchase an aggregate of $35.0 million of shares of Company common stock from time to time at the Company’s sole discretion (the “LPC Purchase Agreement”).
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company sold 750,000 and 1,535,848 shares, respectively, pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement, resulting in net proceeds of $1.7 million and $3.7 million,
respectively. Additionally, during the period January 1, 2021 through February 28, 2021, the Company sold 800,000 shares of its common stock pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement, resulting in net proceeds of $4.2 million. As of February 28, 2021, the Company may sell up to an additional $25.3 million of shares under the LPC Purchase Agreement, subject to certain limitations.
ATM Agreement
In November 2018, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with JMP Securities LLC (“JMP”) pursuant to which the Company may issue and sell shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million through JMP as its agent.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company sold 3,608,713 and 532,700 shares, respectively, pursuant to the ATM Agreement, resulting in net proceeds, after deduction of commissions and other offering expenses, of $12.3 million and $1.6 million, respectively. Additionally, during the period January 1, 2021 through February 28, 2021, the Company sold 2,394,956 shares of its common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement resulting in net proceeds, after deduction of commissions, of $12.1 million. As of February 28, 2021, the Company may sell up to an additional $22.9 million of shares under the ATM Agreement.
The LPC Purchase Agreement and ATM Agreement are more fully described in Note 8 of the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Private Placements
As more fully described in Notes 7 and 8 to the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, between December 2019 and July 2020, the Company entered into three private placement financings with certain investors, which, collectively, may provide the Company with funding of up to $138.4 million, of which $25.2 million has been received through December 31, 2020. This funding is solely at the discretion of the investors and consists of:
(i) the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement, under which we received $10.1 million in gross proceeds in December 2019 and provides for up to $87.6 million additional aggregate gross proceeds at the sole discretion of Baker Brothers in connection with additional sales of securities and warrant exercises;
(ii) the April 2020 Securities Purchase Agreement, under which we received $5.0 million gross proceeds in April 2020 and $5.0 million gross proceeds in December 2020 and provides for up to $10.7 million additional aggregate gross proceeds at the sole discretion of entities affiliated with Pillar in connection with the exercise of outstanding warrants; and
(iii) the July 2020 Securities Purchase Agreement, under which we received $5.1 million gross proceeds in July 2020 and provides for up to $14.9 million additional aggregate gross proceeds at the sole discretion of entities affiliated with Pillar in connection with sales of additional securities and warrant exercises.
Funding Requirements
We had cash, cash equivalents and investments of approximately $37.7 million at December 31, 2020. We believe based on our current operating plan, our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments on hand as of December 31, 2020, plus cash received through February 2021 from the ATM Agreement and LPC Purchase Agreement, will enable us to fund our operations into the second quarter of 2022. Specifically, we believe our available funds will be sufficient to enable us to perform the following:
(i) continue to execute on our ongoing Phase 3 clinical trial of tilsotolimod in combination with ipilimumab for the treatment of anti-PD1 refractory metastatic melanoma (ILLUMINATE-301), including announcing key topline data and beginning the filing of a New Drug Application with the FDA;
(ii) continue enrollment in the current Low-Dose, High-Frequency Cohort of our Phase 2 study of tilsotolimod in combination with nivolumab and ipilimumab for the treatment of MSS-CRC (ILLUMINATE-206);
(iii) fund certain investigator initiated clinical trials of tilsotolimod; and
(iv) maintain our current level of general and administrative expenses in order to support the business.
Assuming Baker Brothers and Pillar exercise their rights under their respective securities purchase agreement and no other forms of external funding, we expect the proceeds could fund operations beyond an NDA filing for tilsotolimod and into the second quarter of 2023. In addition, we are seeking and expect to continue to seek additional funding through collaborations, the sale or license of assets or financings of equity or debt securities. We believe that the key factors that will affect our ability to obtain funding are:
(i) the results of our clinical development activities in our tilsotolimod program or any other drug candidates we develop on the timelines anticipated;
(ii) the cost, timing, and outcome of regulatory reviews;
(iii) competitive and potentially competitive products and technologies and investors' receptivity to tilsotolimod or any other drug candidates we develop and the technology underlying them in light of competitive products and technologies;
(iv) the receptivity of the capital markets to financings by biotechnology companies generally and companies with drug candidates and technologies similar to ours specifically;
(v) the receptivity of the capital markets to any in-licensing, product acquisition or other transaction we may enter into;
(vi) our ability to enter into additional collaborations with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies and the success of such collaborations; and
(vii) the impact of the novel coronavirus disease, COVID-19, to global economy and capital markets, and to our business and our financial results.
In addition, increases in expenses or delays in clinical development may adversely impact our cash position and require additional funds or cost reductions.
Financing may not be available to us when we need it or may not be available to us on favorable or acceptable terms or at all. Additionally, Baker Brothers may not exercise their right to purchase convertible preferred stock or exercise warrants in connection with the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement and the Pillar Investment Entities may not exercise their right to purchase shares of common stock (or pre-funded warrants) and common warrants, or exercise common warrants in connection with the April 2020 Securities Purchase Agreement or the July 2020 Securities Purchase Agreement. We could be required to seek funds through collaborative alliances or through other means that may require us to relinquish rights to some of our technologies, drug candidates or drugs that we would otherwise pursue on our own. In addition, if we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our then existing stockholders may experience dilution. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of existing stockholders. An equity financing that involves existing stockholders may cause a concentration of ownership. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, and are likely to include rights that are senior to the holders of our common stock. Any additional debt or equity financing may contain terms which are not favorable to us or to our stockholders, such as liquidation and other preferences, or liens or other restrictions on our assets. As discussed in Note 14 to the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, additional equity financings may also result in cumulative changes in ownership over a three-year period in excess of 50% which would limit the amount of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards that we may utilize in any one year.
If we are unable to obtain adequate funding on a timely basis or at all, we will be required to terminate, modify or delay our clinical trials of tilsotolimod, or relinquish rights to portions of our technology, drug candidates and/or products.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities. The net cash used in operating activities for all periods presented consists primarily of our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital. The decrease in cash outflow for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, related to lower costs for our tilsotolimod development program.
Investing Activities. Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities primarily consisted of the following amounts relating to our investments in available-for-sale securities and purchases and disposals of property and equipment:
● for the year ended December 31, 2020, proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale securities of $10.5 million, substantially offset by the purchase of $12.2 million of available-for-sale securities; and
● for the year ended December 31, 2019, proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale securities of $42.1 million, substantially offset by the purchase of $44.5 million of available-for-sale securities.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of the following amounts raised in connection with the following transactions:
● for the year ended December 31, 2020, aggregate net proceeds of $28.8 million from financing arrangements consisting of $14.8 million received pursuant to the April 2020 and July 2020 Securities Purchase Agreements, $1.7 million received pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement and $12.3 million received under the ATM Agreement, plus an additional $0.1 million in proceeds from employee stock purchases under our 2017 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“2017 ESPP”), partially offset by $0.2 million in payments related to our short-term insurance premium financing arrangement; and
● for the year ended December 31, 2019, $15.5 million in aggregate net proceeds from financing arrangements consisting of $10.1 million received pursuant to the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement, $3.7 million received pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement and $1.6 million received under the ATM Agreement, plus an additional $0.1 million in proceeds from employee stock purchases under our 2017 ESPP.
Material Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we had a material lease commitment in an aggregate amount of $1.1 million relating to our facility in Exton, Pennsylvania. This lease expires on May 31, 2025. See Note 13 of the Notes to Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to warrant and future tranche right liabilities and related revaluation gains (losses), research and development prepayments, accruals and related expenses, stock-based compensation, and revenue recognition. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We regard an accounting estimate or assumption underlying our financial statements as a “critical accounting estimate” where:
● the nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the level of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change; and
● the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Warrant and Future Tranche Right Liabilities and Related Revaluation Gain (Loss)
We entered into the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement, as more fully described in Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, pursuant to which we issued shares of convertible preferred stock with detachable warrants. Additionally, the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement contains call options on redeemable preferred shares with warrants (conditionally exercisable for shares that are puttable), which we refer to as future tranche rights.
We determined that these warrants and future tranche rights represent freestanding financial instruments and account for both the warrants and future tranche rights as liabilities, which requires the measurement of the fair value of the liability at the time of issuance and recording changes as a charge to current earnings at each reporting period, which is included in Warrant Liability Revaluation Expense and/or Future Tranche Right Liability Revaluation Expense in the Company’s statements of operations.
Warrant Liability. We use an option pricing model to value our liability-classified warrants. Inherent in the valuation model are assumptions related to volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected term, dividend rate, and other scenarios (i.e. probability of complex features of the warrants being triggered). Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the warrants, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period.
Future Tranche Right Liability. We use both a lattice model and a Monte Carlo simulation to value the future tranche rights. We selected these models as we believe they are reflective of all significant assumptions that market participants would likely consider in negotiating the transfer of the future tranche rights. Such assumptions include, among other inputs, stock price volatility, risk-free rates, and expected terms inclusive of early exercise and cancellation assumptions. Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the future tranche rights, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period.
Research and Development Prepayments, Accruals and Related Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued and prepaid expenses for research and development activities performed by third parties, including Clinical Research Organizations (“CROs”) and clinical investigators. These estimates are made as of the reporting date of the work completed over the life of the individual study in accordance with agreements established with CROs and clinical trial sites. Some CROs invoice us on a monthly basis, while others invoice upon achievement of milestones and the expense is recorded as services are rendered. We determine the estimates of research and development activities incurred at the end of each reporting period through discussion with internal personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of trials or services, as of the end of each reporting period, pursuant to contracts with clinical trial centers and CROs and the agreed upon fee to be paid for such services. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Clinical trial site costs related to patient enrollments are recorded as patients are entered into the trial.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize all share-based payments to employees and directors as expense in our statements of operations based on their fair values. We record compensation expense over an award’s requisite service period, or vesting period, based on the award’s fair value at the date of grant. Our policy is to charge the fair value of stock options as an expense, adjusted for forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, which is generally four years for employees and one year for directors.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants. The Black-Scholes option pricing model relies on a number of key assumptions to calculate estimated fair values, including assumptions as to average risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected life and expected volatility. For the assumed risk-free interest rate, we use the U.S. Treasury security rate with a term equal to the expected life of the option. Our assumed dividend yield of zero is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends to common stockholders and have no present intention to pay cash dividends. We use an expected option life based on actual experience. Our assumption for expected volatility is based on the actual stock-price volatility over a period equal to the expected life of the option.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense in future periods, or if we decide to use a different valuation model, the stock-based compensation expense we recognize in future periods may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period and could materially affect our operating income (loss), net income (loss) and earnings (loss) per share. It may also result in a lack of comparability with other companies that use different models, methods and assumptions. The Black-Scholes option pricing model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. These characteristics are not present in our option grants. Although the Black-Scholes option pricing model is widely used, existing valuation models, including the Black-Scholes option pricing model, may not provide reliable measures of the fair values of our stock-based compensation.
New Accounting Pronouncements
New accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.