Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that contain the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends” and similar words and phrases. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results projected in any forward-looking statement. In addition to the factors specifically noted in the forward-looking statements, other important factors, risks and uncertainties that could result in those differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed under Item 1A to Part I “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. The forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this Annual Report, and we assume no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Investors should consult all of the information set forth in this report and the other information set forth from time to time in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including our reports on Forms 10-Q and 8-K.
We followed the disclosure requirements of Regulation S-K applicable to smaller reporting companies in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In accordance with Item 10(f)(2) of Regulation S-K, we qualify as a “smaller reporting company” because our public float was below $200 million as of January 31, 2020, the last business day of our second quarter in fiscal 2020. Our public float as of January 29, 2021, the last business day of our second quarter in fiscal 2021, was $292.2 million. Therefore, in accordance with Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K, we will transition from the scaled disclosure available to smaller reporting companies to the disclosure requirements applicable to all other companies beginning with our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for our first quarter in fiscal 2022.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Critical accounting policies are those that require application of management’s most subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our critical accounting policies include those related to the allowance for doubtful accounts, goodwill, valuation of long-lived assets, and income taxes, sales taxes, and regulatory agency fees. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our allowance for doubtful accounts was $4.4 million at July 31, 2021 and $6.1 million at July 31, 2020. The allowance for doubtful accounts as a percentage of gross trade accounts receivable decreased to 8.7% at July 31, 2021 from 12.1% at July 31, 2020 because the allowance for doubtful accounts decreased 27.1% and gross trade accounts receivable increased 1.7% at July 31, 2021 compared to July 31, 2020.
We estimate the balance of our allowance for doubtful accounts by analyzing accounts receivable balances by age and applying historical write-off and collection trend rates. Our estimates include separately providing for customer receivables based on specific circumstances and credit conditions, and when it is deemed probable that the balance is uncollectible. Account balances are written off against the allowance when it is determined that the receivable will not be recovered. Our estimates of recoverability of customer accounts may change due to new developments, changes in assumptions or changes in our strategy, which may impact our allowance for doubtful accounts balance. We continually assess the likelihood of potential amounts or ranges of recoverability and adjust our allowance accordingly, however, actual collections and write-offs of trade accounts receivables may materially differ from our estimates.
Goodwill
Our goodwill is attributable to reporting units in our Traditional Communications segment and to net2phone-UCaaS, which is both a segment and a reporting unit. Goodwill was $14.9 million and $12.9 million at July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Goodwill is not amortized. Instead, goodwill is reviewed annually (or more frequently under various conditions) for impairment. We have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. However, we may elect to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test even if no indications of a potential impairment exist.
When performing our quantitative annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test we are comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount. We would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized would not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. Additionally, we consider income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using discounted cash flow methodologies, as well as considering third party market value indicators. Our use of a discounted cash flow methodology includes estimates of future revenue based upon budgets and projections. We also develop estimates for future levels of gross and operating profits and projected capital expenditures. Our methodology also includes the use of estimated discount rates based upon industry and competitor analysis as well as other factors.
In fiscal 2020, we performed a quantitative annual impairment test which resulted in no goodwill impairment since the estimated fair values of our reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying value. In fiscal 2021, we performed a qualitative assessment and determined that it was not necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. In addition, we do not believe our reporting units are currently at risk of goodwill impairment. Calculating the fair value of the reporting units requires significant estimates and assumptions by management. Should the estimates and assumptions regarding the fair value of the reporting units prove to be incorrect, we may be required to record impairments to our goodwill in future periods and such impairments could be material.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We test the recoverability of our long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of any such asset may not be recoverable. Such events or changes in circumstances include:
■ significant actual underperformance relative to expected performance or projected future operating results;
■ significant changes in the manner or use of the asset or the strategy of our overall business;
■ significant adverse changes in the business climate in which we operate; and
■ loss of a significant contract.
There were no such events or changes in circumstances in fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020. If we determine that the carrying value of certain long-lived assets may not be recoverable, we test for impairment based on the projected undiscounted cash flows to be derived from such asset. If the projected undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset, we will record an impairment loss based on the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of the asset. We generally measure fair value by considering sale prices for similar assets or by discounting estimated future cash flows from the asset using an appropriate discount rate. Cash flow projections and fair value estimates require significant estimates and assumptions by management. Should our estimates and assumptions prove to be incorrect, we may be required to record impairments in future periods and such impairments could be material.
Income Taxes, Sales Taxes, and Regulatory Agency Fees
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowance, accruals for sales taxes, and telecom regulatory agency fee accruals, are impacted by events and transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with special and non-routine items. Assessment of the appropriate amount of income taxes, sales taxes, and regulatory agency fees is dependent on several factors, including estimates of the timing and realization of deferred income tax assets, the results of audits, changes in tax laws or regulatory agency rules and regulations, as well as unanticipated future actions impacting related accruals of regulatory agency fees.
The valuation allowance on our deferred income tax assets was $11.5 million and $58.7 million at July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In fiscal 2021, we released $46.5 million of our valuation allowance on the portion of the deferred income tax assets that we are more likely than not going to utilize. This release was mostly related to domestic deferred income tax assets. We used the framework of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Income Taxes (Topic 740) to determine whether the valuation allowance should be maintained or reversed. We considered the scheduled expiration of our net operating losses included in our deferred tax assets, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies in our assessment of the valuation allowance. The primary factors that resulted in the valuation allowance release were the three consecutive years of profitability in the United States and expected future profitability in both the United States and the United Kingdom that will utilize a significant portion of the net operating losses. Our tax planning strategies were not a significant factor in the analysis. In fiscal 2020, due to taxable income in the United States, we utilized deferred tax assets and released the corresponding valuation allowance to offset income tax expense of $3.5 million. In addition, in fiscal 2020, we released an additional $8.4 million of the valuation allowance on the portion of the deferred tax assets that we are more likely than not going to utilize because we forecasted future profitability in the United States.
On June 21, 2018, the United States Supreme Court rendered a decision in South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc., holding that a state may require a remote seller with no physical presence in the state to collect and remit sales tax on goods and services provided to purchasers in the state, overturning certain existing court precedent. We have evaluated our state tax filings with respect to the Wayfair decision and are in the process of reviewing our remittance practices. It is possible that one or more jurisdictions may assert that we have liability for periods for which we have not collected sales, use or other similar taxes, and if such an assertion or assertions were successful it could materially and adversely affect our business, financial position, and operating results. One or more jurisdictions may change their laws or policies to apply their sales, use or other similar taxes to our operations, and if such changes were made it could materially and adversely affect our business, financial position, and operating results.
Our 2017 FCC Form 499-A, which reports our calendar year 2016 revenue, is currently under audit by the USAC. The Internal Audit Division of USAC issued preliminary audit findings and we have, in accordance with audit procedures, appealed certain of the findings. We are awaiting a final decision by USAC on the preliminary audit findings. Depending on the findings contained in the final decision, we may further appeal to the FCC. Although a final decision remains pending, we have been invoiced $2.9 million and $1.8 million on behalf of the Federal Telecommunications Relay Services Fund and on behalf of the Universal Service Fund, respectively. We do not intend to remit payment for these fees unless and until a negative decision on our appeal has been issued. In response to the aforementioned preliminary audit findings, we made certain changes to our filing policies and procedures for years that remain potentially under audit. At July 31, 2021 and 2020, our accrued expenses included $38.3 million and $40.8 million, respectively, for FCC-related regulatory fees for the year covered by the audit, as well as prior and subsequent years.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARD NOT YET ADOPTED
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, that changes the impairment model for most financial assets and certain other instruments. For receivables, loans and other instruments, entities will be required to use a new forward-looking current expected credit loss model that generally will result in the earlier recognition of allowance for losses. For available-for-sale debt securities with unrealized losses, entities will measure credit losses in a manner similar to current practice, except the losses will be recognized as allowances instead of reductions in the amortized cost of the securities. In addition, an entity will have to disclose significantly more information about allowances, credit quality indicators, and past due securities. The new provisions will be applied as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings. We will adopt the new standard on August 1, 2023. We are evaluating the impact that the new standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
As of August 1, 2020, we revised our reportable business segments to reflect the growth of our financial technology and cloud communications businesses and their increased contributions to our consolidated results. Our three reportable business segments, Fintech, net2phone-UCaaS, and Traditional Communications, reflect management’s approach to analyzing results, its resource allocation strategy, and its assessment of business performance. Comparative segment information has been reclassified and restated in all periods to conform to the current period presentation. We evaluate the performance of our business segments based primarily on income (loss) from operations. Accordingly, the income and expense line items below income (loss) from operations are only included in our discussion of the consolidated results of operations.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
We continue to monitor and respond to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners.
Operationally, our employees transitioned to work-from-home during the third quarter of fiscal 2020 and, to a large degree, continue to work-from-home. Beginning in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, certain of our employees returned to our offices on a part-time basis. Our salespeople, customer service employees, technicians, and delivery employees continue to serve our independent retailers, channel partners, and customers with minimal interruption.
COVID-19 had mixed financial impacts on our businesses beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2020 and continuing through the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. It drove increases in demand for our consumer offerings, principally BOSS Revolution Money Transfer, BOSS Revolution Calling and Mobile Top-Up, through our digital channels beginning in the latter half of March 2020. Subsequently, digital transaction levels have continued to increase relative to retailer originated transactions. Conversely, sales of consumer offerings originating through retailers and channel partners slowed modestly in late March and April 2020 before stabilizing in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. NRS was immaterially impacted by the closure of some of its retailers in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, but most re-opened quickly and many attracted increased foot traffic following the onset of COVID-19 as local retailers are typically more accessible to pedestrian traffic than big box retailers. The resilience of local retailers has enabled NRS to continue to expand sales of terminals, payment processing, and advertising services. Carrier Services’ revenue, which had been declining as communications globally transition away from traditional international long-distance voice, declined more rapidly following the onset of COVID-19 as business communications shifted from calling to video conferencing and other collaboration platforms.
At the onset of COVID-19, the transition from offices to a more flexible workforce increased the demand for net2phone-UCaaS’ offerings. Customers transitioned from their on-premises phone system to net2phone-UCaaS’ cloud solution, ported their phone numbers, and quickly set-up their employees to work remotely. In April 2020, the release of Huddle, net2phone-UCaaS’ integrated video conferencing solution, significantly improved net2phone-UCaaS’ functionality for remote work, which also increased the demand for its services. COVID-19 had mixed financial impacts on net2phone-UCaaS’ business beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2020. Its customer base growth slowed somewhat in the second half of fiscal 2020 in certain Latin American markets. However, Latin American sales rebounded in the first quarter of fiscal 2021 and sales have remained strong in its United States and Canadian markets. In the second half of fiscal 2021, COVID-19 cases increased in Latin America, in particular Brazil, and in Spain. This caused businesses to downsize or shutdown, which reduced its customer base and revenues. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the demand for flexible communications solutions for a hybrid workforce has resulted in an increase in new net2phone-UCaaS customers.
As of the date of this Annual Report, including the impact of COVID-19, we expect that our cash from operations and the balance of cash, cash equivalents, debt securities, and current equity investments that we held on July 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our currently anticipated working capital and capital expenditure requirements during fiscal 2022. However, the situation remains fluid and we cannot predict with certainty the potential impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
Concentration of Customers
Our most significant customers typically include telecom operators to whom we provide wholesale services and distributors of our retail calling products. While they may vary from quarter to quarter, our five largest customers collectively accounted for 14.5% and 12.7% of our consolidated revenues in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Our customers with the five largest receivables balance collectively accounted for 9.7% and 13.8% of the consolidated gross trade accounts receivable at July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This concentration of customers increases our risk associated with nonpayment by those customers. In an effort to reduce our risk, we perform ongoing credit evaluations of our significant customers, and in some cases, do not offer credit terms to customers, choosing instead to require prepayment. Historically, when we have issued credit, we have not required collateral to support trade accounts receivables from our customers. However, when necessary, we have imposed stricter credit restrictions on our customers. In some cases, this has resulted in our sharply curtailing, or ceasing completely, sales to certain customers. We attempt to mitigate our credit risk related to specific Carrier Services customers by also buying services from the customer, in order to create an opportunity to offset our payables and receivables with the customer. In this way, we can continue to sell services to these customers while reducing our receivable exposure risk. When it is practical to do so, we will increase our purchases from Carrier Services customers with receivable balances that exceed our applicable payables in order to maximize the offset and reduce our credit risk.
Explanation of Performance Metrics
Our results of operations discussion include the following performance metrics: active POS terminals, payment processing accounts, direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues, seats, subscription revenue, and minutes of use.
NRS uses two metrics, among others, to measure the size of its customer base: active POS terminals and payment processing accounts. Active POS terminals are the number of POS terminals that have completed at least one transaction in the calendar month. It excludes POS terminals that are being installed. Payment processing accounts are NRS PAY accounts that can generate revenue. It excludes accounts that have been approved but not activated. NRS uses these two metrics in its analysis of revenue trends and comparisons between periods.
Direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues is a financial metric that measures changes in our direct cost of revenues relative to changes in revenues during the same period. Direct cost of revenues is the numerator and revenues are the denominator in this ratio. Direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues is a useful metric for monitoring and evaluating trends in the net contribution of our revenues.
net2phone-UCaaS’ cloud communications offering is priced on a per-seat basis, with each customer employee identity constituting a seat, and its subscription revenue is a monthly base fee per seat. The number of seats served and subscription revenue trends and comparisons between periods are used in the analysis of net2phone-UCaaS’ revenues and direct cost of revenues.
Minutes of use is a nonfinancial metric that measures aggregate customer usage during a reporting period. Minutes of use is an important factor in BOSS Revolution Calling’s and Carrier Services’ revenue recognition since satisfaction of our performance obligation occurs when the customer uses our service. Minutes of use trends and comparisons between periods are used in the analysis of revenues and direct cost of revenues.
Year Ended July 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended July 31, 2020
The following table sets forth certain items in our statements of income as a percentage of our total revenues:
Fintech Segment
Fintech, which represented 5.2% and 4.4% of our total revenues in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, comprises BOSS Revolution Money Transfer, a provider of international money remittance and related value/payment transfer services, and NRS, operator of a nationwide POS network providing payment processing, digital advertising, transaction data, and ancillary services. BOSS Revolution Money Transfer and NRS were previously included in our Telecom & Payment Services segment.
Revenues. Revenues from BOSS Revolution Money Transfer increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 driven primarily by increased transaction volume in its digital channel, and a significant but diminished benefit from transient foreign exchange market conditions that ceased by the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
Revenues from NRS increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 driven primarily by the expansion of its POS network, and revenue growth from its payment processing services and digital out-of-home advertising. Merchant services and other revenue, which includes payment processing services, increased 295% to $7.8 million in fiscal 2021 from $2.0 million in fiscal 2020. Advertising and data revenue increased 95% to $8.7 million in fiscal 2021 from $4.5 million in fiscal 2020. Active POS terminals increased 40% to 14,000 at July 31, 2021 from 10,000 at July 31, 2020. Payment processing accounts increased 124% to 5,600 at July 31, 2021 from 2,500 at July 31, 2020.
Direct Cost of Revenues. Direct cost of revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in revenues. BOSS Revolution Money Transfer’s direct cost of revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to increased direct cost of revenues in its digital channel.
Direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues increased 310 basis points in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to an increase in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues in BOSS Revolution Money Transfer’s digital channel, partially offset by a decrease in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues in NRS.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expense increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increases in employee compensation, debit and credit card processing charges, sales commissions, and marketing expense. The increase in card processing charges was the result of increased credit and debit card transactions through our BOSS Revolution Money app and other digital channels. As a percentage of Fintech’s revenue, Fintech’s selling, general and administrative expense increased to 64.5% from 59.7% in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increased depreciation of capitalized costs of consultants and employees developing internal use software and increased depreciation of NRS’ POS equipment.
net2phone-UCaaS Segment
The net2phone-UCaaS segment, which represented 3.0% and 2.4% of our total revenues in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, comprises net2phone’s cloud communications offerings, which were previously included in our net2phone segment.
Revenues. net2phone-UCaaS’ revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 driven by growth in the United States, although revenue increased in all net2phone-UCaaS regions. Seats served increased 47% to 226,000 at July 31, 2021 from 154,000 at July 31, 2020. Subscription revenue increased 39% to $41.5 million in fiscal 2021 from $29.9 million in fiscal 2020, led by growth in the U.S. market. net2phone-UCaaS launched its integration with Slack in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, building on its prior integrations with Zoho and Microsoft Teams. Also in fiscal 2021, net2phone-UCaaS launched an integration with Salesforce. In November 2020, net2phone-UCaaS announced it had launched its service in Peru and in December 2020, it expanded coverage to six additional cities in Brazil.
Direct Cost of Revenues. Direct cost of revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the increase in revenues, with the largest increases in the United States and Latin America.
Direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues decreased 170 basis points in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily because of a decrease in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues in the United States. net2phone-UCaaS’ focus on mid-sized businesses, multi-channel strategies, and localized offerings generated revenue growth that exceeded the increase in direct cost of revenues.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expense increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increases in employee compensation and sales commissions. As a percentage of net2phone-UCaaS’ revenues, net2phone-UCaaS’ selling, general and administrative expenses decreased to 102.4% from 114.3% in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was due to increased depreciation of net2phone-UCaaS’ telephone equipment leased to customers and increased depreciation of capitalized costs of consultants and employees developing internal use software.
Other Operating Expense, net. Other operating expense, net in fiscal 2021 was due to the settlement of a legal matter. Other operating expense, net in fiscal 2020 was due to the write-off of certain capitalized assets related to a cancelled project.
Traditional Communications Segment
The Traditional Communications segment, which represented 91.8% and 93.2% of our total revenues in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, includes Mobile Top-Up, which enables customers to transfer airtime and bundles of airtime, messaging, and data to international and domestic mobile accounts, BOSS Revolution Calling, an international long-distance calling service marketed primarily to immigrant communities in the United States and Canada, and Carrier Services, a wholesale provider of international voice and SMS termination and outsourced traffic management solutions to telecoms worldwide. Traditional Communications also includes net2phone-Platform Services, which provides telephony services to cable operators and other offerings that leverage a common technology platform, as well as smaller communications and payments offerings, many in harvest mode. Most of the Traditional Communications segment was previously included in our Telecom & Payment Services segment except for net2phone-Platform Services, which was previously included in our net2phone segment.
Traditional Communications’ most significant revenue streams are from Mobile Top-Up, BOSS Revolution Calling, and Carrier Services. Mobile Top-Up and BOSS Revolution Calling are sold direct-to-consumers and through distributors and retailers. We receive payments for BOSS Revolution Calling, traditional calling cards, and Mobile Top-Up prior to providing the services. We recognize the revenue when services are provided to the customer. Traditional Communications’ revenues tend to be somewhat seasonal, with the second fiscal quarter (which contains Christmas and New Year’s Day) and the fourth fiscal quarter (which contains Mother’s Day and Father’s Day) typically showing higher minute volumes.
Revenues. Revenues from Mobile Top-Up increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily from product expansion and continued growth across all of our distribution channels, including the addition of a business-to-business channel in fiscal 2021. The business-to-business channel was the main driver for Mobile Top-Up’s revenue increase in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. In addition, our acquisition of a mobile top-up company in December 2020 contributed to our increased penetration into the market in Africa.
Revenues and minutes of use from BOSS Revolution Calling decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 although COVID-19 related demand in fiscal 2021 slowed the rate of decline in BOSS Revolution Calling revenue that we have experienced in recent periods. BOSS Revolution Calling continues to be impacted by persistent, market-wide trends, including the proliferation of unlimited calling plans offered by wireless carriers and mobile virtual network operators, and the increasing penetration of free and paid over-the-top voice, video conferencing, and messaging services.
Revenues and minutes of use from Carrier Services decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as communications globally continued to transition away from international voice calling. This trend was accelerated by the impact of COVID-19 as business communications shifted from calling to video conferencing and other collaboration platforms. We expect that Carrier Services will continue to be adversely impacted by these trends, and minutes of use and revenues will likely continue to decline from quarter-to-quarter, as we seek to maximize economics rather than necessarily sustain minutes of use or revenues.
Direct Cost of Revenues. Direct cost of revenues increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increases in Mobile Top-Up’s direct cost of revenues in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as a result of the increase in its revenues, partially offset by decreases in Carrier Services’ and BOSS Revolution Calling’s direct cost of revenues in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues decreased 10 basis points in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 because of decreases in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues in Mobile Top-Up and BOSS Revolution Calling in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, mostly offset by an increase in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues in Carrier Services in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decreases in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues in Mobile Top-Up and BOSS Revolution Calling were primarily due to the continued migration of customers to our digital platforms. The increased adoption of our digital, direct-to-consumer channels is expected to continue, which is expected to contribute to future reductions in direct cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expense decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to decreases in employee compensation, stock-based compensation, marketing expense, and bad debt expense, partially offset by an increase in debit and credit card processing charges. The increases in card processing charges were the result of the shift in the sales of our consumer offerings from cash transactions at retailers to credit and debit card transactions through our BOSS Revolution Calling app and other digital channels. As a percentage of Traditional Communications’ revenue, Traditional Communications’ selling, general and administrative expense decreased to 8.9% from 10.7% in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as more of our property, plant, and equipment became fully depreciated, partially offset by depreciation of equipment added to our telecommunications network and capitalized costs of consultants and employees developing internal use software.
Severance Expense. We incurred severance expense of $0.4 million and $3.5 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Other Operating Gain (Expense), net. Other operating gain (expense), net in fiscal 2021 included a gain of $2.0 million received from the sale to a third party of all our rights under the Payment Card Interchange Fee and Merchant Discount Antitrust Litigation. The lawsuit is about claims that merchants paid excessive fees to accept Visa and Mastercard cards between January 1, 2004 and January 25, 2019 because Visa and Mastercard, individually, and together with their respective member banks, violated the antitrust laws. Other operating gain (expense), net also included expense for the indemnification of a net2phone cable telephony customer related to patent infringement claims brought against the customer of $0.5 million and $1.2 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Other operating gain (expense), net in fiscal 2021 also included expense for a settlement of a Carrier Services’ claim for $0.6 million and other expense of $0.3 million. In addition, other operating gain (expense), net in fiscal 2020 included an accrual for non-income related taxes related to one of our foreign subsidiaries of $2.2 million, a write-off of $0.6 million for certain assets primarily in Latin America, and expense of $0.5 million for a legal matter.
Corporate
Corporate costs include compensation, consulting fees, treasury, tax and accounting services, human resources, corporate purchasing, corporate governance including Board of Directors’ fees, internal and external audit, investor relations, corporate insurance, corporate legal, charitable contributions, travel, and other corporate-related general and administrative expenses. Corporate does not generate any revenues, nor does it incur any direct cost of revenues.
General and Administrative. Corporate general and administrative expense decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily because of a decrease in stock-based compensation due to reductions in expense of deferred stock units granted in June 2019 and stock options, as well as a decrease in employee compensation. As a percentage of our consolidated revenues, Corporate general and administrative expense was 0.5% and 0.7% in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Other Operating Gain (Expense), net. As discussed in Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 to Part II of this Annual Report, we (as well as other defendants) have been named in a pending putative class action on behalf of Straight Path’s stockholders and a derivative complaint. We incurred legal fees of $2.9 million and $3.6 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, related to this action. Also, we recorded offsetting gains from insurance claims for this matter of $3.1 million and $3.1 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Consolidated
The following is a discussion of certain of our consolidated expenses, and our consolidated income and expense line items below income from operations.
Related Party Lease Costs. We lease office and parking space in Rafael Holdings’ building and parking garage located at 520 Broad St, Newark, New Jersey. We also lease office space in Israel from Rafael Holdings. The Newark lease expires in April 2025 and the Israel lease expires in July 2025. In both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we incurred lease costs of $1.9 million in connection with the Rafael Holdings’ leases, which is included in consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense. Stock-based compensation expense included in consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses was $1.5 million and $3.9 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. The decrease in stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily due to reductions in expense of deferred stock units granted in June 2019 and stock options. At July 31, 2021, unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested stock-based compensation was an aggregate of $0.6 million. The unrecognized compensation cost is expected to be recognized over the remaining vesting period that ends in fiscal 2024.
nm-not meaningful
Other Income (Expense), net. Other income (expense), net consists of the following:
On February 2, 2021, we paid $4.0 million to purchase shares of series B convertible preferred stock of a communications company (the equity method investee, or EMI). The shares purchased represent 23.95% of the outstanding shares of the EMI on an as converted basis. We account for this investment using the equity method since the series B convertible preferred stock is in-substance common stock, and we can exercise significant influence over the operating and financial policies of the EMI. We determined that on the date of the acquisition, there was a difference of $3.4 million between our investment in the EMI and our proportional interest in the equity of the EMI, which represented our share of the EMI’s customer list on the date of acquisition. This basis difference is being amortized over the 6-year estimated life of the customer list.
The gain on investments in fiscal 2021 is primarily from appreciation of shares of Rafael Holdings Class B common stock, partially offset by unrealized losses on hedge funds.
Income Taxes. In fiscal 2021, we released $46.5 million of our valuation allowance on the portion of our deferred income tax assets that we are more likely than not going to utilize. This release was mostly related to domestic deferred income tax assets. We used the framework of ASC Income Taxes (Topic 740) to determine whether the valuation allowance should be maintained or reversed. We considered the scheduled expiration of our net operating losses included in our deferred tax assets, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies in our assessment of the valuation allowance. The primary factors that resulted in the valuation allowance release were the three consecutive years of profitability in the United States and expected future profitability in both the United States and the United Kingdom that will utilize a significant portion of the net operating losses. Our tax planning strategies were not a significant factor in the analysis. In fiscal 2020, due to taxable income in the United States, we utilized deferred tax assets and released the corresponding valuation allowance to offset income tax expense of $3.5 million. In addition, in fiscal 2020, we released an additional $8.4 million of the valuation allowance on the portion of the deferred tax assets that we are more likely than not going to utilize because we forecasted future profitability in the United States. The increase in income tax expense in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, excluding the benefits from the valuation allowance released in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, was primarily due to differences in the amount of taxable income earned in the various taxing jurisdictions.
Net (Income) Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. The change in the net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was due to the reduction in the net loss of NRS, as well as new noncontrolling interests in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2021, we acquired an aggregate of 75% of the issued shares of a company that provides a digital platform facilitating supply and distribution of mobile airtime and data top-ups and other services across borders. As of May 31, 2021, we entered into a Warrant Purchase Agreement with the shareholders of a variable interest entity, or VIE, that operates money transfer businesses. We have various management rights and protective provisions pursuant to the Warrant Purchase Agreement. Primarily as a result of the Warrant Purchase Agreement, we can obtain 90% of the ownership interests in the VIE. We consolidated the VIE as of May 31, 2021 because we determined that we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE since we have the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact its economic performance, and we have the obligation to absorb losses of and the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to it. We do not currently own any interest in the VIE and thus the net income incurred by the VIE was attributed to noncontrolling interests. Finally, on December 31, 2020, the previously approved compensatory arrangement with each of Howard S. Jonas, the Chairman of our Board of Directors, and Shmuel Jonas, our Chief Executive Officer, was finalized. Howard S. Jonas and Shmuel Jonas each received fifty restricted shares of net2phone 2.0, Inc., or net2phone 2.0, Class B common stock, which represents 5% of the outstanding common stock of net2phone 2.0. net2phone 2.0 owns and operates our net2phone-UCaaS segment.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of the date of this Annual Report, including the impact of COVID-19, we currently expect our cash from operations and the balance of cash, cash equivalents, debt securities, and current equity investments that we held on July 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our currently anticipated working capital and capital expenditure requirements during fiscal 2022.
At July 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, debt securities, and unrestricted current equity investments of $161.4 million and working capital (current assets in excess of current liabilities) of $48.8 million.
We treat unrestricted cash and cash equivalents held by IDT Payment Services as substantially restricted and unavailable for other purposes. At July 31, 2021, “Cash and cash equivalents” in our consolidated balance sheet included an aggregate of $15.3 million held by IDT Payment Services that was unavailable for other purposes.
Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operations vary significantly from quarter to quarter and from year to year, depending on our operating results and the timing of operating cash receipts and payments, specifically trade accounts receivable and trade accounts payable.
Gross trade accounts receivable increased to $51.1 million at July 31, 2021 from $50.3 million at July 31, 2020 primarily due to amounts billed during fiscal 2021 that were greater than collections in fiscal 2021.
Deferred revenue arises from sales of prepaid products and varies from period to period depending on the mix and the timing of revenues. Deferred revenue increased to $42.3 million at July 31, 2021 from $40.1 million at July 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in the BOSS Revolution Calling deferred revenue balance.
Customer deposit liabilities at IDT Financial Services Limited, our Gibraltar-based bank, decreased to $115.5 million at July 31, 2021 from $116.0 million at July 31, 2020. Our restricted cash and cash equivalents included $115.8 million and $116.3 million at July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, held by the bank.
On December 21, 2020, we received $2.0 million from the sale to a third party of all our rights under the Payment Card Interchange Fee and Merchant Discount Antitrust Litigation. The lawsuit is about claims that merchants paid excessive fees to accept Visa and Mastercard cards between January 1, 2004 and January 25, 2019 because Visa and Mastercard, individually, and together with their respective member banks, violated the antitrust laws.
On June 21, 2018, the United States Supreme Court rendered a decision in South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc., holding that a state may require a remote seller with no physical presence in the state to collect and remit sales tax on goods and services provided to purchasers in the state, overturning certain existing court precedent. We have evaluated our state tax filings with respect to the Wayfair decision and are in the process of reviewing our remittance practices. It is possible that one or more jurisdictions may assert that we have liability for periods for which we have not collected sales, use or other similar taxes, and if such an assertion or assertions were successful it could materially and adversely affect our business, financial position, and operating results. One or more jurisdictions may change their laws or policies to apply their sales, use or other similar taxes to our operations, and if such changes were made it could materially and adversely affect our business, financial position, and operating results.
Investing Activities
Our capital expenditures were $16.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $16.0 million in fiscal 2020. We currently anticipate that total capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 will be $18 million to $20 million. We expect to fund our capital expenditures with our net cash provided by operating activities and cash, cash equivalents, debt securities, and current equity investments on hand.
On December 3, 2020, our subsidiary IDT International Telecom, Inc., or IDTIT, acquired 51% of the issued shares of a company for $2.4 million, net of cash acquired. We also recorded $0.4 million for the estimated fair value of contingent consideration. The contingent consideration of $0.5 million will be paid (a) no later than November 30, 2021 if the acquired company generates EBITDA (as defined in the purchase agreement) of no less than $1.0 million between October 1, 2020 and September 30, 2021; or (b) no later than November 30, 2022 if the acquired company generates EBITDA of no less than $1.0 million between October 1, 2021 and September 30, 2022. Also, pursuant to a Put/Call Option Agreement related to the 5% of the issued shares of the acquired company that the seller did not initially sell to IDTIT, or the Option Shares, the seller exercised its option and on March 22, 2021, IDTIT purchased the Option Shares for $0.3 million. On June 15, 2021, IDTIT purchased 19% of the issued shares of the acquired company from the remaining noncontrolling interest holder for $1.0 million. We also recorded $0.2 million for the estimated fair value of contingent consideration. The contingent consideration of up to $0.3 million will be paid if the acquired company meets certain Adjusted EBITDA targets (as defined in the purchase agreement) no later than April 1, 2023.
On December 11, 2019, our subsidiary, net2phone, Inc. acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of Ringsouth Europa, S.L., a regional provider of cloud communications services to businesses in Spain. The cash paid for the acquisition was $0.5 million. We also recorded $0.4 million for the estimated fair value of contingent consideration. The contingent consideration includes two potential payments to the seller of $0.4 million each, based on monthly recurring revenue targets to be achieved over a 36-month period and 48-month period. The second potential payment is not contingent upon meeting the target for the first payment.
On September 29, 2021, NRS sold 862,442 shares of its Class B common stock, which represents 2.5% of its outstanding capital stock on a fully diluted basis, to Alta Fox Opportunities Fund LP, or Alta Fox, for cash of $10 million. Alta Fox has the right to request redemption of all or any portion of the NRS common shares that it purchased at the per share purchase price during a period of 182 days following the fifth anniversary of this transaction. The redemption right shall terminate upon the consummation of (i) a sale of NRS or its assets for cash or securities that are listed on a national securities exchange, (ii) a public offering of NRS’ securities, or (iii) a distribution of NRS’ capital stock following which NRS’ common shares are listed on a national securities exchange.
As of May 31, 2021, we purchased a warrant from the shareholders of a VIE for cash of $0.8 million, which is included in financing activities, and a contingent payment of $0.1 million. We acquired cash of $3.3 million from the initial consolidation of the VIE, which is included in investing activities.
On December 7, 2020, we purchased from Rafael Holdings 218,245 newly issued shares of Rafael Holding’s Class B common stock and a warrant to purchase up to 43,649 shares of Rafael Holding’s Class B common stock at an exercise price of $22.91 at any time on or after December 7, 2020 and on or prior to June 6, 2022. The aggregate purchase price was $5.0 million. The purchase price was based on a per share price of $22.91, which was the closing price of Rafael Holding’s Class B common stock on the New York Stock Exchange on the trading day immediately preceding the purchase date. On March 15, 2021, we exercised the warrant in full and purchased 43,649 shares of Rafael Holding’s Class B common stock for cash of $1.0 million.
On February 2, 2021, we paid $4.0 million to purchase shares of the EMI’s series B convertible preferred stock representing 23.95% of the outstanding shares of the EMI on an as converted basis. On August 10, 2021, we paid $1.1 million to purchase shares of the EMI’s series C convertible preferred stock and additional shares of the EMI’s series B convertible preferred stock. These purchases increased our ownership of the EMI’s outstanding shares to 26.57% on an as converted basis.
Purchases of debt securities and equity investments were $43.2 million and $22.4 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Proceeds from maturities and sales of debt securities and redemptions of equity investments were $26.2 million and $6.5 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Financing Activities
We distributed cash of $0.9 million and $0.9 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, to the noncontrolling interests in certain of our subsidiaries.
In fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we received proceeds from financing-related other liabilities of $0.7 million and nil, respectively.
In fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we repaid financing-related other liabilities of $0.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
On April 20, 2020, our subsidiary, IDT Domestic Telecom, Inc., or IDT DT, received loan proceeds of $10.0 million from TD Bank, N.A., pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP Loan, under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. On April 29, 2020, IDT DT returned all $10.0 million in proceeds from the PPP Loan.
In fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we received proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.7 million and $0.3 million, respectively, for which we issued 81,041 and 32,551 shares, respectively, of our Class B common stock.
Our subsidiary, IDT Telecom, Inc., or IDT Telecom, entered into a credit agreement, dated as of May 17, 2021, with TD Bank, N.A. for a revolving credit facility for up to a maximum principal amount of $25.0 million. IDT Telecom may use the proceeds to finance working capital requirements and for certain closing costs of the facility. At July 31, 2021, IDT Telecom had not borrowed any amounts under this facility. The revolving credit facility is secured by primarily all of IDT Telecom’s assets. The principal outstanding bears interest per annum at the Intercontinental Exchange Benchmark Administration Ltd. LIBOR multiplied by the Regulation D maximum reserve requirement plus 125 to 175 basis points, depending upon IDT Telecom’s leverage ratio as computed for the most recent fiscal quarter. Interest is payable monthly, and all outstanding principal and any accrued and unpaid interest is due in May 2024. IDT Telecom pays a quarterly unused commitment fee on the average daily balance of the unused portion of the $25.0 million commitment of 30 to 85 basis points, depending upon IDT Telecom’s leverage ratio as computed for the most recent fiscal quarter. IDT Telecom is required to comply with various affirmative and negative covenants as well as maintain certain targets based on financial ratios during the term of the revolving credit facility. As of July 31, 2021, IDT Telecom was in compliance with all of the covenants.
IDT Telecom had a credit agreement, dated as of October 31, 2019, with TD Bank, N.A. for a revolving credit facility for up to a maximum principal amount of $25.0 million until its maturity on July 15, 2020. The principal outstanding incurred interest per annum at the LIBOR rate adjusted by the Regulation D maximum reserve requirement plus 125 basis points. In fiscal 2020, we borrowed and repaid an aggregate of $1.4 million under the facility. IDT Telecom paid a quarterly unused commitment fee of 0.3% per annum on the average daily balance of the unused portion of the $25.0 million commitment.
We have an existing stock repurchase program authorized by our Board of Directors for the repurchase of shares of our Class B common stock. The Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 8.0 million shares in the aggregate. In fiscal 2021, we repurchased 463,792 shares of Class B common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $2.8 million. In fiscal 2020, we repurchased 671,117 shares of our Class B common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $4.2 million. At July 31, 2021, 5.8 million shares remained available for repurchase under the stock repurchase program.
In fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we paid $1.3 million and $0.3 million, respectively, to repurchase 109,381 and 37,348 shares, respectively, of our Class B common stock that were tendered by employees of ours to satisfy the employees’ tax withholding obligations in connection with the lapsing of restrictions on awards of deferred stock units and restricted stock. Such shares are repurchased by us based on their fair market value on the trading day immediately prior to the vesting date.
Other Sources and Uses of Resources
We are considering spin-offs, sales of equity, and other potential dispositions of certain of our subsidiaries. Some of the transactions under consideration are in early stages and others are more advanced. A spin-off may include the contribution of a significant amount of cash, cash equivalents, debt securities, and/or equity securities to the subsidiary prior to the spin-off, which would reduce our capital resources. The sale of a subsidiary’s equity in an initial public offering or other transaction would instead be a source of cash. In fiscal 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors had directed us to prepare for the potential spin-off of our net2phone cloud communications business. Management subsequently has stated that it expects the preparations will be complete by the end of calendar year 2021 or shortly thereafter. There is no assurance at this time that any of these transactions will be completed.
We intend to, where appropriate, make other strategic investments and acquisitions to complement, expand, and/or enter into new businesses. In considering acquisitions and investments, we search for opportunities to profitably grow our existing businesses and/or to add qualitatively to the range and diversification of businesses in our portfolio. At this time, we cannot guarantee that we will be presented with acquisition opportunities that meet our return-on-investment criteria, or that our efforts to make acquisitions that meet our criteria will be successful.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
The following table quantifies our future contractual obligations and other commercial commitments at July 31, 2021:
Payments Due by Period
(1) The above table does not include an aggregate of $19.6 million in performance bonds and $1.7 million in potential contingent consideration related to business acquisitions due to the uncertainty of the amount and/or timing of any such payments.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any “off-balance sheet arrangements,” as defined in relevant SEC regulations that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources, other than the following.
In connection with our spin-off of Straight Path in July 2013, we and Straight Path entered into various agreements prior to the spin-off including a Separation and Distribution Agreement to effect the separation and provide a framework for our relationship with Straight Path after the spin-off, and a Tax Separation Agreement, which sets forth the responsibilities of us and Straight Path with respect to, among other things, liabilities for federal, state, local, and foreign taxes for periods before and including the spin-off, the preparation and filing of tax returns for such periods and disputes with taxing authorities regarding taxes for such periods. Pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreement, we indemnify Straight Path and Straight Path indemnifies us for losses related to the failure of the other to pay, perform or otherwise discharge, any of the liabilities and obligations set forth in the agreement. Pursuant to the Tax Separation Agreement, we indemnify Straight Path from all liability for taxes of Straight Path or any of its subsidiaries or relating to the Straight Path business with respect to taxable periods ending on or before the spin-off, from all liability for taxes of ours, other than Straight Path and its subsidiaries, for any taxable period, and from all liability for taxes due to the spin-off. (see Note 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 to Part II of this Annual Report).
We have performance bonds issued through third parties for the benefit of various states in order to comply with the states’ financial requirements for money remittance licenses and telecommunications resellers. At July 31, 2021, we had aggregate performance bonds of $19.6 million outstanding.