Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), which are intended to be covered by the safe harbors created thereby. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential,” “continue,” “intends,” and other variations of these words or comparable words. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections or other characterizations of events, circumstances or trends and that do not relate to historical matters are forward-looking statements. To the extent that there are statements that are not recitations of historical fact, such statements constitute forward-looking statements that, by definition, involve risks and uncertainties. In any forward-looking statement, where we express an expectation or belief as to future results or events, such expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis, but there can be no assurance that the statement of expectation or belief will be achieved or accomplished. The actual results or events may differ materially from those anticipated and as reflected in forward-looking statements included in this report.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. Except as required by law, we do not undertake to update or revise any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained herein, which speak only as of the date hereof. We believe the information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to be accurate as of the date hereof. Changes may occur after that date, and we will not update that information except as required by law.
As used in this Annual Report, “Infinity,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer collectively to Infinity Energy Resources, Inc., its predecessors and subsidiaries or one or more of them as the context may require.
The following information should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note 1 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Financial Statements for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operational and Financial Objectives
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
The financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as the description of our business contained herein, unless otherwise indicated, principally reflect the status of our business and the results of our operations as of December 31, 2020. Economies throughout the world continue to be severely disrupted by the effects of the quarantines, business closures and the reluctance of individuals to leave their homes as a result of the outbreak of the coronavirus (Covid-19). In particular, the oil and gas market has been severely impacted by the negative effects of the coronavirus because of the substantial and abrupt decrease in the demand for oil and gas globally. In addition, the capital markets have been disrupted and our efforts to raise necessary capital will likely be adversely impacted by the outbreak of the virus and we cannot forecast with any certainty when the disruptions caused by it will cease to impact our business and the results of our operations. In reading this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including our discussion of our ability to continue as a going concern set forth herein, in each case, consider the additional uncertainties caused by the outbreak of Covid-19.
Corporate Activities
The Company’s 2020 operating objectives have focused on the resolution of obligations in default and to acquire the Properties.
Recent financings -
Issuance of Convertible Preferred Stock - On March 26, 2021, the Company issued Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Preferred Stock”), with an aggregate principal face amount of up to $2,500,000 subject to a 10% original issue discount. The Preferred Stock is, subject to certain conditions, convertible into common stock at a rate of $0.32 per share and will be subject to a 10% dividend rate per annum, payable quarterly in cash or registered common stock, subject to equity conditions. The Holders were also granted demand registration rights. The Company issued warrants in addition to the Preferred Stock investors to purchase up to 6,410,250 shares (assuming the $2.5 million offering is fully subscribed) of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.39 per share, subject to customary adjustments. The common stock purchase warrants are exercisable commencing six months after issuance on a cashless basis at the Holders discretion with a term of five years. On March 26, 2021 investors purchased Preferred Stock with an aggregate cash purchase price of $2,050,000 together with warrants to purchase a total of 5,256,410 shares of common stock. The Company will allow additional investor purchases to complete the entire offering of an aggregate principal face amount of up to $2,500,000 before closing such offering.
The Company intends to use the proceeds of the Convertible Preferred Stock Offering to complete the acquisition and development of the Properties, to pay-off all outstanding convertible notes payable and for general working capital.
Issuance of Convertible Notes Payable - On August 19, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an accredited investor (the “August Investor”) for our senior unsecured convertible note payable due August 19, 2021 (the “August Note”), with an aggregate principal face amount of approximately $365,169. The August Note is, subject to certain conditions, convertible into an aggregate of 3,943,820 shares of Common Stock, at a price of $0.10 per share (the “Fixed Conversion Price”). We also issued a five-year common stock purchase warrant (the “August Warrant”) to purchase up to 800,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.50 per share, subject to customary adjustments. The August Warrant is immediately exercisable and on a cashless basis if the shares underlying such warrant have not been registered within 180 days after the date of issuance. The August Investor purchased such securities from the Company for an aggregate purchase price of $325,000. We also granted the August Investor certain automatic and piggy-back registration rights whereby we agreed to register the resale by the August Investor of the shares underlying the August Warrant and the conversion of the August Note.
The August Note bears interest at a rate of eight percent (8%) per annum, may be voluntarily repaid in cash in full or in part by us at any time in an amount equal to 115% of the principal amount of the August Note and any accrued and unpaid interest, and shall be mandatorily repaid in cash in an amount equal to 115% of the principal amount of the August Note and any accrued and unpaid interest in the event of the consummation by us of any public or private offering or other financing pursuant to which we receive gross proceeds of at least $2,500,000. The August Note is convertible at any time by the August Investor and we shall have the right to request that the August Investor convert the August Note in full or in part at the Fixed Conversion Price in the event that the VWAP (as defined in the August Note) of the Common Stock exceeds $0.75 for twenty consecutive trading days. In addition, pursuant to the August Note, so long as the August Note remains outstanding, we shall not enter into any financing transactions pursuant to which the Company sells its securities at a price lower than the Fixed Conversion Price, without written consent of the August Investor.
The conversion of the August Note and the exercise of the August Warrant are each subject to beneficial ownership limitations such that the August Investor may not convert the August Note or exercise the August Warrant to the extent that such conversion or exercise would result in the August Investor being the beneficial owner in excess of 4.99% (or, upon election of the August Investor, 9.99%) of the number of shares of the Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to the issuance of shares of Common Stock issuable upon such conversion or exercise, which beneficial ownership limitation may be increased or decreased up to 9.99% upon notice to us, provided that any increase in such limitation will not be effective until 61 days following notice to us.
We used the proceeds of the August Note to pay off $60,125 in principal balance of notes payable that were in default, to pay the $100,000 required by the Exchange Agreement (as defined and described below) and for general working capital.
Extinguishment of liabilities - On September 24, 2020, the Company entered into an Exchange and Settlement Agreement (the “Exchange Agreement”) with a note holder (the “Holder”), pursuant to which the Holder agreed to exchange its 8% promissory note in the original principal amount of $1,050,000, representing outstanding principal balance of $1,000,000 and accrued and unpaid interest thereon (which totaled $542,762 as of September 24, 2020), for (i) a cash payment in the amount of $100,000 and (ii) 737,532 newly issued shares of Common Stock (the “Exchange”).
In connection with the Exchange Agreement, the Company and the Holder agreed to terminate the following agreements: (i) the preemptive rights agreement, dated as of December 27, 2013, between the Company and the Holder, (ii) the revenue sharing agreement, dated as of May 30, 2014, between the Company and the Holder and (iii) the indemnity agreement, dated as of December 27, 2013, between the Company and the Holder. Additionally, pursuant to the Exchange Agreement, the Holder acknowledged the expiration on March 12, 2017, by its terms, of a common stock purchase warrant, issued to the Holder, for the purchase of up to 100,000 shares of Common Stock. The Company and the Holder also agreed to provide mutual limited releases, releasing each of them from all liabilities and obligations to the other, as between them with respect to claims relating to the Note, such preemptive rights agreement, the Holder’s warrant and all other agreements relating thereto.
The closing of the Exchange occurred concurrently with the execution of the Exchange Agreement. At the closing, the Company made the $100,000 cash payment and issued 737,532 shares of Common Stock (valued at $132,756 based on the closing market price of the shares on the date of the Exchange) to the Holder and the underlying documents and obligations summarized above were surrendered and/or cancelled.
Option to Acquire Oil and Gas Properties - On July 31, 2019, we acquired an option (the “Option”) from Core Energy, LLC, a closely held company (“Core”), to purchase the production and mineral rights/leasehold for the Properties. We paid a nonrefundable deposit of $50,000 to bind the Option, which provided us the right to acquire the Properties for $2.5 million prior to December 31, 2019. The Company was not able to exercise the Option prior to December 31, 2019. On September 2, 2020, the Company acquired a new Option from Core under similar terms as the previous Option, however the Option now permits the Company to purchase the Properties at a reduced price of $900,000 at any time prior to November 1, 2020 and the Company has agreed to immediately conduct a capital raise of between approximately $2-10 million to fund its acquisition and development of the Properties. On December 14, 2020 the parties executed an Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement which extended the new Option to January 11, 2021 which the parties are finalizing another extension.
We intend to complete the acquisition of the Properties during the second quarter of 2021, subject to successfully obtaining adequate financing. In that regard, the Company raised approximately $2.05 million on March 26, 2021 through the issuance of Convertible Preferred Stock with detachable common stock purchase warrants. The funds raised pursuant to the Convertible Preferred Stock issuance will be used to complete the acquisition and development of the Properties and to pay-off all outstanding Convertible Notes Payable . Core and the Company are finalizing the final purchase date and terms of the Properties which is expected to occur in the second quarter 2021.
Upon completion of the acquisition, the purchase will include the existing production equipment, infrastructure and ownership of 11 square miles of existing 3-D seismic data on the acreage. The Properties include a horizontal producing well, horizontal saltwater injection well, conventional saltwater disposal well and two conventional vertical producing wells, which currently produce from the Reagan Sand zone with an approximate depth of 3,600 feet.
We intend to complete the acquisition of the Properties during the second quarter 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet debt, nor did we have any transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations) or other relationships with any unconsolidated entities or other persons that may have a material current or future effect on our financial conditions, changes in our financial conditions, or our results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, capital resources, or significant components of revenue or expenses.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company had no revenues in either 2020 or 2019 because it focused on the acquisition of domestic oil and gas properties, resulting in its Option for the Properties on July 31, 2019.
Production and Other Operating Expenses (income)
The Company had no production related operating expenses in either 2020 or 2019. The Company sold its investment in Infinity-Texas in July 2012 and held no developed or undeveloped oil and gas properties in the United States in 2020 and 2019. The Company has been pursuing the acquisition of oil producing properties in the Central Kansas Uplift region containing existing production on approximately11,000 contiguous acres. The Company expects the acquisition to be closed in the first quarter of 2021 assuming the Company obtains adequate financing.
The Company has no current domestic exploration and development activities other than the pursuit of the above-mentioned Central Kansas Uplift Project.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $316,299 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $102,460, or 24%, from our general and administrative expenses of $418,759 in the same period in 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses is primarily attributable to several expenses including the $76,415 charge-off of the expired Option and the $77,784 related to our abandoned Nicaraguan Concessions which both occurred in 2019 and did not re-occur in 2020. These decreases in expenses were offset by an increase of $49,951 related to the restricted stock granted to our officers, directors and certain consultants during 2020. The restricted stock granted to our officers, directors and certain consultants will continue be amortized through June 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased to $210,931 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $92,452 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $118,479, or 128%. The Company issued the August Note, which has a stated principal balance of $365,169 and bears interest at an 8% rate. The Company used the proceeds of the August Note to pay off $60,125 in principal balance of notes payable that were in default, to pay the $100,000 required by the Exchange Agreement and for general working capital. The August Note resulted in cash interest accrued of $10,725 and the amortization to interest expense of the related discount totaling $133,563 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company’s current financial condition has made traditional bank loans and customary financing terms unattainable; therefore, the Company will need to continue to pursue short-term borrowings with high interest rates especially in light of the Company trying to close on the Option to acquire the Central Kansas Uplift project in early 2021.
Gain on Extinguishment of Liabilities
The gain on extinguishment of liabilities is attributable to two transactions that extinguished outstanding liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020; (i) the Exchange Agreement which extinguished a promissory note with an outstanding principal balance of $1,000,000, $542,762 in accrued interest and other obligations previously outstanding and resulting in a total gain of $1,310,006, and (ii) the extinguishment of trade payable obligations totaling $4,840,136 that arose during 2013 which were extinguished in 2020 pursuant to the relevant statute of limitations.
The gain on extinguishment of liabilities during the 2019 period was attributable to the extinguishment of a senior secured convertible note in the principal amount of $12 million issued by the Company in May 2015 (the “May 2015 Note”), which had an approximate principal balance of $2.2 million, short term notes payable with a principal balance totaling $240,000 and a warrant to purchase 240,000 shares of Common Stock issued to the placement agent for the Company’s May 2015 private placement transaction during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company and the holders of these obligations agreed to extinguish the existing obligations (which were in default) in exchange for the issuance of shares of Common Stock or new warrants to purchase shares of Common Stock with no price or dilution protection. Upon exchange of such securities, the existing obligations were cancelled, and such note holders signed agreements which released the Company of all obligations related to such securities. As a result, the Company extinguished such original securities/obligations and recorded the issuance of the new obligations at their fair value on the date of exchange, resulting in a total gain of $2,445,700 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Change in Derivative Fair Value
The conversion feature in certain outstanding promissory notes and common stock purchase warrants issued in connection with short-term notes outstanding during 2020 and 2019 are treated as derivative instruments because such notes and warrants contain ratchet and anti-dilution provisions. The mark-to-market process resulted in a gain of $795 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a loss of $89,714 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax
The Company recorded no income tax benefit (expense) in the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company has been in a cumulative tax loss position and has substantial net operating loss carryforwards available for its utilization at December 31, 2020. The Company has continued to carry a 100% reserve on its net deferred tax assets and therefore recorded no income tax expense on its income before income taxes during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net earnings
The Company reported net earnings of $5,623,707 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net earnings of $1,844,775 for the same period in 2019. This represents an improvement of $3,778,932 which was primarily attributable to the extinguishment of liabilities during 2020 that will not likely reoccur.
Basic and Diluted earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing the net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of Common Stock outstanding during the period. Diluted net earnings per share is computed by dividing the net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of Common Stock and Common Stock equivalents outstanding during the period. Common Stock equivalents included in the diluted computation represent shares of Common Stock issuable upon the assumed conversion of convertible debt and assumed exercise of stock options and warrants using the treasury stock and “if converted” method. For periods in which net losses are incurred, weighted average shares outstanding is the same for basic and diluted loss per share calculations, as the inclusion of Common Stock equivalents would have an anti-dilutive effect. In addition, in periods in which there is net earnings and the effect of including Common Stock equivalents in the diluted per share calculations would be anti-dilutive (such as when the conversion or exercise price of the Common Stock equivalents are higher than the average closing market price per share) such anti-dilutive Common Stock equivalents would also be excluded from the calculation of basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the August Note were considered Common Stock equivalents and therefore its dilutive effect was included in the computation of diluted income per share. All shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of convertible debt (other than the August Note) and the exercise of outstanding stock options and warrants were antidilutive, and, therefore, not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, all of the Common Stock equivalents outstanding were anti-dilutive because of their respective conversion or exercise prices were higher than the average closing market price per share during such period. Therefore, all of the Common Stock equivalents outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2019 were excluded from the diluted weighted average shares outstanding and diluted earnings per share calculations.
The Basic and Diluted earnings per Share were $0.39 and $0.36 for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. The Basic and Diluted earnings per Share were both $0.20 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Potential equivalent shares of Common Stock as of December 31, 2020 totaled 5,804,200 shares of Common Stock, which included 3,943,820 shares of Common Stock underlying the conversion of debt, 1,528,380 shares of Common Stock underlying outstanding warrants and 332,000 shares of Common Stock underlying outstanding stock options.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Going Concern
We have had a history of losses and have generated little or no operating revenues for a number of years, as we concentrated on development of our Nicaraguan Concessions, which was a long-term, high-risk/reward exploration project in an otherwise unproven part of the world. We abandoned the Nicaragua development project in early 2020 due to the challenging economic and political issues in Nicaragua and the oil and gas industry in general. We are now assessing various opportunities and strategic alternatives involving the acquisition, exploration and development of natural gas and oil properties in the United States, including the possibility of acquiring businesses or assets that provide support services for the production of oil and gas in the United States. As a result, we have acquired the Option to purchase the Properties. We intend to acquire, develop and commence operations on the Properties during 2021. The exercise of the Option will require us to raise substantial capital to accomplish our operating plan, which cannot be assured. Historically, we financed our operations through the issuance of equity and various short and long-term debt financing that contained some level of detachable warrants to provide the holders with a level of equity participation.
Issuance of Convertible Preferred Stock
On March 26, 2021, the Company issued Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Preferred Stock”), with an aggregate principal face amount of up to $2,500,000 subject to a 10% original issue discount. The Preferred Stock is, subject to certain conditions, convertible into common stock at a rate of $0.32 per share and will be subject to a 10% dividend rate per annum, payable quarterly in cash or registered common stock, subject to equity conditions. The Holders were also granted demand registration rights. The Company issued warrants in addition to the Preferred Stock investors to purchase up to 6,410,250 shares (assuming the $2.5 million offering is fully subscribed) of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.39 per share, subject to customary adjustments. The common stock purchase warrants are exercisable commencing six months after issuance on a cashless basis at the Holders discretion with a term of five years. On March 26, 2021 investors purchased Preferred Stock with an aggregate cash purchase price of $2,050,000 together with warrants to purchase a total of 5,256,410 shares of common stock. The Company will allow additional investor purchases to complete the entire offering of an aggregate principal face amount of up to $2,500,000 before closing such offering.
Issuance of Convertible Notes Payable
On August 19, 2020, the Company issued the August Note, with an aggregate principal face amount of approximately $365,169. The August Note is, subject to certain conditions, convertible into an aggregate of 3,943,820 shares of Common Stock, at a price of $0.10 per share. The Company also issued the August Warrant to purchase up to 800,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.50 per share, subject to customary adjustments. The August Warrant is immediately exercisable and on a cashless basis if the shares of Common Stock underlying such warrant have not been registered within 180 days after the date of issuance. The August Investor purchased such securities from the Company for an aggregate purchase price of $325,000. The Company also granted the August Investor certain automatic and piggy-back registration rights whereby the Company has agreed to register the resale by the August Investor of the shares underlying the August Warrant and the August Note.
The Company used the proceeds of the August Note to pay off $60,125 in principal balance of notes payable that were in default, to pay the $100,000 required by the Exchange Agreement and for general working capital.
The convertible note payable is further described in Note 3 of the Notes to the Financial Statements, entitled “Debt.”
Related Party Debt Obligation
On May 13, 2020, the Company borrowed $41,000 from its Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and President in the form of an unsecured promissory note bearing 6% interest and due on demand. This note was paid off in full on August 19, 2020. The proceeds from such issuance were used for general working capital purposes.
Senior Secured Convertible Note
On May 7, 2015, the Company completed the private placement (the “May 2015 Private Placement”) of the May 2015 Note and a common stock purchase warrant to purchase 1,800,000 shares of Common Stock with an institutional investor. At the closing, such investor acquired the May 2015 Note by paying $450,000 in cash and issuing a promissory note, secured by cash, with a principal amount of $9,550,000.
On May 23, 2019, and as amended on May 30, 2019, the Company and such investor agreed to an omnibus resolution to these outstanding matters and entered into an exchange agreement and side-letter agreement, which are described in Note 2 of the Notes to the Condensed Financial Statements, entitled “Debt.”
Extinguishment of Liabilities
On September 24, 2020, the Company entered into the Exchange Agreement with the Holder, pursuant to which the Holder agreed to exchange its 8% promissory note in the original principal amount of $1,050,000, representing outstanding principal balance of $1,000,000 and accrued and unpaid interest thereon (which totaled $542,762 as of September 24, 2020), for (i) a cash payment in the amount of $100,000 and (ii) 737,532 newly issued shares of Common Stock. The closing of the Exchange occurred concurrently with the execution of the Exchange Agreement. At the closing, the Company made the $100,000 cash payment and issued 737,532 shares of Common Stock (valued at $132,756 based on the closing market price of the Common Stock on the date of the Exchange) to the Holder and the underlying documents and obligations summarized above were surrendered and/or cancelled.
The Company incurred trade payable obligations totaling $4,840,136 during 2013 which were extinguished during the year ended December 31, 2020 pursuant to the relevant statute of limitations.
Short-Term Notes Outstanding
On July 7, 2015 and July 15, 2015, the Company borrowed a total of $85,000 from two individuals under convertible notes payable with the conversion rate of $5.60 per share. The original terms of such notes were for a period of 90 days and such notes bears interest at 8% per annum. In connection with the issuance of such notes, the Company issued warrants for the purchase of a total of 34,000 shares of Common Stock with exercise prices of $5.60 per share, which are exercisable for a period of five years from the date of their issuance. Such notes were not paid at maturity and are in default as of December 31, 2020. The Company is attempting to negotiate a resolution to the defaults, which may be completed in conjunction with closing on the Properties but there can be no assurance that it will be successful in that regard.
In summary, as of December 31, 2020, the following debts were outstanding: (i) two promissory notes issued in July 2015 in the total principal amount of $85,000, which had matured and are now in default; (ii) and the unsecured convertible note payable in the stated principal amount of $365,169 and due August 19, 2021.
Capital Expenditures
On July 31, 2019, we acquired the Option from Core to purchase the production and mineral rights/leasehold for the Properties. We paid a nonrefundable deposit of $50,000 to bind the Option, which provided us the right to acquire the Properties for $2.5 million prior to December 31, 2019. The Company was not able to exercise the Option prior to December 31, 2019. On September 2, 2020, the Company acquired a new Option from Core under similar terms as the previous Option, however the Option now permits the Company to purchase the Properties at a reduced price of $900,000 at any time prior to November 1, 2020 and the Company has agreed to immediately conduct a capital raise of between approximately $2-10 million to fund its acquisition and development of the Properties. On December 14, 2020 the parties executed an Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement which extended the new Option to January 11, 2021, which the parties are currently finalizing another extension.
We intend to complete the acquisition of the Properties during the second quarter of 2021, subject to successfully obtaining adequate financing. In that regard, the Company raised approximately $2.05 million on March 26, 2021 through the issuance of Convertible Preferred Stock with detachable common stock purchase warrants. The funds raised pursuant to the Convertible Preferred Stock issuance will be used to complete the acquisition and development of the Properties and to pay-off all outstanding Convertible Notes Payable . Core and the Company are finalizing the final purchase date and terms of the Properties which is expected to occur in the second quarter 2021.
Upon completion of the acquisition, the purchase will include the existing production equipment, infrastructure and ownership of 11 square miles of existing 3-D seismic data on the acreage. The Properties include a horizontal producing well, horizontal saltwater injection well, conventional saltwater disposal well and two conventional vertical producing wells, which currently produce from the Reagan Sand zone with an approximate depth of 3,600 feet.
We intend to complete the acquisition of the Properties during the second quarter of 2021. We must obtain new sources of debt and/or equity capital to fund the full development and operations of the Properties.
Due to the uncertainties related to these matters, there exists substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financials are issued. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of asset carrying amounts or the amount and classification of liabilities that might result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
Inflation and Seasonality
Inflation has not materially affected us during the past fiscal year. We do not believe that our business is seasonal in nature.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP and fairly present our financial position and results of operations. The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The Company bases its accounting estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and evaluates its estimates on an ongoing basis. The following section identifies and summarizes those accounting policies considered by management to be the most critical to understanding the judgments that are involved in the preparation of our financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. The application of these accounting policies requires judgment and use of assumptions as to future events and outcomes that are uncertain and, as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates. Refer to Note 1 - Nature of Operations, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for all relevant accounting policies.
Accounting for Income Taxes. Accounting for income taxes requires significant estimates and judgments on the part of management. Such estimates and judgments include, but are not limited to, the effective tax rate anticipated to apply to tax differences that are expected to reverse in the future, the sufficiency of taxable income in future periods to realize the benefits of net deferred tax assets and net operating losses currently recorded and the likelihood that tax positions taken in tax returns will be sustained on audit.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reduced its valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets by $1,431,000 while the valuation allowance remained at 100% of all net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020. The Company has incurred net taxable losses for in 10 of the last 13 years and continues to be in a cumulative loss position at December 31, 2020. In addition, there exists substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financials are issued due to the operational and financing uncertainties. Accordingly, the Company determined there was not sufficient positive evidence regarding its potential for future profits to outweigh the negative evidence of our three-year cumulative loss position under the guidance provided in ASC 740. Therefore, it determined to continue to provide a 100% valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets. The Company expects to continue to maintain a full valuation allowance until it determines that it can sustain a level of profitability that demonstrates its ability to realize these assets. To the extent the Company determines that the realization of some or all of these benefits is more likely than not based upon expected future taxable income, a portion or all of the valuation allowance will be reversed.
For income tax purposes, the Company has net operating loss carry-forwards of approximately $61,325,000 as of December 31, 2020, which expire from 2025 through 2040.
The Company has recently completed the filing of tax returns for the tax years 2012 through 2019. Therefore, all such tax returns are open to examination by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Internal Revenue Code contains provisions under Section 382 which limit a company’s ability to utilize net operating loss carry-forwards in the event that it has experienced a more than 50% change in ownership over a three-year period. Management has completed its review of whether such ownership changes have occurred, and based upon such review, management believes that the Company is not currently subject to an annual limitation or the possibility of the complete elimination of the net operating loss carry- forwards. In addition, the Company may be limited by additional ownership changes which may occur in the future
Determination of Fair Value for Financial Instruments and Derivatives.
The estimated fair value of the Company’s derivative liabilities, all of which are related to the detachable warrants issued in connection with various notes payable, were estimated using a closed-ended option pricing model utilizing assumptions related to the contractual term of the instruments, estimated volatility of the price of the Company’s common stock, interest rates, The detachable warrants issued in connection with the two short-term notes payable (See Note 3) contain ratchet and anti-dilution provisions that remain in effect during the term of the warrants while the ratchet and anti-dilution provisions of the other notes payable cease when the related note payable is extinguished. When the related notes payable containing such ratchet and anti-dilution provisions is extinguished, the derivative liability will be adjusted to fair value and the resulting derivative liability will be transitioned from a liability to equity as of such date.
The Company has outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 17,000 shares of Common Stock, in connection with various outstanding debt instruments which require derivative accounting treatment as of December 31, 2020 and 34,000 shares as of December 31, 2019. A comparison of the assumptions used in calculating estimated fair value of such derivative liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
ASC 820 utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The following is a brief description of those three levels:
● Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities
● Level 2 - Other significant observable inputs (including quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or liabilities)
● Level 3 - Significant unobservable inputs (including the Company’s own assumptions in determining the fair value)
The following table represents the Company’s hierarchy for its financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Going Concern Analysis.
In accordance with ASU 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements- Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40) - Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern, we are required to evaluate whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that our financials are issued. When management identifies conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about their ability to continue as a going concern it should consider whether its plans to mitigate those relevant conditions or events will alleviate the substantial doubt. If conditions or events raise substantial doubt about an entity’s ability to continue as a going concern, but the substantial doubt is alleviated as a result of management’s plans, the entity should disclose information that enables user of financial statements to understand the principal events that raised the substantial doubt, management’s evaluation of the significance of those conditions or events, and management’s plans that alleviated substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We performed the analysis and our overall assessment was there were conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, which raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within the next year, but such doubt was not adequately mitigated by our plans to address the substantial doubt as disclosed in Note 1: Going Concern.
Share-based compensation
We grant share-based compensation awards in exchange for employee, director and consultant services, including a stock option plan and grants of restricted stock that vest over future periods considering the grantee remains as an employee or service provider to the Company. The fair value of awards granted under the plans are recognized in the Statements of Earnings over the related service period. The fair values of stock options are estimated at the time of each grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model, and the fair values of restricted stock grants are measured at each grant date using the closing market price on the day of grant. The fair value estimates may be impacted by certain variables including, but not limited to, stock price volatility, employee stock option exercise behaviors, additional stock option grants, estimates of forfeitures, the Company’s performance, and the Company’s performance in relation to its peers. Refer to Note 4 - Stock Based Compensation for further information regarding our outstanding stock options and restricted stock grants.