ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
Format of Presentation
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related footnotes contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-Kof iHeartMedia, Inc. (the "Company," "iHeartMedia," "we," or "us").
Our primary business provides media and entertainment services via broadcast and digital delivery, including our networks businesses, through our Audio segment. We also operate businesses that provide audio and media services through our Audio and Media Services segment, including our full-service media representation business, Katz Media Group (“Katz Media”) and our provider of scheduling and broadcast software and services, RCS. Following the Separation, we ceased to operate our former outdoor business, which prior to the Separation was presented as our Americas outdoor segment and our International outdoor segment. The historical results of the outdoor business have been reclassified as results from discontinued operations.
Over the past ten years, we have transitioned our Audio business from a single platform radio broadcast operator to a company with multiple platforms including podcasting, networks and events. We have also invested in numerous technologies and businesses to increase the competitiveness of our inventory with our advertisers and our audience. We believe that our ability to generate cash flow from operations from our business initiatives and our current cash on hand will provide sufficient resources to fund and operate our businesses, fund capital expenditures and other obligations and make interest payments on our long-term debt for at least the next 12 months.
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 2020 presentation.
Our Business
Our Audio strategy centers on delivering entertaining and informative content where our listeners want to find us across multiple platforms, including broadcast, digital and live mobile, as well as events. Our primary source of revenue is derived from selling local and national advertising time on our radio stations, with contracts typically less than one year in duration. The programming formats of our radio stations are designed to reach audiences with targeted demographic characteristics. We work closely with our advertising and marketing partners to develop tools and leverage data to enable advertisers to effectively reach their desired audiences. We continue to expand the choices for listeners and we deliver our radio, podcasting and other content and sell advertising across multiple distribution channels, including digitally via our iHeartRadio mobile application and other digital platforms which reach national, regional and local audiences. We also generate revenue from network syndication, our nationally recognized events, our station websites and other miscellaneous transactions.
Management monitors average advertising rates and cost per mille, the cost of every 1,000 advertisement impressions (“CPM”), which are principally based on the length of the spot and how many people in a targeted audience listen to our stations, as measured by an independent ratings service. In addition, our advertising rates are influenced by the time of day the advertisement airs, with morning and evening drive-time hours typically priced the highest. Our price and yield information systems enable our station managers and sales teams to adjust commercial inventory and pricing based on local market demand, as well as to manage and monitor different commercial durations in order to provide more effective advertising for our customers at what we believe are optimal prices given market conditions. Yield is measured by management in a variety of ways, including revenue earned divided by minutes of advertising sold.
Management looks at our Audio operations’ overall revenue as well as the revenue from each type of advertising, including local advertising, which is sold predominately in a station’s local market, and national advertising, which is sold across multiple markets. Local advertising is sold by each radio station’s sales staff while national advertising is sold by our national sales team. Local advertising, which is our largest source of advertising revenue, and national advertising revenues are tracked separately because these revenue streams have different sales teams and respond differently to changes in the economic environment. We periodically review and refine our selling structures in all regions and markets in an effort to maximize the value of our offering to advertisers and, therefore, our revenue.
Management also looks at Audio's revenue by region and market size. Typically, larger markets can reach larger audiences with wider demographics than smaller markets. Additionally, management reviews our share of Audio advertising revenues in markets where such information is available, as well as our share of target demographics listening in an average quarter hour. This metric gauges how well our formats are attracting and retaining listeners.
Management also monitors revenue generated through our programmatic ad-buying platform, Soundpoint, and our data analytics advertising product, SmartAudio, to measure the success of our enhanced marketing optimization tools. We have made significant investments so we can provide the same ad-buying experience that once was only available from digital-only companies and enable our clients to better understand how our assets can successfully reach their target audiences.
A portion of our Audio segment’s expenses vary in connection with changes in revenue. These variable expenses primarily relate to costs in our sales department, such as commissions, and bad debt. Our content costs, including music royalty and license fees for music delivered via broadcast or digital streaming, vary with the volume and mix of songs played on our stations and the listening hours on our digital platforms. Our programming and general and administrative departments incur most of our fixed costs, such as utilities and office salaries. We incur discretionary costs in our advertising, marketing and promotions, which we primarily use in an effort to maintain and/or increase our audience share. Lastly, we have incentive systems in each of our departments which provide for bonus payments based on specific performance metrics, including ratings, revenue and overall profitability.
Our advertising revenue is highly correlated to changes in gross domestic product (“GDP”) as advertising spending has historically trended in line with GDP. A recession or downturn in the U.S. economy typically has a significant impact on the Company’s ability to generate revenue. In light of the novel coronavirus pandemic (“COVID-19”) and the resulting recession impacting the U.S. economy, our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 has declined significantly compared to 2019, largely as a result of a decline in consumer and business spending and the related impact to the demand for advertising and pricing pressure resulting from greater competition for available advertising dollars. In the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we experienced sequential increases in revenue compared to the second quarter of 2020, although we continued to see year-over-year declines in our Broadcast radio, Networks and Sponsorships revenue streams. Revenue from our Audio and Media Services increased, primarily as a result of higher political revenue, which resulted in an increase of $61.8 million in revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
When the business environment recovers, we expect that the traditional use of radio will be a strong benefit to us. As businesses reopen both nationally and locally, we believe that we are advantaged by our unparalleled reach and the live and local trusted voices that advertisers need to get their messages out quickly.
In the first quarter of 2020, we announced our modernization initiatives, which take advantage of the significant investments we have made in new technologies to build an operating infrastructure that provides new, high quality products while also unlocking cost efficiencies. These initiatives delivered the expected 2020 in-year savings of approximately $50 million and remain on track to deliver annualized run-rate cost savings of approximately $100 million by mid-year 2021. In addition, and as previously discussed, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took steps to significantly reduce our capital and operating expenditures in 2020. These initiatives generated approximately $200 million of operating cost savings in 2020 and we have identified, and executed on, plans to make substantially all of those savings permanent in 2021 and beyond. For more information, please see the Liquidity and Capital Resources - Anticipated Cash Requirements section below.
On March 26, 2020, we announced the withdrawal of our previously issued financial guidance for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2020 due to heightened uncertainty related to COVID-19. As a precautionary measure to preserve financial flexibility in light of this uncertainty, we borrowed $350.0 million principal amount under our senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Facility”). During the second and third quarters of 2020, we repaid the amounts outstanding under our ABL Facility using cash on hand and the proceeds from the issuance of our Incremental Term Loan Facility (as defined below), resulting in no balance outstanding under the facility as of December 31, 2020 and borrowing capacity of $172 million, as a result of restrictions in iHeartMedia’s debt and preferred stock agreements.
In July 2020, iHeartCommunications issued $450.0 million of incremental term loans pursuant to an amendment (the “Incremental Term Loan Facility”) to the credit agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”) with iHeartMedia Capital I, LLC ("Capital I"), as guarantor, certain subsidiaries of iHeartCommunications, Inc. ("iHeartCommunications"), as guarantors, and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, governing the Company’s $2.5 billion aggregate principal amount of senior secured term loans (the “Term Loan Facility”), resulting in net proceeds of $425.8 million, after original issue discount and debt issuance costs. A portion of the proceeds was used to repay the balance outstanding on our ABL Facility of $235.0 million, with the remaining $190.6 million of the proceeds available for general corporate purposes. For more information please refer to the “Liquidity and Capital Resources section” in this MD&A.
Impairment Charges
As a result of uncertainty related to COVID-19 and its negative impact on our business and the public trading values of our debt and equity, we were required to perform interim impairment tests on our long-lived assets, intangible assets and indefinite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2020. The interim impairment tests resulted in a non-cash impairment of our Federal Communication Commission (“FCC”) licenses of $502.7 million and a non-cash impairment charge of $1.2 billion to reduce goodwill during the three months ended March 31, 2020.
The Company performs its annual impairment test on goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, including FCC licenses, as of July 1 of each year. No impairment was required as part of the 2020 annual impairment testing. In addition, no further impairment was considered necessary in the fourth quarter of 2020. For more information, see Note 5, Property, Plant and Equipment, Intangible Assets and Goodwill to the consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further description of the impairment charges and annual impairment tests.
While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized reasonable assumptions to calculate the fair values of our long-lived assets, indefinite-lived FCC licenses and reporting units, it is possible a material change could occur to the estimated fair value of these assets as a result of the uncertainty regarding the magnitude of the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the timing of any recovery. If our actual results are not consistent with our estimates, we could be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Combined Results
Our financial results for the periods from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2018 are referred to as those of the “Predecessor” period. Our financial results for the period from May 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 and the year ended December 31, 2020 are referred to as those of the “Successor” period. Our results of operations as reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements for these periods are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Although GAAP requires that we report on our results for the period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 and the period from May 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 separately, management views the Company’s operating results for the year ended December 31, 2019 by combining the results of the applicable Predecessor and Successor periods because such presentation provides the most meaningful comparison to our results in the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company cannot adequately benchmark the operating results of the period from May 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 against any of the current or prior periods reported in its Consolidated Financial Statements without combining it with the period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 and does not believe that reviewing the results of this period in isolation would be useful in identifying trends in or reaching conclusions regarding the Company’s overall operating performance. Management believes that the key performance metrics such as revenue, operating income and Adjusted EBITDA for the Successor period in fiscal 2019 when combined with the Predecessor period in fiscal 2019 provides more meaningful comparisons to other periods and are useful in identifying current business trends. Accordingly, in addition to presenting our results of operations as reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP, the tables and discussion below also present the combined results for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The combined results for the year ended December 31, 2019, which we refer to herein as the results for the “year ended December 31, 2019” represent the sum of the reported amounts for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 and the Successor period from May 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019. These combined results are not considered to be prepared in accordance with GAAP and have not been prepared as pro forma results per applicable regulations. The combined operating results do not reflect the actual results we would have achieved absent our emergence from bankruptcy and may not be indicative of future results. Accordingly, the results for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 may not be comparable, particularly for statement of operations line items significantly impacted by the Reorganization and Separation transactions, the impact of fresh start accounting on depreciation and amortization and the impact of interest expense not being recognized while we were in Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from the Petition Date of March 14, 2018 to May 1, 2019.
Executive Summary
As 2020 began, we saw strong growth across our revenue streams in January and February, particularly from digital and from political advertising. However, while digital and political revenue continued to grow, the economic downturn as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant and negative impact on our other revenue streams beginning in March 2020 and continuing through the rest of 2020, including broadcast radio which is our largest revenue stream. Revenue from our Broadcast and Audio and Media Services revenue streams were positively impacted by political revenue as a result of 2020 being a presidential election year. Although revenue improved significantly from the low point through the remainder of 2020, we continued to experience a decline in advertising spend and the postponement or cancellation of certain tent-pole events drove an overall decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The extent of the economic downturn and the timing of recovery, as well as the future impact on our operations, are subject to significant uncertainty. In an effort to further strengthen the Company's financial flexibility and efficiently manage through the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented measures to cut costs and preserve cash. For additional information on these actions, see the Liquidity and Capital Resources - Anticipated Cash Requirements section below.
The key developments in our business for the year ended December 31, 2020 are summarized below:
•Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted revenue for all revenue streams, with the exception of political revenue.
•We achieved approximately $250 million of cost savings in 2020.
•Revenue of $2,948.2 million decreased 20.0% during 2020 compared to 2019.
•Revenue decreased 1.9%, 46.6%, 21.5% and 8.8% in the first, second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively, compared to the respective quarters in 2019.
•Operating loss of $1,737.6 million was down from Operating income of $506.7 million in 2019.
•Net loss of $1.9 billion in 2020, driven primarily by an impairment of $1.7 billion in the first quarter of 2020, as compared to Net income of $11.3 billion in 2019.
•Adjusted EBITDA(1) of $538.7 million, was down from Adjusted EBITDA(1) of $1,000.7 million in 2019.
•Cash flows provided by operating activities from continuing operations of $215.9 million decreased $245.5 million or 53.2% compared to 2019.
•Free cash flow(2) of $130.7 million decreased $218.5 million or 62.6% compared to 2019.
The table below presents a summary of our historical results of operations for the periods presented:
(1) For a definition of Adjusted EBITDA, and a reconciliation to Operating income, the most closely comparable GAAP measure, and to Net Income (Loss), please see “Reconciliation of Operating Income to Adjusted EBITDA” and “Reconciliation of Net Income (Loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA” in this MD&A.
(2) For a definition of Free cash flow from continuing operations and a reconciliation to Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations, the most closely comparable GAAP measure, please see “Reconciliation of Cash provided by (used for) operating activities from continuing operations to Free cash flow from (used for) continuing operations” in this MD&A.
Results of Operations
The table below presents the comparison of our historical results of operations for the periods presented:
The table below presents the comparison of our revenue streams for the periods presented:
Consolidated results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the combined results for the year ended December 31, 2019 were as follows:
Revenue
Revenue decreased $735.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in Revenue is attributable to the macroeconomic effects of COVID-19, which began to unfold into a global pandemic in early March 2020, resulting in a significant economic downturn due to the shut-down of businesses and shelter-in-place orders. Strong revenue growth in January and February was followed by a sharp decline in revenue in March, which continued through the end of 2020, with the exception of October, which saw consolidated revenue growth as a result of strong political advertising spend, resulting in significant revenue declines impacting most of our revenue streams, primarily as a result of a decrease in broadcast radio advertising spend as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Broadcast revenue decreased $628.4 million, driven by a $432.7 million decrease in Local spot revenue and a $195.7 million decrease in National spot revenue. The decrease in Broadcast revenue was partially offset by a $70.5 million increase in political revenue as a result of 2020 being a presidential election year. Revenue from our Networks businesses, including both Premiere and Total Traffic & Weather, was also impacted by the downturn, resulting in a decrease of $129.8 million. Revenue from Sponsorship and Events decreased by $101.9 million, primarily as a result of the cancellations of events in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Digital revenue increased $98.2 million, driven by continued growth in podcasting, including for both new and existing podcasts, which continued to experience increased advertiser demand. Audio and Media Services revenue increased $38.1 million primarily due to a $61.8 million increase in political revenue as a result of 2020 being a presidential election year, partially offset by the effects of COVID-19 on advertising spend.
Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses decreased $97.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in Direct operating expenses was driven primarily by lower employee compensation expenses resulting from our modernization initiatives and cost reduction initiatives taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, variable operating expenses, including music license and performance royalty fees, decreased in relation to lower revenue recognized during the year. Variable expenses related to events also decreased as a result of the postponement or cancellation of events in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in Direct operating expenses was partially offset by severance payments and other costs specific to our modernization initiatives, as well as higher content costs from higher podcasting and digital subscription revenue.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
SG&A expenses decreased $99.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in SG&A expenses was driven primarily by lower employee compensation expenses resulting from cost reduction initiatives taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, along with lower sales commissions, which were impacted by the decrease in revenue. Travel and entertainment expenses also decreased primarily as a result of operating expense saving initiatives put into place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as trade and barter expenses primarily driven by lower Local trade expenses, which declined in line with lower trade revenue. The decrease in SG&A expenses was partially offset by costs incurred in relation to our modernization initiatives announced in the first quarter of 2020 and higher bad debt expense.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses decreased $45.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of lower employee compensation, including variable incentive expenses and employee benefits, resulting from cost reduction initiatives taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in Corporate expenses was partially offset by costs incurred to support our modernization initiatives.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $100.5 million during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the application of fresh start accounting, which resulted in significantly higher values of our tangible and intangible long-lived assets.
Impairment Charges
We perform our annual impairment test on our goodwill and FCC licenses as of July 1 of each year. In addition, we test for impairment of intangible assets whenever events and circumstances indicate that such assets might be impaired. As discussed above, as a result of the assumed potential adverse effects caused by the COVID-19 pandemic on estimated future cash flows, we performed an interim impairment test as of March 31, 2020 and we recognized non-cash impairment charges to our indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill of $1.7 billion in the first quarter of 2020. No impairment charges were recorded in the remainder of 2020 in connection with our annual impairment test which was performed in the third quarter of 2020.
We recognized non-cash impairment charges of $91.4 million in the first quarter of 2019 on our indefinite-lived FCC licenses as a result of an increase in our weighted average cost of capital. See Note 7, Property, Plant and Equipment, Intangible Assets and Goodwill, to the consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further description of the impairment charges.
Other Operating Expense, Net
Other operating expense, net of $11.3 million and $8.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily related to net losses recognized on the disposal of assets.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased $77.5 million during 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of the interest recognized on the new debt issued in connection with our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases. During the period from March 14, 2018 to May 1, 2019, while the Company was a debtor-in-possession, no interest expense was recognized on pre-petition debt. The increase was offset by a decrease in interest expense driven by the impact of lower LIBOR rates, as well as the impact of the amendment to the Term Loan Facility in the first quarter of 2020, resulting in a 1.00% reduction in the Term Loan Facility interest rate.
In the Predecessor period, we ceased to accrue interest expense on long-term debt, which was reclassified as Liabilities subject to compromise as of the Petition Date, resulting in $533.4 million in contractual interest not being accrued on pre-petition indebtedness for the period from January 1, 2019 to May 1, 2019.
Loss on Investments, net
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized loss on investments, net of $9.3 million and $31.2 million, respectively, primarily in connection with other-than-temporary declines in the values of certain of our investments.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which related primarily to costs incurred to amend our Term Loan Facility and professional fees incurred in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases in the Successor period.
Other expense, net was $18.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which related primarily to professional fees incurred in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases in the Successor period. Such expenses were included within Reorganization items, net in the Predecessor period while the Company was a debtor-in-possession.
Reorganization Items, Net
During 2019, we recognized Reorganization items, net of $9,461.8 million related to our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases, which consisted primarily of the net gain from the consummation of the Plan of Reorganization and the related settlement of liabilities. In addition, Reorganization items, net included professional fees recognized between the March 14, 2018 Petition Date and the May 1, 2019 Effective Date in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases. See Note 3, Fresh Start Accounting to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 8.7%. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily impacted by the impairment charges discussed above. In addition, the Successor Company recorded deferred tax adjustments to state net operating losses and federal and state disallowed interest carryforwards as a result of the filing of 2019 tax returns and certain legal entity restructuring completed during the period. These deferred tax adjustments were partially offset by valuation allowances adjustments recorded during the year against certain federal and state deferred tax assets such as net operating loss carryforwards and disallowed interest carryforwards due to the uncertainty of the ability to utilize those assets in future periods.
The Successor Company’s effective tax rate for the period from May 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 was 15.1%. The effective tax rate for the Successor period was primarily impacted by deferred tax benefits recorded for changes in estimates related to the carryforward tax attributes that are expected to survive the emergence from bankruptcy and deferred tax adjustments associated with the filing of the Company’s 2018 tax returns during the fourth quarter of 2019. The primary change to the 2018 tax return filings, when compared to the provision estimates, was the Company's decision to elect out of the first-year bonus depreciation rules for the 2018 year for all qualified capital expenditures. This resulted in less tax depreciation deductions for tax purposes for the 2018 year and higher adjusted tax basis for our fixed assets as of the Effective Date.
The Predecessor Company’s effective tax rate for the period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 was 0.4%. The income tax expense for the period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 (Predecessor) primarily consisted of the income tax impacts from reorganization and fresh start adjustments, including adjustments to our valuation allowance. The Company recorded income tax benefits of $102.9 million for reorganization adjustments in the Predecessor period, primarily consisting of: (1) tax expense for the reduction in federal and state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards from the cancellation of debt income ("CODI") realized upon emergence; (2) tax benefit for the reduction in deferred tax liabilities attributed primarily to long-term debt that was discharged upon emergence; (3) tax benefit for the effective settlement of liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits that were discharged upon emergence; and (4) tax benefit for the reduction in valuation allowance resulting from the adjustments described above. The Company recorded income tax expense of $185.4 million for fresh start adjustments in the Predecessor period, consisting of $529.1 million tax expense for the increase in deferred tax liabilities resulting from fresh start accounting adjustments, which was partially offset by $343.7 million tax benefit for the reduction in the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to the Company
Net income (loss) attributable to the Company decreased $13.2 billion to a Net loss of $1.9 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net income of $11.3 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Net loss attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to the non-cash impairment charges to our indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill of $1.7 billion recognized in the first quarter of 2020. In 2019, the Net income attributable to the Company primarily related to the recognition of net gain from the consummation of the Plan of Reorganization and the related settlement of liabilities.
The comparison of our combined results for the year ended December 31, 2019 to the consolidated results of year ended December 31, 2018 is as follows:
The table below presents the comparison of our revenue streams for the periods presented:
Revenue
Revenue increased $72.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in revenue is primarily due to higher digital revenue of $91.6 million driven by growth in podcasting, including the impact of our acquisition of Stuff Media in October 2018, as well as other digital revenue, including live radio and other on-demand services, and revenue from our Network businesses, which increased $32.4 million. Broadcast revenue decreased $30.8 million, due to a $38.2 million decrease in political revenue as a result of 2018 being a mid-term congressional election year, partially offset by growth generated by our programmatic offerings. Audio and Media Services revenue decreased $27.4 million due to a $34.5 million decrease in political revenue. Political revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $28.8 million and $103.0 million, respectively.
Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses increased $127.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. Higher direct operating expenses were driven primarily by higher compensation-related expenses, including from the acquisitions of Stuff Media and Jelli in the fourth quarter of 2018, as well as higher music license fees, digital royalties and content costs from higher podcasting, subscription and other digital revenue. Included in this increase is the impact of updated estimates to music license fee expenses primarily related to prior years for which payments were made under interim agreements with performance rights organizations and that are subject to ongoing negotiations. The increase in direct operating expenses also includes a $6.3 million increase in lease expense due to the impact of the adoption of the new leasing standard in the first quarter of 2019 and the adoption of fresh start accounting.
SG&A Expenses
SG&A expenses decreased $25.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in our SG&A expenses was due primarily to lower commissions as a result of our revenue mix, lower bad debt expense, resulting from improved collections, and lower trade and barter expenses, primarily resulting from timing. The decrease in SG&A expenses was partially offset by higher third-party digital fees, driven by the increase in digital revenue, along with higher employee costs, primarily resulting from the acquisitions of Stuff Media and Jelli in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses increased $5.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 as a result of higher share-based compensation expense, which increased $24.8 million as a result of our equity compensation plan entered into in connection with our Plan of Reorganization. This increase was partially offset by lower employee benefit costs and lower amortization of retention bonuses related to the bankruptcy for which amortization ceased on the Effective Date.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $90.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 primarily as a result of the application of fresh start accounting, which resulted in significantly higher values of our tangible and intangible long-lived assets.
Impairment Charges
We recognized non-cash impairment charges of $91.4 million in the first quarter of 2019 on our indefinite-lived FCC licenses as a result of an increase in the weighted average cost of capital. During 2018 we recorded impairment charges of $33.2 million related primarily to several of our Audio markets.
Other Operating Expense, Net
Other operating expense, net of $8.2 million and $9.3 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, was primarily related to net losses recognized on the disposal of assets.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased $68.5 million during 2019 compared to 2018 as a result of the interest recognized in the period from January 1, 2018 to the March 14, 2018 petition date on our pre-petition debt exceeding the interest recognized in the period from May 2, 2019 to December 31, 2019 on our new debt issued in connection with our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases. During the period from March 14, 2018 to May 1, 2019, while the Company was a debtor-in-possession, no interest expense was recognized on pre-petition debt.
Loss on Investments, net
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a loss of $31.2 million, primarily in connection with other-than-temporary declines in the values of certain of our investments.
Equity in Loss of Nonconsolidated Affiliates
During the year ended December 31, 2019 we recognized a net loss of $0.3 million related to equity-method investments. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized net earnings of $0.1 million related to equity-method investments.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $18.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which related primarily to professional fees incurred in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases in the Successor period. Such expenses were included within Reorganization items, net in the Predecessor period while the Company was a debtor-in-possession.
Other expense, net was $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which related primarily to professional fees incurred directly in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases before the March 14, 2018 Petition Date. Such expenses were included within Reorganization items, net in the post-petition period while the Company was a debtor-in-possession.
Reorganization Items, Net
During 2019, we recognized Reorganization items, net of $9,461.8 million related to our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases, which consisted primarily of the net gain from the consummation of the Plan of Reorganization and the related settlement of liabilities. In addition, Reorganization items, net included professional fees recognized between the March 14, 2018 Petition Date and the May 1, 2019 Effective Date in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases. See Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
The Successor Company’s effective tax rate for the period from May 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019 was 15.1%. The effective tax rate for the Successor period was primarily impacted by deferred tax benefits recorded for changes in estimates related to the carryforward tax attributes that are expected to survive the emergence from bankruptcy and deferred tax adjustments associated with the filing of the Company’s 2018 tax returns during the fourth quarter of 2019. The primary change to the 2018 tax return filings, when compared to the provision estimates, was the Company's decision to elect out of the first-year bonus depreciation rules for the 2018 year for all qualified capital expenditures. This resulted in less tax depreciation deductions for tax purposes for the 2018 year and higher adjusted tax basis for our fixed assets as of the Effective Date.
The Predecessor Company’s effective tax rate for the period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 was 0.4%. The income tax expense for the period from January 1, 2019 through May 1, 2019 (Predecessor) primarily consisted of the income tax impacts from reorganization and fresh start adjustments, including adjustments to our valuation allowance. The Company recorded income tax benefits of $102.9 million for reorganization adjustments in the Predecessor period, primarily consisting of: (1) tax expense for the reduction in federal and state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards from the cancellation of debt income ("CODI") realized upon emergence; (2) tax benefit for the reduction in deferred tax liabilities attributed primarily to long-term debt that was discharged upon emergence; (3) tax benefit for the effective settlement of liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits that were discharged upon emergence; and (4) tax benefit for the reduction in valuation allowance resulting from the adjustments described above. The Company recorded income tax expense of $185.4 million for fresh start adjustments in the Predecessor period, consisting of $529.1 million tax expense for the increase in deferred tax liabilities resulting from fresh start accounting adjustments, which was partially offset by $343.7 million tax benefit for the reduction in the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was (57.3)%. The effective tax rate for 2018 was primarily impacted by $11.3 million of deferred tax expense attributed to the valuation allowance recorded against federal and state deferred tax assets generated in the period due to the uncertainty of the ability to realize those assets in future periods.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to the Company
Net income attributable to the Company increased $11.5 billion to $11.3 billion during the year ended December 31,
2019 compared to a net loss of $201.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to the net gain from the consummation of the Plan of Reorganization and the related settlement of liabilities.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Reconciliations of Operating Income (Loss) to Adjusted EBITDA
Reconciliations of Net Income (Loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
(1)Increase in Depreciation and amortization is driven by the application of fresh start accounting, resulting in significantly higher values of our tangible and intangible assets.
(2)We define Adjusted EBITDA as consolidated Operating income (loss) adjusted to exclude restructuring and reorganization expenses included within Direct operating expenses, SG&A expenses and Corporate expenses, and share-based compensation expenses included within Corporate expenses, as well as the following line items presented in our Statements of Operations: Depreciation and amortization, Impairment charges and Other operating expense (income), net. Alternatively, Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as Net income (loss), adjusted to exclude (Income) loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, Income tax (benefit) expense, Interest expense (income), net, Depreciation and amortization, Reorganization items, net, (Gain) Loss on investments, net, Other (income) expense, net, Equity in loss of nonconsolidated affiliates, net, Impairment charges, Other operating expense (income), net, Share-based compensation expense, and restructuring and reorganization expenses. Restructuring expenses primarily include severance expenses incurred in connection with cost saving initiatives, as well as certain expenses, which, in the view of management, are outside the ordinary course of business or otherwise not representative of the Company's operations during a normal business cycle. Reorganization expenses primarily include the amortization of retention bonus amounts paid or payable to certain members of management directly as a result of the Reorganization. We use Adjusted EBITDA, among other measures, to evaluate the Company’s operating performance. This measure is among the primary measures used by management for the planning and forecasting of future periods, as well as for measuring performance for compensation of executives and other members of management. We believe this measure is an important indicator of our operational strength and performance of our business because it provides a link between operational performance and operating income. It is also a primary measure used by management in evaluating companies as potential acquisition targets. We believe the presentation of this measure is relevant and useful for investors because it allows investors to view performance in a manner similar to the method used by management. We believe it helps improve investors’ ability to understand our operating performance and makes it easier to compare our results with other companies that have different capital structures or tax rates. In addition, we believe this measure is also among the primary measures used externally by our investors, analysts and peers in our industry for purposes of valuation and comparing our operating performance to other companies in our industry. Since Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, it should not be considered in isolation of, or as a substitute for, operating income or net income (loss) as an indicator of operating performance and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily a measure of our ability to fund our cash needs. Because it excludes certain financial information compared with operating income and compared with consolidated net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, users of this financial information should consider the types of events and transactions which are excluded.
Reconciliations of Cash provided by (used for) operating activities from continuing operations to Free cash flow from (used for) continuing operations
(1)Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 was impacted primarily by an increase of $165.1 million in cash paid for interest. Our debt issued upon emergence was outstanding from the period of May 2, 2019 to December 31, 2019, resulting in cash interest payments of $183.8 million. In 2018, we made cash interest payments of $22.5 million on our pre-petition debt, which was outstanding for the period from January 1, 2018 to March 14, 2018. Cash provided by operating activities was also impacted by a $97.9 million increase in cash payments for Reorganization items, which consisted primarily of bankruptcy-related professional fees, as well as payments for settlement of pre-petition liabilities upon our emergence from bankruptcy.
(2)We define Free cash flow from (used for) continuing operations (“Free Cash Flow”) as Cash provided by (used for) operating activities from continuing operations less capital expenditures, which is disclosed as Purchases of property, plant and equipment by continuing operations in the Company's Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We use Free Cash Flow, among other measures, to evaluate the Company’s liquidity and its ability to generate cash flow. We believe that Free Cash Flow is meaningful to investors because we review cash flows generated from operations after taking into consideration capital expenditures due to the fact that these expenditures are considered to be a necessary component of ongoing operations. In addition, we believe that Free Cash Flow helps improve investors' ability to compare our liquidity with other companies. Since Free Cash Flow is not a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, it should not be considered in isolation of, or as a substitute for, Cash provided by operating activities and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies. Free Cash Flow is not necessarily a measure of our ability to fund our cash needs.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
Historically, we had granted restricted shares of the Company's Class A common stock to certain key individuals. In connection with the effectiveness of our Plan of Reorganization, all unvested restricted shares were canceled.
Pursuant to the new equity incentive plan (the “Post-Emergence Equity Plan”) we adopted in connection with the effectiveness of our Plan of Reorganization, we have granted restricted stock units and options to purchase shares of the Company's Class A common stock to certain key individuals.
Share-based compensation expenses are recorded in corporate expenses and were $22.9 million, $26.4 million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In August 2020, we issued performance-based restricted stock units (“Performance RSUs”) to certain key employees. Such Performance RSUs vest upon the achievement of critical operational (cost savings) improvements and specific environmental, social and governance initiatives, which are being measured over an approximately 18-month period from the date of issuance. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $3.4 million in relation to these performance-based RSUs.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $54.0 million of unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested share-based compensation arrangements with vesting based on service conditions. This cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of approximately 2.8 years. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, there was $1.6 million of unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested share-based compensation arrangements that will vest based on performance conditions.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows
The following discussion highlights cash flow activities during the periods presented:
(1) For a definition of Free cash flow from continuing operations and a reconciliation to Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations, the most closely comparable GAAP measure, please see “Reconciliation of Cash provided by (used for) operating activities from continuing operations to Free cash flow from (used for) continuing operations” in this MD&A.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $215.9 million in 2020 compared to $428.7 million of cash provided by operating activities in 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations decreased from $461.4 million in 2019 to $215.9 million in 2020 primarily as a result of a decrease in Revenue driven by the decline in advertising spend resulting from the economic slow-down caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, cash interest payments made by continuing operations increased $169.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of interest payments on our debt issued upon our emergence. The Company ceased paying interest on long-term debt after the March 14, 2018 petition date until the Company emerged from bankruptcy on May 1, 2019. The decrease was partially offset by changes in working capital balances, particularly accounts receivable, which was impacted by improved collections, and accrued expenses, which was impacted by the timing of payments. In addition, payments made in relation to Reorganization items, net were $201.2 million lower in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities was $428.7 million in 2019 compared to $966.7 million of cash provided by operating activities in 2018. The primary driver for the change in cash provided by operating activities was a $258.1 million decrease in operating cash flows provided by discontinued operations, which decreased from a cash inflow of $225.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 to a cash outflow of $32.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations decreased from $741.2 million in 2018 to $461.4 million in 2019 primarily as a result of cash interest payments made by continuing operations, which increased $165.1 million as a result of interest payments on our debt issued upon our emergence compared to pre-petition interest payments made in the prior year. The Company ceased paying interest on long-term debt classified as Liabilities subject to compromise after the March 14, 2018 petition date. In addition, cash decreased as a result of cash payments for Reorganization items, including payments for prepetition liabilities and for bankruptcy-related professional fees, upon our emergence from bankruptcy on May 1, 2019. Such payments for Reorganization items were $97.9 million higher in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $741.2 million in 2018 compared to $619.2 million of cash used for operating activities from continuing operations in 2017. The increase in cash provided by operating activities is primarily attributed to the $1,374.4 million decrease in cash paid for interest. Cash paid for interest was $398.0 million during 2018 compared to $1,772.4 million during 2017. In addition, cash provided by operating activities increased as a result of changes in working capital balances, particularly accounts receivable, which were affected by improved collections as well as accounts payable and accrued expenses which were impacted by the timing of payments. Cash paid for Reorganization items, net was $103.7 million during 2018. As part of our liquidity measures taken in anticipation of our March 14, 2018 bankruptcy filing, we did not make scheduled interest payments on our long-term debt and we extended certain accounts payable to conserve cash. Subsequent to the bankruptcy filing, interest payments on our debt classified as "Liabilities subject to compromise" were stayed and only limited pre-petition payments on accounts payable were made.
Investing Activities
Cash used for investing activities of $147.8 million in 2020 was driven primarily by capital expenditures of $85.2 million primarily related to IT software and infrastructure, reflecting a $27.0 million decrease in capital expenditures compared to the prior year as a result of actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we used $62.1 million of cash to acquire certain strategic businesses including Voxnest which was acquired in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Cash used for investing activities of $334.4 million in 2019 primarily reflects $222.4 million in cash used for investing activities from discontinued operations. In addition, we used $112.2 million for capital expenditures, primarily related to IT software and infrastructure.
Cash used for investing activities of $345.5 million in 2018 primarily reflects $203.6 million in cash used for investing activities from discontinued operations. In addition, we used $85.2 million for capital expenditures, primarily related to IT software and infrastructure.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $241.2 million in 2020 primarily resulted from the net proceeds of $425.8 million from the issuance of incremental term loan commitments, offset by the $150.0 million prepayment on our Term Loan Facility in the first quarter 2020, along with required quarterly principal payments made on our term loan credit facilities.
Cash used for financing activities of $113.6 million in 2019 primarily resulted from the net payment by iHeartCommunications to CCOH as CCOH’s recovery of its claims under the Due from iHeartCommunications Note and settlement of the post-petition intercompany note balance, partially offset by $60.0 million in proceeds received from the issuance of the iHeart Operations Preferred Stock.
Cash used for financing activities of $491.8 million in 2018 primarily resulted from payments on long-term debt and on our receivables based credit facility. In connection with the replacement of the iHeartCommunications' receivables based credit facility with a new Debtor-in-Possession Facility (“DIP Facility”) on June 14, 2018, we repaid the outstanding $306.4 million and $74.3 million balances of the receivables based credit facility's term loan and revolving credit commitments, respectively. An additional $125.0 million principal amount was repaid under the DIP Facility during the third quarter of 2018.
Anticipated Cash Requirements
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand, which consisted of $720.7 million as of December 31, 2020, cash flow from operations and borrowing capacity under our $450.0 million ABL Facility. As of December 31, 2020, iHeartCommunications had no principal amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility, a facility size of $450.0 million and $32.9 million in outstanding letters of credit, resulting in $417.1 million of excess availability. As a result of certain restrictions in the Company's debt and preferred stock agreements, as of December 31, 2020, approximately $172 million was available to be drawn upon under the ABL Facility.
In July 2020, the Company issued $450.0 million of incremental term loans, resulting in net proceeds of $425.8 million, after original issue discount and debt issuance costs. A portion of the proceeds from the issuance was used to repay all outstanding balances under the ABL Facility of $235.0 million, with the remaining $190.6 million of the proceeds available for general corporate purposes. Our cash balance was $720.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Together with our borrowing capacity under the ABL Facility, our total available liquidity1 was approximately $893 million.
We continue to evaluate the full extent of COVID-19’s impact on our business. While the challenges that COVID-19 has created for advertisers and consumers had a significant impact on our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and has created a business outlook that is less clear in the near term, we believe that we have sufficient liquidity to continue to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months.
We expect that our primary anticipated uses of liquidity will be to fund our working capital, make interest payments, fund capital expenditures, pursue certain strategic opportunities and maintain operations in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and other obligations. We expect to have approximately $335 million of cash interest payments in 2021.
As a result of certain favorable tax provisions in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, our 2020 taxes were significantly reduced compared to what they would have been absent these provisions. Our cash income tax payments were $5.8 million primarily as a result of the provisions allowing for increased interest deductions, which resulted in additional tax deductible interest expense of $179.4 million during the year. In addition, the Company was able to defer the payment of $29.3 million in certain employment taxes during 2020, of which half will be due on December 31, 2021 and the other half will be due on December 31, 2022.
1 Total available liquidity defined as cash and cash equivalents plus available borrowings under the ABL Facility. We use total available liquidity to evaluate our capacity to access cash to meet obligations and fund operations.
Over the past ten years, we have transitioned our Audio business from a single platform radio broadcast operator to a company with multiple platforms, including digital, podcasting, networks and events. Early in the first quarter of 2020, we implemented our modernization initiatives to take advantage of the significant investments we have made in new technologies to build an operating infrastructure that provides better quality and newer products and delivers new cost efficiencies. Our investments in modernization delivered approximately $50 million of savings in 2020 and are expected to deliver annualized run-rate cost savings of approximately $100 million by mid-year 2021. We have also invested in numerous technologies and businesses to increase the competitiveness of our inventory with our advertisers and our audience.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in an effort to further strengthen the Company's financial flexibility and efficiently manage through the period of economic slowdown and uncertainty, the Company took the following measures, which generated approximately $200 million in operating cost savings in 2020:
•Substantial reduction in certain operating expenses, such as new employee hiring, travel and entertainment expenses, 401(k) matching expenses, consulting fees and other discretionary expenses.
•Reduction in planned capital expenditures to a level that we believe will still enable the Company to make key investments to continue our strategic initiatives related to Smart Audio and Digital, including podcasting.
•Reduction in compensation for senior management and other employees of the Company, including a 100% reduction of the Company's Chief Executive Officer's annual base salary and bonus.
•In addition, as a result of the decrease in revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, certain variable expenses including event production costs and sales commissions, as well as other variable compensation, showed a corresponding decrease.
The Company has identified, and executed on, strategic initiatives to ensure that the majority of all of the $200 million in COVID-19 savings persist in 2021.
We believe that our cash balance, our cash flow from operations and availability under our ABL Facility provide us with sufficient liquidity to fund our core operations, maintain key personnel and meet our other material obligations. In addition, none of our long-term debt includes maintenance covenants that could trigger early repayment. We fully appreciate the unprecedented challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, however, we remain confident in our business, our employees and our strategy. We believe that our ability to generate cash flow from operations from our business initiatives, our current cash on hand and availability under the ABL Facility will provide sufficient resources to continue to fund and operate our business, fund capital expenditures and other obligations and make interest payments on our long-term debt. If these sources of liquidity need to be augmented, additional cash requirements would likely be financed through the issuance of debt or equity securities; however, there can be no assurances that we will be able to obtain additional debt or equity financing on acceptable terms or at all in the future.
We frequently evaluate strategic opportunities, and we expect from time to time to pursue acquisitions or dispose of certain businesses, which may or may not be material. For example, on October 22, 2020, we used a portion of our cash on hand to complete the strategic acquisition of Voxnest, Inc., a provider of podcast analytics and programmatic ad serving tools, which we believe will be a transaction accretive to shareholder value. Specifically, as we continue to focus on operational efficiencies that drive greater margin and cash flow, we will continue to review and consider opportunities to unlock shareholder value and increase free cash flow.
On February 3, 2020, iHeartCommunications made a $150.0 million prepayment using cash on hand and entered into an agreement to amend the Term Loan Facility to reduce the interest rate to LIBOR plus a margin of 3.00%, or the Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) plus a margin of 2.00% and to modify certain covenants contained in the Credit Agreement.
As a precautionary measure to preserve financial flexibility in light of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we borrowed $350.0 million principal amount under our ABL Facility. On July 16, 2020, iHeartCommunications entered into an additional amendment to the Credit Facility (“Amendment No. 2”) to provide for $450.0 million, resulting in net proceeds of $425.8 million, after original issue discount and debt issuance costs. A portion of the proceeds from the issuance was used to repay the then-remaining balance outstanding under the ABL Facility of $235.0 million, with the remaining $190.6 million of the proceeds available for general corporate purposes. The incremental term loans issued pursuant to Amendment No. 2 have an interest rate of 4.00% for Eurocurrency Rate Loans and 3.00% for Base Rate Loans (subject to a LIBOR floor of 0.75% and Base Rate floor of 1.75%). Amendment No. 2 also modifies certain other provisions of the Credit Agreement.
In connection with the Separation and Reorganization, we entered into the following transactions which may require ongoing capital commitments:
Transition Services Agreement
Pursuant to the Transition Services Agreement between us, iHeartMedia Management Services, Inc. (“iHM Management Services”), iHeartCommunications and CCOH, for one year from the Effective Date, we agreed to provide CCOH with certain administrative and support services and other assistance which CCOH utilized in the conduct of its business as such business was conducted prior to the Separation.
The Transition Services Agreement was terminated on August 31, 2020. For additional information, see Note 4, Discontinued Operations to the consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further description.
New Tax Matters Agreement
In connection with the Separation, we entered into the New Tax Matters Agreement by and among iHeartMedia, iHeartCommunications, iHeart Operations, Inc., CCH, CCOH and Clear Channel Outdoor, Inc., to allocate the responsibility of iHeartMedia and its subsidiaries, on the one hand, and CCOH and its subsidiaries, on the other, for the payment of taxes arising prior and subsequent to, and in connection with, the Separation.
The New Tax Matters Agreement requires that iHeartMedia and iHeartCommunications indemnify CCOH and its subsidiaries, and their respective directors, officers and employees, and hold them harmless, on an after-tax basis, from and against certain tax claims related to the Separation. In addition, the New Tax Matters Agreement requires that CCOH indemnify iHeartMedia for certain income taxes paid by iHeartMedia on behalf of CCOH and its subsidiaries. For additional information, see Note 4, Discontinued Operations to the consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further description.
Sources of Capital
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had the following debt outstanding, net of cash and cash equivalents:
(1)On February 3, 2020, iHeartCommunications made a $150.0 million prepayment using cash on hand and entered into an agreement to amend the Term Loan Facility to reduce the interest rate to LIBOR plus a margin of 3.00%, or the Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) plus a margin of 2.00% and to modify certain covenants contained in the Credit Agreement.
(2)On July 16, 2020, iHeartCommunications issued $450.0 million of incremental term loans under the Amendment No. 2, resulting in net proceeds of $425.8 million, after original issue discount and debt issuance costs. A portion of the proceeds from the issuance was used to repay the remaining balance outstanding on the Company's ABL Facility of $235.0 million, with the remaining $190.6 million of the proceeds available for general corporate purposes.
(3)On March 13, 2020, iHeartCommunications borrowed $350.0 million under the ABL Facility, the proceeds of which were invested as cash on the Balance Sheet. During the three months ended June 30, 2020 and the three months ended September 30, 2020, iHeartCommunications voluntarily repaid the principal amount drawn under the ABL Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the ABL Facility had a facility size of $450.0 million, no principal amounts outstanding and $32.9 million of outstanding letters of credit, resulting in $417.1 million of excess availability. As a result of certain restrictions in the Company's debt and preferred stock agreements, as of December 31, 2020, approximately $172.0 million was available to be drawn upon under the ABL Facility.
For additional information regarding our debt, including the terms of the governing documents, refer to Note 9, Long-Term Debt to our consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Exchange of Special Warrants
On July 25, 2019, the Company filed a PDR with the FCC to permit up to 100% of the Company’s voting stock to be owned by non-U.S. individuals and entities. On November 5, 2020, the FCC issued the Declaratory Ruling granting the relief requested by the PDR, subject to certain conditions set forth in the Declaratory Ruling.
On January 8, 2021, the Company exchanged a portion of the outstanding Special Warrants into 45,133,811 shares of iHeartMedia Class A common stock, the Company’s publicly traded equity, and 22,337,312 Class B common stock in compliance with the Declaratory Ruling, the Communications Act and FCC rules. Following the Exchange, the Company's remaining Special Warrants continue to be exercisable for shares of Class A common stock or Class B common stock. There
were 110,923,534 shares of Class A common stock, 29,088,181 shares of Class B common stock and 6,201,453 Special Warrants outstanding on February 22, 2021.
Supplemental Financial Information under Debt Agreements and Certificate of Designation Governing the iHeart Operations Preferred Stock
Pursuant to iHeartCommunications' material debt agreements, Capital I, the parent guarantor and a subsidiary of iHeartMedia, is permitted to satisfy its reporting obligations under such agreements by furnishing iHeartMedia’s consolidated financial information and an explanation of the material differences between iHeartMedia’s consolidated financial information, on the one hand, and the financial information of Capital I and its consolidated restricted subsidiaries, on the other hand. Because neither iHeartMedia nor iHeartMedia Capital II, LLC, a wholly-owned direct subsidiary of iHeartMedia and the parent of Capital I, have any operations or material assets or liabilities, there are no material differences between iHeartMedia’s consolidated financial information for the year ended December 31, 2020, and Capital I’s and its consolidated restricted subsidiaries’ financial information for the same period.
According to the certificate of designation governing the iHeart Operations Preferred Stock, iHeart Operations is required to provide certain supplemental financial information of iHeart Operations in comparison to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries. iHeart Operations and its subsidiaries comprised 84.8% of the Company's consolidated assets as of December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, iHeart Operations and its subsidiaries comprised 85.3% of the Company's consolidated revenues.
Uses of Capital
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
See the Contractual Obligations table under “Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees” and Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the Company's future capital expenditure commitments.
Our capital expenditures are not of significant size individually and primarily relate to studio and broadcast equipment and software.
Dividends
Holders of shares of our Class A common stock are entitled to receive dividends, on a per share basis, when and if declared by our Board out of funds legally available therefor and whenever any dividend is made on the shares of our Class B common stock subject to certain exceptions set forth in our certificate. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Acquisitions
During the first quarter of 2021, we entered into a Share Purchase Agreement to acquire Triton Digital, a global leader in digital audio and podcast technology and measurement services, from The E.W. Scripps Company for $230 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments. The consummation of the proposed acquisition is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of customary closing conditions, including regulatory approval.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we acquired Voxnest, Inc. for aggregate consideration of $50 million. The assets acquired primarily consisted of intangible assets valued at $53.2 million, including $36.6 million in goodwill.
During the fourth quarter of 2018, we acquired Stuff Media LLC and Jelli, Inc. for aggregate consideration of $120.3 million, of which $74.3 million was paid in cash in the fourth quarter of 2018 and $46.0 million, plus imputed interest, was paid in cash in the fourth quarter of 2019. The assets acquired as part of these transactions consisted of $27.0 million in fixed assets and $35.2 million in intangible assets, primarily consisting of technology and content, along with $77.3 million in goodwill.
Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business and, as required, have accrued our estimate of the probable costs for resolution of those claims for which the occurrence of loss is probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. These estimates have been developed in consultation with counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. It is possible, however, that future results of operations for any particular period could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings. Please refer to Item 3. “Legal Proceedings” within Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain agreements relating to acquisitions provide for purchase price adjustments and other future contingent payments based on the financial performance of the acquired companies generally over a one to five-year period. The aggregate of these contingent payments, if performance targets are met, would not significantly impact our financial position or results of operations.
We have future cash obligations under various types of contracts. We lease office space, certain broadcast facilities and equipment. Some of our lease agreements contain renewal options and annual rental escalation clauses (generally tied to the consumer price index), as well as provisions for our payment of utilities and maintenance.
We have non-cancellable contracts in our radio broadcasting operations related to program rights and music license fees.
In the normal course of business, our broadcasting operations have minimum future payments associated with employee and talent contracts. These contracts typically contain cancellation provisions that allow us to cancel the contract with good cause.
The scheduled maturities of iHeartCommunications' secured debt, unsecured debt, mandatorily redeemable preferred stock, and our future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable lease agreements, minimum payments under other non-cancelable contracts, payments under employment/talent contracts and other long-term obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as set forth in the table below.
(1)Interest payments on long-term debt and preferred stock reflect the Company's obligations as of December 31, 2020. Interest payments calculated based on floating rates assume rates are held constant over the remaining term.
(2)The non-current portion of the unrecognized tax benefits is included in the “Thereafter” column as we cannot reasonably estimate the timing or amounts of additional cash payments, if any, at this time. For additional information, see Note 11 included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
SEASONALITY
Typically, the Audio segment experiences its lowest financial performance in the first quarter of the calendar year. We expect this trend to continue in the future. Due to this seasonality and certain other factors, the results for the interim periods may not be indicative of results for the full year. In addition, our Audio segment and our Audio and Media Services segment are impacted by political cycles and generally experience higher revenues in congressional election years, and particularly in presidential election years. This cyclicality may affect comparability of results between years.
MARKET RISK
We are exposed to market risks arising from changes in market rates and prices, including movements in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and inflation.
Interest Rate Risk
A significant amount of our long-term debt bears interest at variable rates. Accordingly, our earnings will be affected by changes in interest rates. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 43% of our aggregate principal amount of long-term debt bore interest at floating rates. Assuming the current level of borrowings and assuming a 50% change in LIBOR, it is estimated that our interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have changed by $8.2 million.
In the event of an adverse change in interest rates, management may take actions to mitigate our exposure. However, due to the uncertainty of the actions that would be taken and their possible effects, the preceding interest rate sensitivity analysis assumes no such actions. Further, the analysis does not consider the effects of the change in the level of overall economic activity that could exist in such an environment.
Inflation
Inflation is a factor in our business and we continue to seek ways to mitigate its effect. Inflation has affected our performance in terms of higher costs for wages, salaries and equipment. We believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our historical results of operations and financial condition have been immaterial. Although the exact impact of inflation is indeterminable, we believe we have offset these higher costs by increasing the effective advertising rates of most of our broadcasting stations in our Audio operations.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For information regarding new accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The result of these evaluations forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amount of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such difference could be material. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following narrative describes these critical accounting estimates, the judgments and assumptions and the effect if actual results differ from these assumptions.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We evaluate the collectability of our accounts receivable based on a combination of factors. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations, we record a specific reserve to reduce the amounts recorded to what we believe will be collected. For all other customers, we recognize reserves for bad debt based on historical experience for each business unit, adjusted for relative improvements or deteriorations in the agings and changes in current economic conditions.
If our agings were to improve or deteriorate resulting in a 10% change in our allowance, we estimated that our bad debt expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have changed by approximately $3.9 million.
Leases
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for leases and the impact of these estimates are as follows:
Expected lease term Our expected lease term includes both contractual lease periods and cancellable option periods where failure to exercise such options would result in an economic penalty. The expected lease term is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the lease term exceeds 75% of the leased asset's useful life. The expected lease term is also used in determining the depreciable life of the asset. An increase in the expected lease term will increase the probability that a lease may be considered a finance lease and will generally result in higher interest and depreciation expense for a leased property recorded on our balance sheet.
Incremental borrowing rate The incremental borrowing rate is primarily used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum lease payments is greater than 90% of the fair market value of the property. An increase in the incremental borrowing rate decreases the net present value of the minimum lease payments and reduces the probability that a lease will be considered a finance lease.
Fair market value of leased asset The fair market value of leased property is generally estimated based on comparable market data as provided by third-party sources. Fair market value is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the fair market value of the leased property. A higher fair market value reduces the likelihood that a lease will be considered a finance lease.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including plant and equipment and definite-lived intangibles, are reported at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. We estimate the useful lives for various types of advertising structures and other long-lived assets based on our historical experience and our plans regarding how we intend to use those assets. Our experience indicates that the estimated useful lives applied to our portfolio of assets have been reasonable, and we do not expect significant changes to the estimated useful lives of our long-lived assets in the future. When we determine that structures or other long-lived assets will be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives, we estimate the revised useful lives and depreciate the assets over the revised period. We also review long-lived assets for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that depreciable and amortizable long-lived assets might be impaired and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amounts of those assets. When specific assets are determined to be unrecoverable, the cost basis of the asset is reduced to reflect the current fair market value.
We use various assumptions in determining the remaining useful lives of assets to be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives and in determining the current fair market value of long-lived assets that are determined to be unrecoverable. Estimated useful lives and fair values are sensitive to factors including contractual commitments, regulatory requirements, future expected cash flows, industry growth rates and discount rates, as well as future salvage values. Our impairment loss calculations require management to apply judgment in estimating future cash flows, including forecasting useful lives of the assets and selecting the discount rate that reflects the risk inherent in future cash flows.
If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
In connection with our Plan of Reorganization, we applied fresh start accounting as required by ASC 852 and recorded all of our assets and liabilities at estimated fair values, including our FCC licenses, which are included within our Audio reporting unit. Indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as our FCC licenses, are reviewed annually for possible impairment using the direct valuation method as prescribed in ASC 805-20-S99. Under the direct valuation method, the estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets was calculated at the market level as prescribed by ASC 350-30-35. Under the direct valuation method, it is assumed that rather than acquiring indefinite-lived intangible assets as a part of a going concern business, the buyer hypothetically obtains indefinite-lived intangible assets and builds a new operation with similar attributes from scratch. Thus, the buyer incurs start-up costs during the build-up phase which are normally associated with going concern value. Initial capital costs are deducted from the discounted cash flows model, which results in value that is directly attributable to the indefinite-lived intangible assets.
Our key assumptions using the direct valuation method are market revenue growth rates, market share, profit margin, duration and profile of the build-up period, estimated start-up capital costs, the risk-adjusted discount rate and terminal values. This data is populated using industry normalized information representing an average asset within a market.
On July 1, 2020, we performed our annual impairment test in accordance with ASC 350-30-35 and we concluded no impairment of the indefinite-lived intangible assets was required. In determining the fair value of our FCC licenses, the following key assumptions were used:
•Revenue forecasts published by BIA Financial Network, Inc. (“BIA”), varying by market, were used for the initial four-year period;
•2.0% revenue growth was assumed beyond the initial four-year period;
•Revenue was grown proportionally over a build-up period, reaching market revenue forecast by year 3;
•Operating margins of 8.0% in the first year gradually climb to the industry average margin in year 3 of up to 21.0%, depending on market size; and
•Assumed discount rates of 8.5% for the 15 largest markets and 9.0% for all other markets.
While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized appropriate assumptions to calculate the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets, it is possible a material change could occur. If future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, we may be exposed to impairment charges in the future. The following table shows the change in the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets that would result from a 100 basis point decline in our discrete and terminal period revenue growth rate and profit margin assumptions and a 100 basis point increase in our discount rate assumption:
The estimated fair value of our FCC licenses at July 1, 2020 was $2.0 billion, while the carrying value was $1.8 billion.
Goodwill
Upon application of fresh start accounting in accordance with ASC 852 in connection with our emergence from bankruptcy, we recorded goodwill of $3.3 billion, which represented the excess of estimated enterprise fair value over the estimated fair value of our assets and liabilities. Goodwill was further allocated to our reporting units based on the relative fair values of our reporting units as of May 1, 2019.
We test goodwill at interim dates if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. The fair value of our reporting units is used to apply value to the net assets of each reporting unit. To the extent that the carrying amount of net assets would exceed the fair value, an impairment charge may be required to be recorded.
The discounted cash flow approach we use for valuing goodwill involves estimating future cash flows expected to be generated from the related assets, discounted to their present value using a risk-adjusted discount rate. Terminal values are also estimated and discounted to their present value.
On July 1, 2020, we performed our annual impairment test in accordance with ASC 350-30-35, resulting in no impairment of goodwill. In determining the fair value of our reporting units, we used the following assumptions:
•Expected cash flows underlying our business plans for the periods 2020 through 2024. Our cash flow assumptions are based on detailed, multi-year forecasts performed by each of our operating reporting units, and reflect the current advertising outlook across our businesses.
•Cash flows beyond 2024 are projected to grow at a perpetual growth rate, which we estimated at 2.0% for our Audio and digital reporting units and 2.0% for our Katz Media reporting unit (beyond 2028).
•In order to risk adjust the cash flow projections in determining fair value, we utilized a discount rate of approximately 14.0% for each of our reporting units.
Based on our annual assessment using the assumptions described above, the excess of fair value of the Audio and RCS reporting units compared to its carrying value is approximately 10% or less; however, a hypothetical 5% reduction in the estimated fair value in each of our reporting units would not result in a material impairment condition.
While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized appropriate assumptions to calculate the estimated fair value of our reporting units, it is possible a material change could occur. If future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, we may be exposed to impairment charges in the future. The following table shows the decline in the fair value of each of our reporting units that would result from a 100 basis point decline in our discrete and terminal period revenue growth rate and profit margin assumptions and a 100 basis point increase in our discount rate assumption:
Tax Provisions
Our estimates of income taxes and the significant items giving rise to the deferred tax assets and liabilities are shown in the notes to our consolidated financial statements and reflect our assessment of actual future taxes to be paid on items reflected in the financial statements, giving consideration to both timing and probability of these estimates. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates due to future changes in income tax law or results from the final review of our tax returns by federal, state or foreign tax authorities.
We use our judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized. Deferred tax assets are reduced by valuation allowances if the Company believes it is more than likely than not that some portion or the entire asset will not be realized.
We use our judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that we will sustain positions that we have taken on tax returns and, if so, the amount of benefit to initially recognize within our financial statements. We regularly review our uncertain tax positions and adjust our unrecognized tax benefits (UTBs) in light of changes in facts and circumstances, such as changes in tax law, interactions with taxing authorities and developments in case law. These adjustments to our UTBs may affect our income tax expense. Settlement of uncertain tax positions may require use of our cash.
Litigation Accruals
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings. Based on current assumptions, we have accrued an estimate of the probable costs for the resolution of those claims for which the occurrence of loss is probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Future results of operations could be materially affected by changes in these assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings.
Management’s estimates have been developed in consultation with counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies.
Insurance Accruals
We are currently self-insured beyond certain retention amounts for various insurance coverages, including general liability and property and casualty. Accruals are recorded based on estimates of actual claims filed, historical payouts, existing insurance coverage and projected future development of costs related to existing claims. Our self-insured liabilities contain uncertainties because management must make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate the ultimate cost to settle reported claims and claims incurred but not reported as of December 31, 2020.
If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments, we may be exposed to gains or losses that could be material. A 10% change in our self-insurance liabilities at December 31, 2020 would have affected our net loss by approximately $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Share-Based Compensation
Under the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718-10, share-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires assumptions and judgments, such as expected volatility, among other factors. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, our results of operations could be materially impacted.