ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth previously under the caption “Risk Factors.” This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
The results of operations for the periods reflected herein are not necessarily indicative of results that may be expected for future periods.
References in this MD&A to “we,” “us,” “our,” “our company,” “our business” and “IMAC Holdings” are to IMAC Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and prior to the Corporate Conversion (defined below), IMAC Holdings, LLC, a Kentucky limited liability company, and the following entities which are consolidated due to direct ownership of a controlling voting interest or other rights granted to us as the sole general partner or managing member of the entity: IMAC Regeneration Center of St. Louis, LLC (“IMAC St. Louis”), IMAC Management Services, LLC (“IMAC Management”), IMAC Regeneration Management, LLC (“IMAC Texas”) IMAC Regeneration Management of Nashville, LLC (“IMAC Nashville”) IMAC Management of Illinois, LLC (“IMAC Illinois”), Advantage Hand Therapy and Orthopedic Rehabilitation, LLC (“Advantage Therapy”) and IMAC Management of Florida, LLC (“IMAC Florida”); the following entity which is consolidated with IMAC Regeneration Management of Nashville, LLC due to control by contract: IMAC Regeneration Center of Nashville, PC (“IMAC Nashville PC”); the following entities which are consolidated with IMAC Management of Illinois, LLC due to control by contract: Progressive Health and Rehabilitation, Ltd., Illinois Spine and Disc Institute, Ltd. and Ricardo Knight, P.C.; the following entity which is consolidated with IMAC Management Services, LLC due to control by contract: Integrated Medicine and Chiropractic Regeneration Center PSC (Kentucky PC).
Overview
We are a provider of movement and orthopedic therapies and minimally invasive procedures performed through our regenerative and rehabilitative medical treatments to improve the physical health of our patients at our fast-growing chain of IMAC Regeneration Centers which we own or manage. Our outpatient medical clinics provide conservative, minimally invasive medical treatments to help patients with back pain, knee pain, joint pain, ligament and tendon damage, and other related soft tissue conditions. Our licensed healthcare professionals evaluate each patient and provide a custom treatment plan that integrates traditional medical procedures and innovative regenerative medicine procedures in combination with physical medicine. We do not use or offer opioid-based prescriptions as part of our treatment options in order to help our patients avoid the dangers of opioid abuse and addiction. The original IMAC Regeneration Center opened in Kentucky in August 2000 and remains the flagship location of our current business, which was formally organized in March 2015. To date, we have opened seven, acquired seven and sublease two outpatient medical clinics in Kentucky, Missouri, Tennessee, Illinois and Florida, and plan to further expand the reach of our facilities to other strategic locations throughout the United States. We have partnered with several active and former professional athletes, including Ozzie Smith, David Price, Tony Delk and Mike Ditka, in the branding of our IMAC Regeneration Centers. Our outpatient medical clinics emphasize our focus around treating sports and orthopedic injuries as an alternative to traditional surgeries for repair or joint replacement.
We own our medical clinics directly or have entered into long-term management services agreements to operate and control certain of our medical clinics by contract. Our preference is to own the clinics; however, some state laws restrict the corporate practice of medicine and require a licensed medical practitioner or own the clinic. Accordingly, our managed clinics are owned exclusively by a medical professional within a professional service corporation (formed as a limited liability company or corporation) and are under common control with us in order to comply with state laws regulating the ownership of medical practices. We are compensated under management services agreements through service fees based on the cost of the services provided, plus a specified markup percentage, and a discretionary annual bonus determined in the sole discretion of each professional service corporation.
Corporate Conversion
Prior to June 1, 2018, we were a Kentucky limited liability company named IMAC Holdings, LLC. Effective June 1, 2018, we converted into a Delaware corporation pursuant to a statutory merger (the “Corporate Conversion”) and changed our name to IMAC Holdings, Inc. All of our outstanding membership interests were exchanged on a proportional basis into shares of common stock of IMAC Holdings, Inc.
Following the Corporate Conversion, IMAC Holdings, Inc. continues to hold all of the property and assets of IMAC Holdings, LLC and all of the debts and obligations of IMAC Holdings, LLC continue as the debts and obligations of IMAC Holdings, Inc. The purpose of the Corporate Conversion was to reorganize our corporate structure so that the top tier entity in our corporate structure is a corporation rather than a limited liability company and so that our existing owners own shares of our common stock rather than membership interests in a limited liability company. Except as otherwise noted herein, the consolidated financial statements included herein are those of IMAC Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Private Placement
In the first six months of 2018, we received gross proceeds of $1,530,000 from a private placement of our 4% convertible promissory notes. The $1,530,000 and an additional $200,000 in existing equity and payments to investors (plus accrued interest) is convertible into 445,559 shares of our common stock, pursuant to the terms of a Securities Purchase Agreement with 23 accredited investors. The principal amount of the promissory notes was convertible into shares of common stock automatically upon the closing our initial public offering, which was completed in February 2019. The conversion price of the promissory notes was an amount reflecting a 20% discount to the initial public offering price of $5.00 per share attributable to the common stock.
On June 1, 2018, we entered into a note payable to the Edward S. Bredniak Revocable Trust in the amount of up to $2,000,000. An existing note payable with this entity with an outstanding balance of $379,675.60 was combined into the new note payable. The note carries an interest rate of 10% per annum and all outstanding balances are due and payable 13 months after the closing our initial public offering, which was completed in February 2019. This note was amended effective June 28, 2019 to, among other things, reduce the outstanding principal amount to $1,750,000 and extend the maturity of this note to January 5, 2022. The proceeds of this note are being used to satisfy ongoing working capital needs, expenses related to the preparation for our initial public offering, equipment and construction costs related to new clinic locations and potential business combination and transaction expenses.
Initial Public Offering
On February 15, 2019, we completed our initial public offering of 850,000 units, with each unit consisting one share of our common stock and two warrants each to purchase one share of our common stock, at a combined initial public offering price of $5.125 per unit. The exercise price of the warrants is $5.00 per warrant. The units immediately and automatically separated upon issuance, and the common stock and warrants trade on The NASDAQ Capital Market under the ticker symbols “IMAC” and “IMACW,” respectively.
We received aggregate gross proceeds of $4,356,250 from our initial public offering, before deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other related expenses. Proceeds from the offering have been used for financing the costs of leasing, developing and acquiring new clinic locations, funding research and new product development activities, and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
In addition, upon the closing of our initial public offering, we issued unit purchase options to Dawson James Securities, Inc., as representative of the several underwriters, and its affiliates entitling them to purchase a number of our securities equal to 4% of the securities sold in the initial public offering. The unit purchase options have an exercise price equal to 120% of the public offering price of the units (or $6.15 per share and two warrants) and may be exercised on a cashless basis. The unit purchase options are not redeemable by us.
Significant financial metrics
Our significant financial metrics of the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 are set forth in the bullets below.
● Net loss of $5.0 million in the year ended 2020 compared to a net loss of $6.5 million in the year ended 2019.
● Adjusted EBITDA1 of ($3.819 million) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($3.802) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
● Starting in the second quarter, monthly revenues were negatively impacted by COVID-19. Cumulative net revenue for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 decreased by $2.8 million compared to cumulative net revenue for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2019. The Company was able to receive $2.1 million in assistance from the SBA PPP note and grant funding from the CARES Act.
● Starting in the fourth quarter, the Company had $209,000 in expenses related to its investigational new drug therapy.
● The Company had one-time expenses of $457,000, consisting of: a pre-payment penalty of $125,000 under the $1,115,000 Iliad Note, $225,000 in debt issuance costs, $26,000 in one-time consulting fees and the bad debt charge against the remaining $81,000 receivable from the sale of BioFirma.
(1) Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure most closely comparable to the GAAP measure of net loss. See “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Matters” below for a full reconciliation of the GAAP and non-GAAP measures.
Impacts of and Response to COVID-19 Outbreak
In March 2020, federal, state and local government authorities issued orders and guidance in order to combat the spread of the COVID-19 outbreak. These actions have required or encouraged our patients to remain at home except for essential activities and may reduce patient visits to our clinics. For example, the governor of Kentucky ordered all chiropractic facilities in the state of Kentucky to close effective March 20, 2020, which caused us to close our Kentucky chiropractic facilities until such order was lifted on May 4, 2020. The full extent and duration of such actions and their impacts over the longer term remain uncertain and dependent on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the severity and transmission rate of the COVID-19 outbreak and the extent and effectiveness of containment actions taken.
Our response plan has multiple facets and continues to evolve as the pandemic unfolds. As a precautionary measure, we have taken steps to enhance our operational and financial flexibility to react to the risks the COVID-19 outbreak presents to our business, including the following:
● Launched telemedicine communications for remote patient engagement;
● Suspended operations in three Kentucky clinics to comply with government orders until we were allowed to resume operations on May 4, 2020; and
● Suspended operations at one clinic located in Cook County, Illinois to comply with government orders until such order is lifted. The lease for this clinic expired June 30, 2020 and was not renewed.
The COVID-19 outbreak appears likely to cause significant economic harm across the United States, and the negative economic conditions that may result in reduced patient demand in our industry. We may experience a material loss of patients, revenue and market share as a result of the suspension of any operations. Initiatives to implement telehealth engagement with patients may not be adopted by existing and new patients. Patient habits may also be altered in the medium to long term. Negative economic conditions, a decrease in our revenue and consequent longer term trends harmful to our business may all exert pressure on our company during the pendency of emergency restrictions on our operations and beyond. Due to such conditions, beginning in March 2020 we began to terminate or furlough employees to reduce costs associated with non-essential personnel, which resulted in a 27% reduction in workforce. As of December 31, 2020, 98% of the full and part-time workforce had returned to their on-site work locations.
CARES Act
The Company continues to closely monitor legislative actions at the federal, state and local levels including the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and other governmental assistance that might be available in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As part of the CARES Act, the United States government initially announced that it would offer $100 billion of relief to eligible health care providers. On April 7, 2020, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”) officials indicated they would distribute $30 billion of direct grants to hospitals, ASCs and other health care providers based on how much they bill Medicare. Payments received from these grants are not required to be repaid provided the recipients attest to and comply with certain terms and conditions, including limitations on balance billing and not using funds received from the grants to reimburse expenses or losses that other sources are obligated to reimburse.
The Company received approximately $416,000 of the grant funds distributed under the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund program in April 2020. Based on an analysis of the compliance and reporting requirements and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operating results through the end of the third quarter, these funds were recognized as a reduction in operating expenses under the line item “Grant funds” in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. The recognition of amounts received is conditioned upon certification that payment will be used to prevent, prepare for and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and shall reimburse the recipient only for healthcare related expenses or lost revenues that are attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Amounts are recognized as a reduction to operating costs and expenses only to the extent the Company is reasonably assured that underlying conditions are met.
We cannot predict with certainty when public health and economic conditions will return to normal. A decline in patient visits and/or the possible suspension of operations mandated in response to the COVID-19 outbreak, and the consequent loss of revenue and cash flow during this period may make it difficult for us to obtain capital necessary to fund our operations.
Matters that May or Are Currently Affecting Our Business
We believe that the growth of our business and our future success depend on various opportunities, challenges, trends and other factors, including the following:
● Our ability to identify, contract with, install equipment and operate a large number of outpatient medical clinics and attract new patients to them;
● Our need to hire additional healthcare professionals in order to operate the large number of clinics we intend to open;
● Our ability to enhance revenue at each facility on an ongoing basis through additional patient volume and new services;
● Our ability to obtain additional financing for the projected costs associated with the acquisition, management and development of new clinics, and the personnel involved, if and when needed;
● Our ability to attract competent, skilled medical and sales personnel for our operations at acceptable prices to manage our overhead; and
● Our ability to control our operating expenses as we expand our organization into neighboring states.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses at the date and for the periods that the consolidated financial statements are prepared. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to insurance adjustments and provisions for doubtful accounts. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
We believe that, of the significant accounting policies discussed in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the following accounting policies require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments in the preparation of our financial statements.
Intangible Assets
The Company capitalizes the fair value of intangible assets acquired in business combinations. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated economic useful lives, generally the contract term. The Company performs valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on each acquisition accounted for as a business combination and allocates the purchase price of each acquired business to its respective net tangible and intangible assets. Acquired intangible assets include trade names, non-compete agreements, customer relationships and contractual agreements.
Goodwill
Our goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired in business combinations. The goodwill generated from the business combinations is primarily related to the value placed on the employee workforce and expected synergies. Judgment is involved in determining if an indicator or change in circumstances relating to impairment has occurred. Such changes may include, among others, a significant decline in expected future cash flows, a significant adverse change in the business climate, and unforeseen competition. There was no goodwill impairment for the years presented.
The Company tests goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or when events or circumstances indicate the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value. No impairments of goodwill were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue Recognition
Our patient service revenue is derived from minimally invasive procedures performed at our outpatient medical clinics and patient visits to physicians. The fees for such services are billed either to the patient or a third-party payer, including Medicare. Starting in January 2020, we implemented wellness maintenance programs on a subscription basis. There are three membership plans offered with different levels of service for each plan. We recognize patient service revenue, net of contractual adjustments, which we estimate based on the historical trend of our cash collections and contractual write-offs in the period in which services are performed. Contractual adjustments represent discounts offered for patients serviced within a negotiated third-party payer contract.
Other management service fees are derived from management services where we provide billings and collections support to the clinics and where management services are provided based on state specific regulations known as the corporate practice of medicine (“CPM”). Under the CPM, a business corporation is precluded from practicing medicine or employing a physician to provide professional medical services. In these circumstances, we provide all administrative support to the physician-owned professional corporation (“PC”) through a limited liability company. The PC is consolidated due to control by contract (an “SMA” or Service Management Agreement). The fees we derive from these management arrangements are based on a percentage mark-up on the costs of the LLC. We recognize other management service revenue in the period in which services are rendered. These revenues are eliminated in consolidation.
Patient Deposits
Patient deposits are derived from patient payments in advance of services delivered. Our service lines include traditional and regenerative medicine. Regenerative medicine procedures are not paid by insurance carriers; therefore, we typically require up-front payment from the patient for regenerative services and any co-pays and deductibles as required by the patient specific insurance carrier. For some patients, credit is provided through an outside vendor. In this case, we are paid from the outsourced credit vendor and the risk is transferred to the credit vendor for collection from the patient. These funds are accounted for as patient deposits until the procedures are performed at which point the patient deposit is recognized as patient service revenue.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable primarily consists of amounts due from third-party payers (non-governmental), governmental payers and private pay patients and is recorded net of allowances for doubtful accounts and contractual discounts. Our ability to collect outstanding receivables is critical to our results of operations and cash flows. Accordingly, accounts receivable reported in our consolidated financial statements are recorded at the net amount expected to be received. Our primary collection risks are (i) the risk of overestimation of net revenues at the time of billing that may result in our receiving less than the recorded receivable, (ii) the risk of non-payment as a result of commercial insurance companies’ denial of claims, (iii) the risk that patients will fail to remit insurance payments to us when the commercial insurance company pays out-of-network claims directly to the patient, (iv) resource and capacity constraints that may prevent us from handling the volume of billing and collection issues in a timely manner, (v) the risk that patients do not pay us for their self-pay balances (including co-pays, deductibles and any portion of the claim not covered by insurance), and (vi) the risk of non-payment from uninsured patients.
Our accounts receivable from third-party payers are recorded net of estimated contractual adjustments and allowances from third-party payers, which are estimated based on the historical trend of our facilities’ cash collections and contractual write-offs, accounts receivable aging, established fee schedules, relationships with payers and procedure statistics. While changes in estimated reimbursement from third-party payers remain a possibility, we expect that any such changes would be minimal and, therefore, would not have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Our collection policies and procedures are based on the type of payor, size of claim and estimated collection percentage for each patient account. The operating systems used to manage our patient accounts provide for an aging schedule in 30-day increments, by payer, physician and patient. We analyze accounts receivable at each of the facilities to ensure the proper collection and aged category. The operating systems generate reports that assist in the collection efforts by prioritizing patient accounts. Collection efforts include direct contact with insurance carriers or patients and written correspondence.
We had an increase in accounts receivable of $255,000 to $1.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Our accounts receivable balance increased throughout 2020 due to multiple factors, primarily including the Bonita Springs acquisition, the opening of the Ricardo Knight PC and despite overall visits being slightly down for the total year, there was a 7.3% increase in year over year visits during the second half of 2020, with the most significant increase occurring in December (20% year over year increase). In addition, the Bonita acquisition and opening of the Knight PC drove additional accounts receivable.
Income Taxes
IMAC Holdings was taxed as a partnership through May 31, 2018. As a result, income tax liabilities were passed through to the individual members. Accordingly, no provision for income taxes were reflected in the consolidated financial statements for periods prior to May 31, 2018, at which time the Company converted from a limited liability company to a Delaware corporation. Subsequent to the Company converting to a Delaware corporation, IMAC Nashville, IMAC Texas, IMAC St. Louis continued as single-member limited liability companies that are disregarded entities for tax purposes and do not file separate returns. Their activity is included as part of IMAC Holdings Inc. Advantage Therapy, IMAC Illinois and IMAC Florida are also disregarded entities for tax purposes. BioFirma was a limited liability company taxed as a partnership. Effective October 1, 2019, BioFirma became wholly owned by IMAC Holdings and was a disregarded entity for tax purposes until sold. IMAC Management is taxed as a C-corporation and is included in the consolidated return of IMAC Holdings as a subsidiary.
Any future benefit arising from losses have been offset by a valuation allowance. Accordingly, no provision for income taxes is reflected in the consolidated financial statements. The Company records a liability for uncertain tax positions when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Interest and penalties related to income tax matters, if any, would be recognized as a component of income tax expense. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no liabilities for uncertain tax positions. The Company continually evaluates expiring statutes of limitations, audits, proposed settlements, changes in tax law and new authoritative rulings. Currently, the tax years subsequent to 2018 are open and subject to examination by the taxing authorities.
Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
We own our medical clinics directly or have entered into long-term management services agreements to operate and control these medical clinics by contract. Our preference is to own the clinics; however, some state laws restrict the corporate practice of medicine and require a licensed medical practitioner to own the clinic. Accordingly, our managed clinics are owned exclusively by a medical professional within a professional service corporation (formed as a limited liability company or corporation) under common control with us or eligible members of our company in order to comply with state laws regulating the ownership of medical practices. We are compensated under management services agreements through service fees based on the cost of the services provided, plus a specified markup percentage, and a discretionary annual bonus determined in the sole discretion of each professional service corporation.
Revenues
Our revenue mix is diversified between medical treatments and physiological treatments. Our medical treatments are further segmented into traditional medical and regenerative medicine practices. We are an in-network provider for traditional physical medical treatments, such as physical therapy, chiropractic services and medical evaluations, with most private health insurance carriers. Regenerative medical treatments are typically not covered by insurance, but paid by the patient. For more information on our revenue recognition policies, see “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Revenue Recognition.”
Revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
See the table below for more information regarding our revenue breakdown by service type.
Patient service revenues decreased 15% to $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the COVID-19 outbreak impacting our clinics with government closures affecting three of our clinics throughout 2020 and an overall decrease in services in other markets.
Visits to our clinics are an indication of business activity. The following table is a breakdown of visits by type for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Overall visits slightly decreased from 2019 to 2020. A membership program was implemented in January 2020. This wellness membership program has different plan levels that include services for chiropractic care and medical treatments on a monthly subscription basis. Therefore, memberships could have multiple visits in one month, however only one payment is received for these visits. Total visits decreased 2.6%.
As of December 31, 2020, there were 849 active memberships. All active memberships at our Kentucky locations were paused in April 2020 due to an order of the governor of Kentucky to close all elective care facilities in Kentucky. Therefore, similar to visits, there was a significant decrease in memberships in April 2020.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of patient expenses, salaries and benefits, share based compensation, advertising and marketing, general and administrative expenses and depreciation expenses.
Patient expenses consist of medical supplies for services rendered.
Cost of revenues (patient expense) decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven 50% by the overall decrease in visits. The remaining 50% decrease is attributed to a rotation of service mix reducing the need for supply costs, improvements in supply management as the Company centralized medical ordering for all clinics, and the implementation of supply discounts related to volume purchases.
Salaries and benefits consist of payroll, benefits and related party contracts.
Salaries and benefits expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, slightly decreased. An increase would have been expected considering 2020 was the first full year of salaries and benefits for the Chicago market and the addition of the Florida market in January 2020. However, this increase was offset by the reduction in workforce as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak.
Share-based compensation consists of the value of equity incentive grants issued to employees, directors and board members which have vested during the period.
Share-based compensation was relatively consistent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Advertising and marketing consist of marketing, business promotion and brand recognition.
Advertising and marketing expenses decreased $305,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to reduced marketing spending as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and a shift to more cost-effective marketing strategies.
General and administrative expense (“G&A”) consist of all other costs than advertising and marketing, salaries and benefits, patient expenses and depreciation.
G&A decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, travel expenses have decreased in 2020 compared to 2019. For example, travel expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $122,000 compared to $261,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Also, in 2020 centralized purchasing was implemented in order to streamline supply ordering for all markets which has resulted in a reduction in other expenses and accelerated expense synergies. The Company also incurred $60,000 in one-time consulting fees during the year ended December 31, 2019.
FDA Clinical Trial
In August 2020, the United States Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) approved the Company’s investigational new drug application. The Company has begun Phase 1 of the clinical trial, which will be conducted over a 12-month period. The Company incurred $129,000 in expenses related to consultants, supplies, software and travel for the clinical trial during 2020, which is included in the G&A totals above.
Depreciation is related to our property and equipment purchases to use in the course of our business activities. Amortization is related to our business acquisitions.
Depreciation and amortization increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in depreciation and amortization expense resulted from the April 2019 acquisition of the clinics managed by IMAC of Illinois and the January 2020 acquisition of CHSF.
Net Loss Attributable to the Non-controlling Interest. Net loss attributable to the non-controlling interest is the amount of net income (loss) for the period allocated to non-controlling partners of IMAC Holdings, Inc. that is included in the entity’s consolidated financial statements.
Analysis of Cash Flows
The primary source of our operating cash flow is the collection of accounts receivable from patients, private insurance companies, government programs, self-insured employers and other payers.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operations increased to $6.0 million compared to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to our net loss.
Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.6 million and $1.1 million, respectively. This was primarily driven by the license of the FDA Phase 1 stem cell product and acquisition of Bonita Springs practice, which were $0.2 million and $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8.8 million, including proceeds from the sale of common stock, net of related fees, which totaled $5.2 million and issuances of notes payable of $5.4 million, reduced by principal repayments of $1.5 million. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $5.3 million, including proceeds from our initial public offering, net of related fees, which totaled $3.8 million.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This report contains certain non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP net income and adjusted EBITDA, which are used by management in analyzing our financial results and ongoing operational performance.
In order to better assess the Company’s financial results, management believes that net income before interest, income taxes, stock based compensation, and depreciation and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”) is a useful measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company because adjusted EBITDA reflects net income adjusted for certain non-cash and/or non-operating items. We also believe that adjusted EBITDA is useful to many investors to assess the Company’s ongoing results from current operations. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered a measure of financial performance under GAAP. Because adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement determined in accordance with GAAP, such non-GAAP financial measures are susceptible to varying calculations. Accordingly, adjusted EBITDA, as presented, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
This non-GAAP financial measure should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance which are prepared in accordance with US GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies and have limitations as analytical tools.
A reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measures is set forth below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $2.6 million in cash and a deficiency in working capital of $1.2 million. As of December 31, 2019, we had cash of $0.4 million and deficiency in working capital of $3.5 million. The decrease in working capital deficiency was primarily due to the increase in current assets as cash increased by $2.3 million.
We believe our cash at December 31, 2020, including proceeds from the Iliad notes, PPP Note, the registered direct offering and the at-the-market offering described below, will be sufficient to meet our cash, operational and liquidity requirements for at least 12 months after the filing of this Annual Report.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $6.0 million in current liabilities. Approximately $1.6 million of our current liabilities outstanding were to our vendors and for operating lines of credit, which we have historically paid down in the normal course of our business. Patient deposits accounted for approximately $0.3 million of our current liabilities. The current portion of notes payable by us accounted for approximately $2.5 million of our current liabilities. The current portion of our finance lease obligations accounted for approximately $0.02 million of our current liabilities. The current portion of our liability to issue common stock accounted for approximately $0.4 million of our current liabilities. The current portion of our operating lease liability accounted for approximately $1.1 million of our current liabilities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $15 million. We anticipate that we will need to raise additional capital to fund future operations. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such arrangements when needed or favorable terms, or at all, which would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our development or acquisition activity. Failure to receive additional funding could also cause us to cease operations, in part or in full. Furthermore, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current of future operating plans, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations. Our independent registered public accounting firm has indicated that our financial condition raises substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Equity Line
On July 15, 2019, we signed a $10 million purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park. We also entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Agreement”) with Lincoln Park in which we agreed to file a registration statement related to the transaction with the SEC covering the shares of our common stock that may be issued to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement.
Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we have the right, in our sole discretion, over a 36-month period to sell shares of common stock to Lincoln Park, subject to certain limitations contained in the Purchase Agreement, in amounts up to 50,000 shares per regular sale, which may be increased to up to 100,000 shares depending on certain conditions as set forth in the Purchase Agreement (and subject to adjustment for any reorganization, recapitalization, non-cash dividend, stock split, reverse stock split or other similar transaction as provided in the Purchase Agreement), up to the aggregate commitment of $10 million (“Regular Purchases”). In addition to Regular Purchases and subject to the terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement, we in our sole discretion may direct Lincoln Park on each purchase date to make “accelerated purchases” and “additional accelerated purchases” on the following business day as provided in the Purchase Agreement. However, in no event may we sell any number of shares that would result in Lincoln Park beneficially owning more than 4.99% of our outstanding common stock.
There are no upper limits on the per share price Lincoln Park may pay to purchase our common stock; however, we may not sell more than $1,000,000 in shares of common stock to Lincoln Park per Regular Purchase. The Purchase Agreement also has a minimum price per share of $1.00 for the sale of any shares to Lincoln Park. The purchase price of the shares related to the $10 million of future funding will be based on the prevailing market prices of our shares without any fixed discount. Furthermore, we control the timing and amount of any future sales, if any, of shares of common stock to Lincoln Park.
The Purchase Agreement limits our sales of shares of common stock to Lincoln Park to 1,669,359 shares of common stock, representing 19.99% of the shares of common stock outstanding on the date of the Purchase Agreement unless (a) stockholder approval is obtained to issue more than such amount or (b) the average price of all applicable sales of our common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement equals or exceeds the lower of (i) the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market immediately preceding July 15, 2019 or (ii) the average of the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market for the five Business Days immediately preceding July 15, 2019.
The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, covenants, closing conditions and indemnification and termination provisions by, among and for the benefit of the parties. Additionally, Lincoln Park has agreed not to cause or engage in any manner whatsoever, any direct or indirect short selling or hedging of our common stock. The Purchase Agreement does not limit our ability to raise capital from other sources at our sole discretion, provided that we have agreed not to enter into any “variable rate” transactions with any third party for the 36-month period following the execution of the Purchase Agreement.
In consideration for entering into the $10 million agreement, we issued to Lincoln Park 60,006 shares of our common stock as a commitment fee and will issue up to an additional 60,006 shares pro rata, when and if Lincoln Park purchases, at the Company’s sole discretion, the $10 million aggregate commitment. The Purchase Agreement may be terminated by us at any time at our discretion without any cost to us. The proceeds received by us under the Purchase Agreement may be used for any corporate purpose at our sole discretion.
As of December 31, 2020, pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we sold an aggregate of 1,602,294 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park for aggregate proceeds of $2,424,053 (excluding the 60,006 shares previously issued to Lincoln Park as a commitment fee), for which all transacted in the first calendar quarter of the year.
Iliad Note
On March 25, 2020, the Company entered into a note purchase agreement with Iliad Research & Trading, L.P., (“Iliad”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell to Iliad a secured promissory note in an aggregate initial principal amount of $1,115,000, which is payable on or before the date that is 18 months from the issuance date. The Initial Principal Amount includes an original issue discount of $100,000 and $15,000 that the Company agreed to pay to Iliad to cover legal fees, accounting costs, due diligence and other transaction costs. In exchange for the Note, Iliad paid an aggregate purchase price of $1,000,000. Interest on the Note accrues at a rate of 10% per annum and is payable on the Maturity Date or otherwise in accordance with the Note. The Note may be prepaid by the Company (with the payment of a premium), may be required by Iliad to be redeemed by the Company for up to $200,000 per month after the six-month anniversary of the issuance of the Note (subject to certain deferral rights), and is subject to customary events of default (with a default interest rate of up to 22%). The Note transaction documents also gave Iliad a right of first refusal to future debt issuances and a right to the first $250,000 of every $1 million of proceeds from future sales of equity by the Company. The Note is secured by the assets of the Company, other than the Company’s owned real property, intellectual property and accounts receivable, pursuant to a security agreement. The Company used the proceeds of the Note for certain growth initiatives including an IND filing with the FDA. The Company repaid the note in November 2020.
Registered Direct Offering
On June 18, 2020, the Company entered into the Securities Purchase Agreement with institutional accredited investors pursuant to which the Company offered for sale to the Purchasers an aggregate of 1,764,000 shares of its common stock in a registered direct offering. The Shares were offered by the Company pursuant to its shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237455) originally filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020 and declared effective on April 3, 2020. The purchase price for one Share in the Registered Direct Offering was $1.50, and closing of the Registered Direct Offering occurred on June 22, 2020. The Company received $2.644 million in gross proceeds from the Registered Direct Offering. The Company used approximately $0.5 million of the gross proceeds for the repayment of certain indebtedness, and the remaining proceeds to the Company will be used to finance the costs of developing and acquiring additional outpatient medical clinics as part of the Company’s growth and expansion strategy and for working capital.
At-the-Market Offering
On October 5, 2020, the Company launched an at-the-market offering (the “Offering”) of up to $5,000,000 worth of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, pursuant to an At-The-Market Issuance Sales Agreement, dated October 5, 2020, by and between the Company and Ascendiant Capital Markets, LLC. As of December 31, 2020, pursuant to the Agreement, the Company issued 907,082 shares of common stock of the Company for gross proceeds to the Company of $1,546,665.52, representing an average sale price of $1.7051 per share.
Second Iliad Note
On October 29, 2020, the Company entered into the Note Purchase Agreement with Iliad pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell to Iliad a secured promissory note in an initial principal amount of $2,690,000, which is payable on or before April 29, 2022. The October Principal Amount includes an original discount of $175,000 and $15,000 that the Company agreed to pay to Iliad to cover legal fees, accounting costs, due diligence and other transaction costs. In exchange for the October Note, Iliad paid a purchase price of $2,500,000. The October Purchase Agreement also provides for indemnification of Iliad and its affiliates in the event that they incur loss or damage related to, amount other things, breach by the Company of any of its representations, warranties or covenants under the October Purchase Agreement. In connection with the October Purchase Agreement and the October Note, the Company entered into a Security Agreement with Iliad, pursuant to which the obligations of the Company is secured by all of the assets of the Company, excluding the Company’s accounts receivable and intellectual property. Upon an event of default under the October Note, the October Security Agreement entitles the Holder to take possession of such collateral; provided that Iliad’s security interest and remedies with respect to the collateral are junior in priority to the security interest previously granted by the Company to Iliad in connection with a separate financing entered into by them on March 25, 2020, for which Iliad holds a senior, first-priority security interest in the same collateral.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations by period as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material impact on our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We cannot assure you that future inflation will not have an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition.