Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary statement identifying important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from those projected in forward-looking statements.
Readers of this report are advised that this document contains both statements of historical facts and forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated by the forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to (i) projections of sales, income or loss, earnings per share, capital expenditures, dividends, capital structure, and other financial items, (ii) statements of our plans and objectives with respect to business transactions and enhancement of stockholder value, (iii) statements of future economic performance, and (iv) statements of assumptions underlying other statements and statements about our business prospects.
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Business
Headquartered in Pittsford, New York, Infinite Group, Inc. (IGI) is a developer of cybersecurity software and a provider of cybersecurity consulting services to commercial businesses and government organizations. As part of these offerings we:
●
focus on key cybersecurity services (virtual CISO, compliance review and assessment, incident response, penetration testing and vulnerability assessments) to solve and simplify security for small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs), government agencies, and certain large commercial enterprises. We act as the security overlay to both internal IT and third-party IT (MSPs, VARs, MSSPs) organizations to provide guidance and structure for companies to meet compliance and have an overarching cybersecurity plan. We work with both our channel partners and direct customers to provide these services;
●
developed and brought to market our patent pending, automated vulnerability management solution through our OEM business, Nodeware®, which we sell through distribution and channel partners. We are also master distributor for other security solutions such as Webroot, a cloud-based endpoint security platform solution, where we market to and provide support for over 300 reseller partners across North America;
●
have developed and brought to market our SaaS based automated asset identification and vulnerability management and monitoring solution, Nodeware®, which we sell through distribution and channel partners. We are also master distributor for other security solutions like Webroot, a cloud-based endpoint security platform solution, where we market to and provide support for over 300 reseller partners across North America; and
●
provide level 2 technical and security support across the application layer and physical and virtual infrastructure including software-based managed services supporting enterprise and federal government customers through our partnership with Perspecta.
Business Strategy
Our strategy is to create differentiation in cybersecurity by combining personalized and recurring professional services and build growth businesses by designing, developing, and marketing cybersecurity-based software-as-a-service (SaaS). Products and solutions are spun off from our technology platform to fill technology gaps in cybersecurity. We brought product to market that has two patents pending and intend to develop other intellectual property that serve as the core to other proprietary products and solutions to market through a channel of domestic and international partners and distributors. Our products, solutions and services are designed to simplify the security needs in customer and partner environments, with a focus on the mid-tier Enterprise market and below. We enable our partners by providing recurring revenue-based business models for both recurring services and through our automated and continuous security solutions. Products may be sold as standalone solutions or integrated into existing environments to further automate the management of cybersecurity and related IT functions. Our ability to succeed depends on how successful we are in differentiating ourselves in the market at a time when competition and consolidation in these markets is on the rise.
Our cybersecurity business is comprised of three components: managed security services, product development and deployment, and integration of third-party security solutions into our security offerings to our channel and customers. We provide cybersecurity services and technical consulting resources to support both our channel partners and end customers. For example, we sell our proprietary product, Nodeware, through both our direct partners and through other 3rd party partner distribution and agents so they can either sell it as a standalone solution or part of other technical services they provide to their customers. This enables the channel partner to develop a base of recurring revenue. We also provide our cybersecurity services through our channel partners as a cybersecurity overlay to the technical services they provide.
We are working to expand our managed services business with our prime partner, Perspecta, and the current federal enterprise customer and its customers.
Business Overview
We had sales of approximately $7.2 million in 2020 and approximately $7.1 million in 2019. We generated operating income of approximately $1,000 in 2020 as compared to approximately $329,000 in 2019. We had net income of approximately $676,000 in 2020 and $48,000 in 2019. We recorded other income of approximately $967,000 in 2020 from primarily the forgiveness of our Payroll Protection Plan loan. We derived approximately 65% of our sales in 2020 and 70% in 2019 from contracts as either a prime contractor or a subcontractor.
Results of Operations - Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table compares our statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Sales
For 2020 and 2019, our:
●
managed support service and virtualization project sales comprised approximately 65% and 70% of our total sales, respectively;
●
cybersecurity projects, Nodeware and commercial sales to small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs), were approximately 32% and 22% of our total sales, respectively; and
●
other IT consulting services comprise the balance of our sales with 3% and 8%, respectively.
Our cybersecurity services business has grown by approximately $716,000 in revenues in 2020 versus 2019. We began to close sales of Nodeware with our channel partners during 2017 and have seen continued increases in sales in 2019 and 2020. Our commercial SME business continues to establish new relationships with channel partners who purchase cybersecurity solutions from us. We expect continuing future sales from Nodeware sales, security assessments, and related projects by our cybersecurity personnel.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Cost of sales principally represents the cost of employee services related to our IT Services Group. In smaller amounts, we also incurred cost of sales for third party software licenses for our commercial SME partners.
Gross profit increased by 13.9% while sales increased by 1.8% for 2020. This was primarily due to higher gross profit margin in the cybersecurity services group versus the other areas of business.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include corporate overhead such as compensation and benefits for executive, administrative and finance personnel, rent, insurance, professional fees, travel, and office expenses. General and administrative expenses increased in 2020 consisting of offsetting fluctuations in various expense items and increases in salaries of approximately $222,000 and corporate marketing expenses of $90,000.
Selling Expenses
The increase in selling expenses in 2020 is principally due to the increase of employee salaries, commissions and benefits totaling approximately $186,000 due primarily to the growth to the cyber security and Nodeware sales team. The remaining increase is attributable to several smaller items including amortization of development labor and consulting fees.
Operating Income
The decrease in our operating income for 2020 is attributable to an increase in our general and administrative expenses of $362,364 and our selling expenses of $335,914 offset by the increase in gross profit of $370,432.
Other Income
In 2020, we received a Paycheck Protection Plan (“PPP”) loan which was subsequently forgiven. We recorded $963,516 of other income at that time of forgiveness.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense includes interest on indebtedness, amortization of loan fees, cost of stock options as part of debt agreements and fees for financing accounts receivable invoices. The increase in interest expense is principally attributable to stock option costs offset by lower rates and less use of financing accounts receivable invoices due to the availability of PPP.
Net Income
The increase in net income is attributable to the items discussed above for 2020 as compared to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $32,313 available for working capital needs and planned capital asset expenditures. During 2020, we financed our business activities through cash flows provided by financing activities and sales with recourse of our accounts receivable. Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by collections of accounts receivable, PPP loan and our factoring line of credit. At December 31, 2020, we had approximately $362,000 available to borrow under this line. At December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of approximately $2,051,627 and a current ratio of 0.35. Our objective is to improve our working capital position through profitable operations, and we may continue to borrow to provide cash for working capital.
At December 31, 2020, we have current notes payable of approximately $162,500 to third parties, which includes convertible notes payable of approximately $150,000. Also included is $12,500 in principal amount of a note payable due on June 30, 2016 but not paid by then. This note was issued in payment of software we purchased in February 2016 and secured by a security interest in the software. To date, the holder has not taken any action to collect the amount past due on this note or to enforce the security interest in the software.
At December 31, 2020, we also have an accrued liability for the voluntary match portion of a former simple IRA plan, including interest, of approximately $265,000. We do not anticipate distributing this liability in the next year or two. Interest will continue to accrue.
We have current maturities of long-term obligations of approximately $246,000 to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (the PBGC) with all principal due on September 15, 2018, which has not been extended. We are in discussions with the PBGC and expect to reach an agreement to settle this debt, for which we have available financing under our existing credit facilities. We have maturities of our long-term notes to third parties of $265,000 due on January 1, 2018, which has not been renewed or amended, and $500,000 due on December31, 2021. The accrued interest on these notes and current maturities is approximately $405,000 at December 31, 2020. These notes have not been paid. We plan to renegotiate the terms of the notes payable, offset with amounts owed to us, seek funds to repay the notes or use a combination of the alternatives. At December 31, 2020, we have future cash receipts under contract related to the projects identified in deferred assets in the amount of approximately $565,000. Exclusive of these items and adjusting for future cash receipts under contract, the working capital would be approximately $120,000.
The following table summarizes our cash flow information for the years presented, described below, and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements appearing at Item 15, Page, et seq., of this report.
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
Our operating cash flow is primarily affected by the overall profitability of our contracts, our ability to invoice and collect from our clients in a timely manner, and our ability to manage our vendor payments. We bill our clients weekly or monthly after services are performed, depending on the contract terms. Our net income of $675,996 for 2020 was increased by non-cash expenses for depreciation, amortization, bad debt expense and stock-based compensation of $230,418 and decreased for non-cash adjustments for forgiveness of debt of $963,516. In addition, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $203,082 was offset by increases in accounts receivable and other assets of $559,735 resulted in net cash used in operating activities of $413,755.
We are marketing Webroot and Nodeware to our IT channel partners who resell to their customers. We are making investments in our cyber security team for penetration testing, vCISO and other services. Due to the lengthy lead times typically needed to generate these new sales, we do not expect to realize a return from our sales and marketing personnel for one or more quarters. As a result, we may continue to experience small operating income or operating losses from these investments in personnel until sufficient sales are generated. We expect to fund the cost for the new sales personnel from our operating cash flows and incremental borrowings, as needed.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
In 2020, we incurred capital expenditures for computer hardware as well as software development labor for the enhancements to Nodeware. We expect to continue to invest in computer hardware and software to update our technology to support the growth of our business.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
During 2020, we received $957,372 from the U. S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) as part of the Paycheck Protection Plan enacted by Congress under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). We received SBA forgiveness of this amount plus accrued interest of $6,143 later in the year. We borrowed $50,000 from a related party under the terms of a note payable. The note allows for up to $500,000 credit and is due in August 2026. During 2019, we borrowed $200,000 from the $500,000 credit note. During 2020, we made principal payments of $96,635 to related party note holders and $167,527 to a third party.
We plan to evaluate alternatives which may include renegotiating the terms of the notes, seeking conversion of the notes to shares of common stock and seeking funds to repay the notes. We continue to evaluate repayment of our notes payable based on our cash flow.
Credit Resources
We maintain an accounts receivable financing line of credit from an independent financial institution that allows us to sell selected accounts receivable invoices to the financial institution with full recourse against us in the amount of $2,000,000, including a sublimit for one major client of $1,500,000. This provides us with the cash needed to finance certain costs and expenses. At December 31, 2020, we had financing availability, based on eligible accounts receivable, of approximately $362,000 under this line. We pay fees based on the length of time that the invoice remains unpaid. We also have approximately $265,000 of available credit under various lines of credit as of December 31, 2020.
During May 2019, we originated a line of credit note payable for a $500,000 with a related party and borrowed $250,000 and have $250,000 available to borrow for working capital. This agreement matures in August 2026. We may borrow from the outstanding line of credit to pay a portion the PBGC settlement amount.
During 2017, we originated two lines of credit with related parties totaling $175,000. At December 31, 2020, we had $15,000 available under these financing agreements which mature in July 2022 and January 2023, respectively.
We believe the capital resources available under our factoring line of credit, cash from additional related party loans and cash generated by improving the results of our operations as well as the extension of approximately $574,000 of short term debt to long term will be sufficient to fund our ongoing operations and to support the internal growth we expect to achieve for at least the next 12 months.
We anticipate financing growth from acquisitions of other businesses, if any, and our longer-term internal growth through one or more of the following sources: cash from collections of accounts receivable; additional borrowing from related and third parties; issuance of equity; use of our existing accounts receivable credit facility; or a refinancing of our accounts receivable credit facility.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
See Note 3 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the Company’s accounting policies and estimates including Capitalization of Software for Resale and management’s assessment of going concern.