Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on developing the next generation of ADCs to improve outcomes for cancer patients. By generating targeted therapies with enhanced anti-tumor activity and favorable tolerability profiles, we aim to disrupt the progression of cancer and offer patients more good days. We call this our commitment to ‘‘target a better now.’’
An ADC with our proprietary technology comprises an antibody that binds to a target found on tumor cells and is conjugated to one of our potent anti-cancer agents as a ‘‘payload’’ to kill the tumor cell once the ADC has bound to its target. ADCs are an expanding approach to the treatment of cancer, with nine approved products and the number of agents in development growing significantly in recent years.
We have established a leadership position in ADCs with a portfolio of differentiated product candidates to address both solid tumors and hematological malignancies.
Managing the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Since the first quarter of 2020, we have continued to move our clinical studies forward while adapting to meet the evolving challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. We implemented business continuity plans in March 2020, which allowed our organization to effectively transition to working from home. Since then, we have worked closely with our external partners to monitor progress across our studies and to respond to new developments as they arise. From a manufacturing and supply chain perspective, we entered the pandemic with ample drug product and believe we have sufficient inventory on hand for all of our ongoing mirvetuximab soravtansine (mirvetuximab) monotherapy and combination trials, ongoing IMGN632 studies, and the Phase 1 study for IMGC936. Furthermore, our supply partners have taken prospective measures that we believe will ensure our currently activated study sites have sufficient safety stock of drug product to weather disruptions in transportation or supply. In addition, from a regulatory perspective, since the beginning of the pandemic, we have received timely reviews of our submissions to the FDA and other health authorities covering our clinical trial applications.
We have maintained a high level of productivity since March 2020, when our workforce started working remotely, and are actively monitoring trial progress on a global scale. As disclosed in mid-2020, the impact of COVID-19 slowed site activation and patient enrollment for SORAYA, our single-arm clinical trial to support accelerated approval of mirvetuximab in folate receptor alpha (FRα)-high, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, by six to eight weeks from our original estimates. Factoring in this delay and as previously reported, we expect to report top-line data from SORAYA in the third quarter of 2021 and anticipate submitting the biologics license application (BLA) for mirvetuximab in this setting by the end of 2021.
Our Business
Our lead program is mirvetuximab, a first-in-class investigational ADC targeting FRα, a cell-surface protein overexpressed in a number of epithelial tumors, including ovarian, endometrial, and non-small-cell lung cancers. In 2019, FORWARD I, our Phase 3 clinical trial of mirvetuximab in patients with FRα-positive, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, did not meet its primary endpoint. In post hoc exploratory analyses in the FRα-high population scored by the PS2+ method, however, mirvetuximab was associated with longer progression free survival, a higher overall response rate, and longer overall survival.
Following consultation with the FDA, we moved forward with two new trials of mirvetuximab in FRα-high, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer: SORAYA, a single-arm clinical trial that, if successful, could lead to accelerated approval in this setting; and MIRASOL, a randomized Phase 3 clinical trial that, if successful, could lead to full approval in this setting. We are actively enrolling both studies and expect to report top-line data from SORAYA in the third quarter of 2021 and top-line data from MIRASOL in the first half of 2022. If SORAYA is successful, we expect to submit an application for accelerated approval of mirvetuximab in the applicable patient population to the FDA by the end of 2021 and, thereafter, seek full approval on the basis of the confirmatory Phase 3 MIRASOL trial.
Beyond our anticipated monotherapy indications, we are generating data for mirvetuximab in combination with other agents to expand into earlier lines of ovarian cancer therapy. In addition, we plan to support the initiation in 2021 of two investigator-sponsored trials of mirvetuximab plus carboplatin, including a randomized Phase 2 study in recurrent
platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer and a neo-adjuvant study. With the benefit of these data, we believe there is potential for compendia listings for combination use of mirvetuximab and are also working to define the best path forward to label expansion.
IMGN632 is an ADC comprised of a high-affinity antibody designed to target CD123 with site-specific conjugation to our most potent IGN payload. We are advancing IMGN632 in clinical trials for patients with BPDCN and AML. In October 2020, the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy designation for IMGN632 for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory BPDCN. We are aligned with the FDA on a path to full approval in BPDCN, with an amendment to our ongoing 801 Phase 1/2 study to add a new cohort of up to 20 frontline patients. We expect to complete enrollment and generate top-line data in 12 to 18 months, with potential BLA submission in 2022.
Our 802 study, which is a Phase 1b/2 study designed to determine the safety, tolerability, and preliminary antileukemia activity of IMGN632 when administered in combination with azacitidine and/or venetoclax to patients with relapsed and frontline CD123-positive AML, is in the dose-escalation phase, enrolling relapsed and refractory patients to determine the recommended Phase 2 dose of IMGN632 for combination regimens. We anticipate sharing data from this study in 2021.
We continue to advance additional pipeline programs. IMGC936 is an ADC in co-development with MacroGenics designed to target ADAM9, an enzyme overexpressed in a range of solid tumors and implicated in tumor progression and metastasis. IMGC936 incorporates a number of innovations, including antibody engineering to extend the half-life, site-specific conjugation with a fixed drug-antibody ratio to enable higher dosing, and a next-generation linker and payload for improved stability and bystander activity. The IND for IMGC936 was accepted by the FDA in the second quarter of 2020 and we began enrollment in the Phase 1 study in the fourth quarter of 2020.
IMGN151 is our next generation anti-FRα candidate in preclinical development. This ADC integrates innovation in each of its components, which may enable IMGN151 to address patient populations with lower levels of FRα expression, including tumor types outside of ovarian cancer. We presented encouraging data for IMGN151 at the American Academy of Cancer Research Virtual Annual Meeting II in June 2020. We expect to file the IND for IMGN151 by the end of 2021.
We have selectively licensed restricted access to our ADC platform technology to other companies to expand the use of our technology and to provide us with cash to fund our own product programs. These agreements typically provide the licensee with rights to use our ADC platform technology with its antibodies or related targeting vehicles to a defined target to develop products. The licensee is generally responsible for the development, clinical testing, manufacturing, registration, and commercialization of any resulting product candidate. As part of these agreements, we are generally entitled to receive upfront fees, potential milestone payments, and royalties on the sales of any resulting products.
In October 2020, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with Huadong, a subsidiary of Huadong Medicine Co., Ltd., under which Huadong will exclusively develop and commercialize mirvetuximab in the People’s Republic of China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan, which we refer to as Greater China. Under the terms of the collaboration and license agreement, we received a non-refundable upfront payment of $40.0 million and are eligible to receive additional payments of up to $265.0 million as certain development, regulatory, and net sales milestones are achieved. We are also eligible to receive tiered low double digit to high teen royalties as a percentage of mirvetuximab commercial sales by Huadong in Greater China. Huadong is responsible for the development and commercialization of mirvetuximab in Greater China except in limited circumstances. We retain all rights to mirvetuximab in the rest of the world.
We expect that substantially all of our revenue for at least the next year will result from payments under our collaborative arrangements. For more information concerning these relationships, including their ongoing financial and accounting impact on our business, please read Note C, “Significant Collaborative Agreements,” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
To date, we have not generated revenues from commercial sales of internal products, and we expect to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had $293.9 million in cash and cash equivalents compared to $176.2 million as of December 31, 2019. In January 2021, pursuant to an Open Market Sale AgreementSM, with Jefferies, LLC as sales agent, we sold 4.5 million shares of our common stock, generating net proceeds of $33.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to our collaborative agreements, clinical trial accruals, and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
During 2019, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 842, Leases, using the transition method provided by Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements. Under this method, we initially applied the new leasing rules on January 1, 2019, rather than at the earliest comparative period presented in the financial statements. Periods prior to adoption are presented in accordance with previous guidance issued under ASC 840, Leases. The adoption of ASC 842 represented a change in accounting principle that resulted in the recognition of lease assets and liabilities on the balance sheet, including those previously classified as operating leases under ASC 840, and disclosure of key information about leasing arrangements. Refer to Note B to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on this change.
Refer to Note B to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding our critical accounting policies, including revenue recognition, clinical trial accruals, and stock-based compensation.
Results of Operations
For a discussion related to the results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 11, 2020.
Revenues
For 2020, our total revenues increased to $132.3 million compared to $82.3 million for 2019, driven by increases in license and milestone fees and non-cash royalty revenue.
License and milestone fees
The amount of license and milestone fees we earn is directly related to the number of our collaborators, the collaborators’ advancement of the product candidates, and the overall success in clinical trials of the product candidates. As such, the amount of license and milestone fees may vary widely from quarter to quarter and year to year. Total revenue recognized from license and milestone fees for the years ended 2020 and 2019 was $63.7 million and $34.8 million, respectively. The increase in 2020 was driven by the recognition of $60.5 million of previously deferred license revenue upon Jazz’s opt-out of its right to the last remaining license under its collaboration and option agreement in December 2020, partially offset by license fee revenue recognized related to agreements with CytomX and Jazz and certain partner milestone fees recorded in the prior year.
Deferred revenue of $110.1 million as of December 31, 2020 includes $40.0 million related to the collaboration with Huadong executed in October 2020 and $65.2 million related to the sale of our residual rights to receive royalty payments on commercial sales of Kadcyla in 2019, with the remainder of the balance primarily representing consideration received from our other collaborators pursuant to our license agreements which we have yet to earn pursuant to our revenue recognition policy.
Non-cash royalty revenue related to the sale of future royalties
In February 2013, the FDA granted marketing approval to Kadcyla, an ADC resulting from one of our development and commercialization licenses with Roche, through its Genentech unit. We receive royalty reports and payments related to sales of Kadcyla from Roche one quarter in arrears. In accordance with our revenue recognition policy, $68.5 million and $47.4 million of non-cash royalties on net sales of Kadcyla were recorded and included in royalty revenue for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in 2020 is a result of an increase in royalty payments driven by increases in net sales of Kadcyla due to market expansion of Kadcyla and approval of Kadcyla for a second indication in 2019. Kadcyla sales occurring after January 1, 2015 are covered by royalty purchase agreements. Pursuant to the terms of these agreements, we expect to recognize less non-cash royalty revenue during 2021 and subsequent years. See further details regarding the royalty obligation in Note F, “Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties,” of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses relate to (i) research to evaluate new targets and to develop and evaluate new antibodies, linkers, and cytotoxic agents, (ii) preclinical testing of our own and, in certain instances, our collaborators’ product candidates, and the cost of our own clinical trials, (iii) development related to clinical and commercial manufacturing processes, and (iv) external manufacturing operations, and prior to 2019, internal manufacturing operations, which also included raw materials.
We restructured our business in 2019, the details of which are included under Restructuring Charges below. Research and development expense was $114.6 million and $114.5 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, with lower personnel, administrative, laboratory, third-party research, and allocated facility expenses resulting from the restructuring at the end of the second quarter of 2019 offset by increases in clinical trial and antibody costs in the current year and less reimbursement pursuant to our cost-sharing agreement with Jazz due to the discontinuation of the IMGN779 program in connection with the restructuring.
Clinical trial and regulatory approval processes for our product candidates that have advanced or that we intend to advance to clinical testing are lengthy, expensive, and uncertain in both timing and outcome. As a result, the pace and timing of the clinical development of our product candidates is highly uncertain and may never result in approved products. Completion dates and development costs will vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. A variety of factors, many of which are outside our control, could cause or contribute to the prevention or delay of the successful completion of our clinical trials, or delay or prevent our obtaining necessary regulatory approvals. The costs to take a product through clinical trials are dependent upon, among other factors, the clinical indications, the timing, size, and design of each clinical trial, the number of patients enrolled in each trial, and the speed at which patients are enrolled and treated. Product candidates may be found to be ineffective or to cause unacceptable side effects during clinical trials, may take longer to progress through clinical trials than anticipated, may fail to receive necessary regulatory approvals, or may prove impractical to manufacture in commercial quantities at reasonable cost or with acceptable quality.
The lengthy process of securing FDA approvals for new drugs requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure by us to obtain, or any delay in obtaining, regulatory approvals, would materially adversely affect our product development efforts and our business overall. Accordingly, we cannot currently estimate, with any degree of certainty, the amount of time or money that we will be required to expend in the future on our product candidates prior to their regulatory approval, if such approval is ever granted. As a result of these uncertainties surrounding the timing and outcome of our clinical trials, we are currently unable to estimate when, if ever, our product candidates that have advanced into clinical testing will generate revenues and cash flows.
We do not track our research and development costs by project. Since we use our research and development resources across multiple research and development projects, we manage our research and development expenses within each of the categories listed in the following table and described in more detail below (in thousands):
Research
Research includes expenses associated with activities to evaluate new targets and to develop and evaluate new antibodies, linkers, and cytotoxic agents for our products and in support of our collaborators. Such expenses primarily include personnel, contract services, facility expenses, and laboratory supplies. There were no research expenses for 2020 as a result of the restructuring of the business at the end of the second quarter of 2019.
Preclinical and clinical testing
Preclinical and clinical testing includes expenses related to preclinical testing of our own, and, in certain instances, our collaborators’ product candidates, regulatory activities, and the cost of clinical trials. Such expenses include personnel, patient enrollment at our clinical testing sites, consultant fees, contract services, and facility expenses. Preclinical and clinical testing expenses increased to $75.4 million for 2020 compared to $71.2 million for 2019. This
increase is primarily the result of increased clinical trial costs driven by costs incurred related to advancing the MIRASOL, SORAYA, IMGN632, and IMGC936 studies and less reimbursement recorded in the current year pursuant to our cost-sharing agreement with Jazz. Partially offsetting these increases were lower personnel, administrative, laboratory, and allocated facility expenses resulting from the restructuring of the business, lower clinical trial costs related to the FORWARD I, FORWARD II, and IMGN779 studies, and a decrease in contract services driven by certain regulatory and pre-commercial activities related to mirvetuximab and preclinical development of IMGC936 in the prior year.
Process and product development
Process and product development expenses include costs for development of clinical and commercial manufacturing processes for our own and collaborator compounds. Such expenses include the costs of personnel, contract services, laboratory supplies, and facility expenses. Process and product development expenses decreased to $5.4 million for 2020 compared to $7.8 million for 2019. This decrease is principally due to a decrease in personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, and allocated facility expenses as a result of the restructuring of the business, partially offset by an increase in contract services driven by greater activity related to our IMGN151 and IMGC936 programs and less reimbursement recorded in the current period pursuant to our cost-sharing agreement with Jazz.
Manufacturing operations
Manufacturing operations expense includes costs to have preclinical and clinical materials manufactured for our product candidates and quality control and quality assurance activities. Such expenses include personnel, raw materials for our preclinical studies and clinical trials, non-pivotal and pivotal development costs with contract manufacturing organizations, and facility expenses. Manufacturing operations expense increased $10.5 million to $33.7 million for 2020. The increase in 2020 is principally due to greater external manufacturing costs related to the potential commercial launch of mirvetuximab and less reimbursement recorded in the current period pursuant to our cost-sharing agreement with Jazz, partially offset by lower personnel, administrative, and facility-related expenses resulting from the shut-down of our manufacturing facility in February 2019 and the restructuring of the business at the end of the second quarter of 2019.
Antibody development and supply expense in support of commercial validation and in anticipation of potential future clinical trials, as well as our ongoing trials, was $20.2 million and $8.3 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Development and supply expenses related to the potential commercial launch of mirvetuximab drove the increased spend in 2020. The process of antibody production is lengthy due in part to the lead time to establish a satisfactory production process at a vendor. Accordingly, costs incurred related to antibody production and development have fluctuated from period to period and we expect these cost fluctuations to continue in the future.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $0.1 million to $38.6 million for 2020 due primarily to a higher allocation of facility-related expenses for excess laboratory and office space and an increase in professional services, substantially offset by a decrease in personnel and administrative expenses resulting from the prior year restructuring.
Restructuring Charges
On June 26, 2019, the Board of Directors approved a plan to restructure the business to focus resources on continued development of mirvetuximab and a select portfolio of three earlier-stage product candidates, resulting in a significant reduction of our workforce, with a majority of these employees separating from the business by mid-July 2019 and most of the remaining affected employees transitioning over varying periods of time of up to 12 months. Communication of the plan to the affected employees was substantially completed on June 27, 2019.
As a result of the workforce reduction, we recorded a charge of $16.0 million for severance related to a pre-existing plan in June 2019, which was subsequently reduced to $15.3 million due to minor adjustments to the plan. The related cash payments were substantially paid out by June 30, 2020. In addition, a charge of $4.0 million was recorded for incremental retention benefits in the same time period, of which $1.6 million and $2.4 million was recorded during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In addition to the termination benefits and other related charges, we sub-leased the majority of the laboratory and office space at 830 Winter Street in Waltham, Massachusetts and liquidated excess equipment. In performing the required impairment test, we recorded a charge of $2.5 million in June 2019 to write down the equipment to fair value; however, we determined the right-to-use asset related to the lease was recoverable, therefore, no impairment was recorded.
Charge Related to Unoccupied Office Space
We have sought to sub-lease 10,281 square feet of unoccupied office space in Waltham that was leased in 2016. During 2019, we recorded a $0.6 million impairment charge related to this lease, which represented the remaining balance of the right to use asset as the likelihood of finding a sub-lessor had diminished significantly as the lease approached termination.
Investment Income, net
Investment income for 2020 and 2019 was $0.7 million and $4.4 million, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to a significant decrease in interest rates.
Non-Cash Interest Expense on Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalty
In 2015, IRH purchased our right to receive 100% of the royalty payments on commercial sales of Kadcyla arising under our development and commercialization license with Genentech, subject to a residual cap. In January 2019, OMERS purchased IRH’s right to the royalties the Company previously sold as described above. As described in Note F to our Consolidated Financial Statements, this royalty sale transaction has been recorded as a liability that amortizes over the estimated royalty payment period as Kadcyla royalties are remitted directly to the purchaser. During 2020 and 2019, we recorded $23.1 million and $16.9 million, respectively, of non-cash interest expense. The increase in 2020 was a result of increases in royalty payments driven by increases in net sales of Kadcyla and greater projected future royalty payments due to market expansion of Kadcyla and approval of Kadcyla for a second indication in 2019. We impute interest on the transaction and record interest expense at the effective interest rate, which we currently estimate to be 22.2%. There are a number of factors that could materially affect the estimated interest rate, in particular, the amount and timing of royalty payments from future net sales of Kadcyla, and we assess this estimate on a periodic basis. As a result, future interest rates could differ significantly and any such change in interest rate will be adjusted prospectively.
Interest Expense on Convertible Senior Notes
In June 2016, the Company issued Convertible 4.5% Senior Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $100 million. The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 4.5% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on January 1 and July 1 of each year, commencing on January 1, 2017. During the second half of 2017, $97.9 million of this debt was converted to common shares. For 2020 and 2019, we recorded $95,000 of interest expense in each year.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net for 2020 and 2019 was $0.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively. This includes $0.5 million and $(0.2) million in foreign currency exchange gains (losses) related to obligations with non-U.S. dollar-based suppliers and Euro cash balances maintained to fulfill them during the same periods, respectively. In addition, we recorded a gain of $0.8 million in 2019 related to the sale of excess laboratory equipment resulting from the restructuring.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For a discussion related to our cash flows for 2019 compared to 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 11, 2020.
The following tables show certain balance sheet and cash flow information as of and for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows
We require cash to fund our operating expenses, including the advancement of our clinical programs, and to make capital expenditures. Historically, we have funded our cash requirements primarily through equity and convertible debt financings in public markets and payments from our collaborators, including license fees, milestones, research funding, and royalties. We have also monetized our rights to receive royalties on Kadcyla for up-front consideration. As of December 31, 2020, we had $293.9 million in cash and cash equivalents. Net cash used for operating activities was $78.6 million and $88.4 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The principal use of cash in operating activities for these periods was to fund our net loss, adjusted for non-cash items, with 2020 benefiting from a $40.0 million upfront payment from Huadong pursuant to a collaboration and license agreement and 2019 benefiting from $65.2 million of net proceeds from the sale of our residual rights to royalty payments on net sales of Kadcyla.
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities was $0.5 million and $(0.5) million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, and represent cash outflows from capital expenditures, net of proceeds generated from the sale of capital assets. Capital expenditures for all periods presented consisted primarily of leasehold improvements to the office space at our corporate headquarters, computer software applications, and dedicated equipment at third-party manufacturing vendors. During 2020 and 2019, as a result of the restructuring, we sold excess equipment generating proceeds of $1.5 million and $2.3 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $195.7 million and $2.9 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. In January 2020, pursuant to a public offering, we issued and sold 24.5 million shares of common stock, resulting in net proceeds of $97.7 million. Additionally in 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM (September Sale Agreement) with Jefferies, LLC as sales agent, pursuant to which we offered and sold 19,972,557 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $96.5 million after deducting offering commissions and expenses, effectively closing the September Sale Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 and 2019 also include proceeds from the exercise of stock options and sale of shares through our ESPP.
On December 18, 2020, we entered into a new Open Market Sale AgreementSM (Sale Agreement), with Jefferies, LLC as sales agent, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $150.0 million. In connection with entering into the Sale Agreement, we filed a prospectus supplement to the prospectus included in our registration statement on Form S-3 (No. 333-251502), which became effective upon filing on December 18, 2020, with the SEC relating to the offer and sale of the up to $150.0 million of our common stock under the Sale Agreement. Through the date of filing this report, we have sold 4,544,424 shares of our common stock under the Sale Agreement, generating net proceeds of $33.6 million after deducting offering commissions and expenses. None of the sales under the Sale Agreement occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We anticipate that our current capital resources will enable us to meet our operational expenses and capital expenditures for more than twelve months after the date of this report. We may raise additional funds through equity, debt, and other financings or generate revenues from collaborators through a combination of upfront license payments, milestone payments, royalty payments, and research funding. We cannot provide assurance that we will be able to obtain additional debt, equity, or other financing or generate revenues from collaborators on terms acceptable to us or at all. Should we or our partners not meet some or all of the terms and conditions of our various collaboration agreements or if we are not successful in securing future collaboration agreements, we may elect or be required to secure alternative financing arrangements, and/or defer or limit some or all of our research, development, and/or clinical projects.
Contractual Obligations
We lease approximately 120,000 square feet of laboratory and office space in a building located at 830 Winter Street, Waltham, Massachusetts, with an initial term that expires on March 31, 2026, and 10,281 square feet of additional office space at 930 Winter Street, Waltham, Massachusetts through August 31, 2021. We are obligated to pay $28.4 million in minimum rental payments over the remaining terms of these leases. In addition, we are responsible for
variable operating costs and real estate taxes approximating $3.1 million per year through March 2026. In 2020, we executed four agreements to sublease a total of approximately 65,000 square feet of the 830 Winter Street facility through March 2026. Two of the four sublease agreements include an early termination option after certain periods of time for an agreed-upon fee. Assuming these early termination options are not exercised, we will receive $15.9 million in minimum rental payments over the remaining term of the subleases. The sublessees will also be responsible for their proportionate share of variable operating expenses and real estate taxes.
As of December 31, 2020, we have noncancelable obligations under several agreements related to in-process and future manufacturing of antibody and cytotoxic agents required for clinical supply of our product candidates totaling $6.5 million, which will be paid in 2021. Additionally, pursuant to commercial agreements for future production of antibody, our noncancelable commitments total approximately $36.0 million at December 31, 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth under Note B to the consolidated financial statements under the caption “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” is incorporated herein by reference.
Third-Party Trademarks
Kadcyla and Herceptin are registered trademarks of Genentech, Inc. Probody is a trademark of CytomX.