ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations contain certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Refer to Item 1. “Business-Forward- Looking Statements” for a complete description of forward-looking statements. Refer to Item 1. “Business” for information on our businesses and operating segments.
Amounts are presented in thousands, except per share data or as otherwise indicated.
Market Conditions
The U.S. economy partially rebounded during the second half of 2020 after deteriorating rapidly into recession earlier in the year driven by the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in disruption to business and economic activity as well as to the capital markets. COVID-19's effects in the U.S. and globally have been extreme, and the duration of the pandemic and its ultimate repercussions continue to remain unclear as recently introduced vaccines may not be widely available to the general public for some time and the number of individuals that choose to take the vaccine, once available, is uncertain. Unprecedented government economic intervention has likely dampened the pandemic's effects, but at uncertain long-term cost, and additional government support beyond what was enacted in 2020 is currently being considered. U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) contracted at an estimated annual rate of 3.5 percent in 2020, while the total unemployment rate continues to remain high at 6.7 percent at December 2020 as compared with 3.5 percent at December 2019. After cutting short-term interest rates by 150 basis points (to near zero) in March 2020 and announcing various other initiatives to enhance liquidity and support the flow of credit to households and businesses, the Federal Reserve Board held short-term interest rates steady for the remainder of the year and has indicated it expects short-term rates to remain low for some time until it is confident that the economy is far along in a recovery.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic conditions both in the United States and abroad during 2020 has created global uncertainty about the future economic environment including the length and depth of a global recession. Concerns over interest rate levels, energy prices, domestic and global policy issues, including civil unrest in the U.S., trade policy in the U.S. and geopolitical events as well as the implications of those events on the markets in general further add to this global uncertainty. Interest rate levels and energy prices, in combination with global economic conditions, fiscal and monetary policy and the level of regulatory and government scrutiny of financial institutions will continue to impact our results in 2021 and beyond.
Selected Financial Results for 2020 and 2019
Status of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss was $88.2 million, or $4.15 per diluted common share, as compared to net loss of $8.0 million, or $0.38 per diluted common share in 2019. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, net loss was $2.2 million, or $0.10 per diluted common share, as compared to net loss of $677 thousand, or $0.03 per diluted common share in the fourth quarter of 2019, and net earnings of $1.6 million, or $0.08 per diluted common share, in the third quarter of 2020.
Our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were significantly impacted by the effects of the pandemic, which ultimately led to the previously disclosed temporary suspension of our lending activities during the second quarter of 2020. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased to $88.2 million primarily due to a significant loss on sale of loans, net in the first quarter of 2020, as well as mark-to-market decreases in fair value of our MSRs, as a result of the significant decline in interest rates as a result of the pandemic. The $84.8 million decrease in gain on sale of loans, net was primarily due to the remarking of our NonQM position in the first quarter of 2020, as a result of substantial widening of spreads on credit assets and a reduction in available liquidity to finance credit assets, due to potential pandemic related payment delinquencies and forbearances, causing a severe decline in the values assigned by investors and counterparties for our NonQM position. In addition to the remarking of our NonQM position, which decreased margins to 51 basis points (bps) as compared to 217 bps in 2019, the decrease in gain on sale of loans, net in 2020 was also partially due to origination volumes decreasing to $2.7 billion as compared to $4.5 billion in originations in 2019, as a result of our temporary suspension of lending activities during the second quarter of 2020. Other (expense) income increased as compared to 2019 due to a decrease in loss on change in fair value of net trust assets, including REO trust losses and a decrease in fair value on our long-term debt, partially offset by a decrease in net interest spread as a result of the current interest rate environment.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
For the year ended December 31, 2020, core loss before tax (as defined below) was $58.7 million, or $2.76 per diluted common share, as compared to core earnings before tax of $15.8 million, or $0.75 per diluted common share, in 2019. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, core earnings before tax were $3.3 million, or $0.16 per diluted common share, as compared to core earnings before tax of $1.8 million, or $0.08 per diluted common share, for the fourth quarter of 2019, and core earnings before tax of $4.4 million, or $0.21 per diluted common share, for the third quarter of 2020.
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP), we use the following non-GAAP financial measures: core earnings (loss) before tax and diluted core earnings (loss) per share before tax. Core earnings (loss) and diluted core earnings (loss) per share are financial measurements calculated by adjusting GAAP net (loss) earnings before tax to exclude certain non-cash items, such as fair value adjustments and mark-to-market of mortgage servicing rights (MSRs), and legacy non-recurring expenses. The fair value adjustments are non-cash items which management believes should be excluded when discussing our ongoing and future operations. We use core earnings (loss) before tax as we believe that it more accurately reflects our current business operations of mortgage originations and further aids our investors in understanding and analyzing our core operating results and comparing them among periods. These non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net (loss) earnings before income taxes, net (loss) earnings or diluted (loss) earnings per share (EPS) prepared in accordance with GAAP. The tables below provide a reconciliation of net (loss) earnings before tax and diluted (loss) earnings per share to non-GAAP core earnings (loss) before tax and per share non-GAAP core earnings (loss) before tax:
Key Metrics
● Total mortgage originations volumes were $810.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $2.7 billion in 2020 as compared to $1.5 billion in the fourth quarter of 2019 and $4.5 billion in 2019.
● NonQM mortgage origination volumes decreased to $2.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $264.0 million in 2020 as compared to $325.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 and $1.2 billion in 2019.
● Gain on sale of loans, net decreased to $21.5 million, with margins of approximately 265 basis points (bps) in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to $26.1 million, with margins of approximately 173 bps in the fourth quarter of 2019. Gain on sale of loans, net decreased to $14.0 million, with margins of approximately 51 bps for 2020 as compared to $98.8 million, with margins of approximately 217 bps for 2019.
● Mortgage servicing portfolio decreased to $30.5 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to $4.9 billion at December 31, 2019.
● Servicing (expense) fees, net decreased to an expense of $131 thousand in the fourth quarter of 2020 and fees of $3.6 million in 2020, as compared to fees of $3.0 in the fourth quarter of 2019 and $12.9 million in 2019.
● Operating expenses (personnel, business promotion and general, administrative and other) decreased to $19.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and $81.3 million in 2020, as compared to $27.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 and $96.9 million in 2019.
Mortgage Lending
During the year ended 2020, total originations decreased 40% to $2.7 billion as compared to $4.5 billion in 2019. Retail originations represented the largest channel of originations with 90%, or $2.5 billion, of total originations in 2020.
For the fourth quarter of 2020, our total originations decreased to $810.0 million, a 46% decrease, as compared to $1.5 billion for the fourth quarter of 2019. The overall reduction in originations as compared to 2019 was the result of our temporary suspension of lending activities during the second quarter of 2020, due to uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which decreased our maximum origination capacity in the third and fourth quarters as a result of our reduced headcount and inability to adequately replace lost headcount as a result of market competition for talent. The competition for talent has continued to be a binding constraint not only for us as we re-engaged in lending and expand our lending platform, but also industry wide.
Our loan products primarily include conventional loans for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and government loans insured by FHA, VA and USDA.
Originations by Loan Type:
(1) Includes government-insured loans including FHA, VA and USDA.
(2) FICO-Fair Isaac Corporation credit score.
(3) LTV-loan to value-measures ratio of loan balance to estimated property value based upon third party appraisal.
We announced previously, after our temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020, that we re-engaged lending activities on June 4, 2020, while continuing to maintain a defensive posture initially focusing on GSE, Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and Veterans Affairs (VA) and originating with tighter underwriting guidelines, we reentered the Non-Agency jumbo and NonQM market in the fourth quarter of 2020. As a result, for the year ended December 31, 2020 the weighted average FICO for our originations increased as compared to 2019 and the weighted average LTV decreased as compared to 2019.
We entered 2020 building on the strong momentum gained over the past year repositioning the Company and focusing on our core NonQM lending business. During the first quarter of 2020, prior to the disruption caused by the pandemic, we originated $261.6 million in NonQM loans and were on pace to exceed our fourth quarter 2019 NonQM originations. As financial markets became dislocated in March 2020, spreads widened substantially on credit assets due to potential COVID-19 pandemic related payment delinquencies and forbearances, causing a severe decline in the values assigned by investors and counterparties for NonQM assets. As a result, we ceased originating NonQM loans in the beginning of April 2020 as the decline in value increased the cost and liquidity to finance the product, reduced the ability to finance additional NonQM loans with lenders as well as diminished stable capital markets distribution exits. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we re-engaged lending in the NonQM market.
We continue to believe there is an underserved mortgage market for borrowers with good credit who may not meet the qualified mortgage (QM) guidelines set out by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The third quarter of 2020 saw the re-emergence of the NonQM market including capital markets distribution exits for the product. The re-emergence of the NonQM market has been defined by products that fit within a much tighter credit box, which is where our NonQM originations have been historically. We believe the quality, consistency and performance of our loans has been demonstrated through the previous issuance of four securitizations since 2018. All four securitizations were 100% backed by Impac NonQM collateral with the senior tranches receiving AAA ratings. In 2020, our NonQM originations had a weighted average Fair Isaac Company credit score (FICO) of 730 and a weighted average LTV ratio of 68%. In 2019, our NonQM originations had a weighted average FICO of 731 and a weighted average LTV of 70%.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the origination volume of NonQM loans was $264.0 million, or 10% of total originations, as compared to $1.2 billion, or 27% of total originations, in 2019. In 2020, the retail channel accounted for 22% of NonQM originations while the third-party origination (TPO) channels accounted for 78% of NonQM production. In 2019, the retail channel accounted for 21% of NonQM originations, while the TPO channels accounted for 79% of NonQM production.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, refinance volume decreased $1.2 billion, or approximately 32%, as compared to 2019. Our purchase money transactions declined 80% to $148.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $735.8 million in 2019. The reduction in both refinance and purchase money transactions are from
our aforementioned temporary suspension of lending activities during the second quarter of 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we have approximately 1,075 approved wholesale relationships with mortgage brokerage companies and are approved to lend in 47 states. We have approximately 187 approved correspondent relationships with banks, credit unions and mortgage companies and are approved to lend in 50 states; however, currently approximately 86% of our mortgage originations were generated from California in 2020.
Mortgage Servicing
The following table includes information about our mortgage servicing portfolio:
(1) Based on loan count.
At December 31 2020, the mortgage servicing portfolio decreased to $30.5 million as compared to $4.9 billion at December 31, 2019. The decrease in the mortgage servicing portfolio was primarily due to the sale of $4.2 billion in UPB of Freddie Mac and GNMA MSRs in the second and third quarters of 2020. Throughout 2019 and 2020, we have selectively retained mortgage servicing as well as increase whole loan sales on a servicing released basis to investors. In addition to the servicing sales in 2020, as a result of retaining a smaller portion of servicing on loans sold to third parties the runoff of the portfolio has exceeded the servicing retained. The servicing portfolio generated net servicing fees of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a 72% decrease over the net servicing fees of $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of the aforementioned servicing sales as well as a portfolio runoff caused by the decrease in mortgage interest rates which began in 2019. The sale of MSRs during 2020, will result in net servicing expense going forward as a result of a small balance servicing portfolio as well as interim servicing costs.
Delinquencies within the servicing portfolio are 2.0% for 60+ days delinquent as of December 31, 2020 as compared to 0.51% as of December 31, 2019. The increase is the result of the small UPB of GNMA servicing we retained as of December 31, 2020, as compared to the blended delinquency rates across our entire servicing portfolio for 2019.
Real Estate Services
We provide portfolio loss mitigation and real estate services including real estate owned (REO) surveillance and disposition services, default surveillance and loss recovery services, short sale and real estate brokerage services, portfolio monitoring and reporting services. The source of revenue for this segment is primarily from the long-term mortgage portfolio, along with a small number of third party clients as well.
As the long-term mortgage portfolio continues to decline, we expect real estate services and the related revenues to decline. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the real estate services segment posted a net loss of $173 thousand as compared to net earnings of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Long-Term Mortgage Portfolio
The long-term mortgage portfolio primarily includes (a) the residual interests in securitizations, (b) master servicing rights from the securitizations and (c) long-term debt.
Although we have seen some stabilization and improvement in defaults, the portfolio is expected to continue to suffer losses and may continue for the foreseeable future. Such losses have been included in estimating the fair value of the related securitized mortgage collateral and borrowings.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our residual interest in securitizations (represented by the difference between total trust assets and total trust liabilities) generated cash flows of $2.1 million as compared to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash flows from our residual interest in securitizations during 2020 was due to the historically low interest rate environment which has allowed for an increase in excess spread to be remitted to the residual holder and an increase in prepayments which have paid off older vintage bonds as well as cure over-collateralization deficiencies in certain trusts. At December 31, 2020, our residual interest in securitizations (represented by the difference between total trust assets and total trust liabilities) increased to $16.7 million compared to $15.5 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in residual fair value at December 31, 2020 was the result of excess spread and an increase in prepayments due to the current interest rate environment partially offset by an increase in loss assumptions for certain trusts as compared to 2019.
For additional information regarding the long-term mortgage portfolio refer to Financial Condition and Results of Operations below.
Corporate
The corporate segment includes all corporate services groups, public company costs as well as debt expense related to the Convertible Notes and capital leases. This corporate services group supports all operating segments. A portion of the corporate services costs are allocated to the operating segments. The costs associated with being a public company, unused space for growth as well as the interest expense related to the Convertible Notes and capital leases is not allocated to our operating segments and remains in this segment.
For additional information regarding the corporate segment refer to Results of Operations by Business Segment below.
Critical Accounting Policies
We define critical accounting policies as those that are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. Our critical accounting policies require management to make difficult and complex judgments that rely on estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain due to the effect of changing market conditions and/or consumer behavior. In determining which accounting policies meet this definition, we considered our policies with respect to the valuation of our assets and liabilities and estimates and assumptions used in determining those valuations. We believe the most critical accounting issues that require the most complex and difficult judgments and that are particularly susceptible to significant change to our financial condition and results of operations include the following:
● fair value measurements;
● variable interest entities and transfers of financial assets and liabilities;
● repurchase reserve;
● interest income and interest expense; and
● income taxes.
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Accounting Standards Board-Accounting Standards Codification FASB ASC 820-10-35 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and outlines a fair value hierarchy based on the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (also referred to as an exit price). Fair value measurements are categorized into a three-level hierarchy based on the extent to which the
measurement relies on observable market inputs in measuring fair value. Level 1, which is the highest priority in the fair value hierarchy, is based on unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Level 2 is based on observable market-based inputs, other than quoted prices, in active markets for similar assets or liabilities. Level 3, which is the lowest priority in the fair value hierarchy, is based on unobservable inputs. Assets and liabilities are classified within this hierarchy in their entirety based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
The use of fair value to measure our financial instruments is fundamental to our financial statements and is a critical accounting estimate because a substantial portion of our assets and liabilities are recorded at estimated fair value. Financial instruments classified as Level 3 are generally based on unobservable inputs, and the process to determine fair value is generally more subjective and involves a high degree of management judgment and assumptions. These assumptions may have a significant effect on our estimates of fair value, and the use of different assumptions, as well as changes in market conditions and interest rates, could have a material effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
Mortgage loans held-for-sale-We elected to carry our mortgage loans held-for-sale originated or acquired from the mortgage lending operation at fair value. Fair value is based on quoted market prices, where available, prices for other traded mortgage loans with similar characteristics, and purchase commitments and bid information received from market participants.
Mortgage servicing rights-We elected to carry all of our mortgage servicing rights arising from our mortgage lending operation at fair value. The fair value of mortgage servicing rights is based upon a discounted cash flow model. The valuation model incorporates assumptions that market participants would use in estimating the fair value of servicing. These assumptions include estimates of prepayment speeds, discount rate, cost to service, escrow account earnings, contractual servicing fee income, prepayment and late fees, among other considerations.
Derivative financial instruments-We utilize certain derivative instruments in the ordinary course of our business to manage our exposure to changes in interest rates. These derivative instruments include to-be-announced MBS and forward loan sale commitments (TBA MBS or Hedging Instruments). We also issue interest rate lock commitments (IRLCs) to borrowers in connection with single family mortgage loan originations. We recognize all derivative instruments at fair value. The estimated fair value of IRLCs are based on underlying loan types with similar characteristics using the TBA MBS market, which is actively quoted and easily validated through external sources. The data inputs used in this valuation include, but are not limited to, loan type, underlying loan amount, note rate, loan program, and expected sale date of the loan, adjusted for current market conditions. These valuations are adjusted at the loan level to consider the servicing release premium and loan pricing adjustments specific to each loan. For all IRLCs, the base value is then adjusted for the anticipated current secondary market prices for underlying loans and estimated servicing value with similar coupons, maturities and credit quality, subject to the anticipated loan funding probability (Pull through Rate). The fair value of the Hedging Instruments is based on the actively quoted TBA MBS market using observable inputs related to characteristics of the underlying MBS stratified by product, coupon and settlement date and are recorded in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. The initial and subsequent changes in value of IRLCs and forward sale commitments are a component of gain on sale of loans, net in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Long-term debt-Long-term debt (consisting of junior subordinated notes) is reported at fair value within the long-term mortgage portfolio. These securities are measured based upon an analysis prepared by management, which utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis which takes into consideration our credit risk. Unrealized gains and losses are recognized in earnings in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as change in fair value of long-term debt. Our estimate of the fair value of the long-term debt requires us to exercise significant judgment as to the timing and amount of the future obligation. Changes in assumptions resulting from changes in our credit risk profile will affect the estimated fair value of the long-term debt and those changes are recorded as a component of net earnings. A change in assumptions associated with the improvement in our credit risk profile could result in a significant increase in the estimated fair value of the long-term debt which would result in a significant charge to net earnings.
Variable Interest Entities and Transfers of Financial Assets and Liabilities
Historically, we securitized mortgages in the form of collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO) and real estate mortgage investment conduits (REMICs), (collectively, securitizations), which were either consolidated or unconsolidated depending on the design of the securitization structure. These securitizations are evaluated for consolidation in accordance with the variable interest model of FASB ASC 810-10-25. A variable interest entity (VIE) is consolidated in the financial
statements if the Company has the power to direct activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of the VIE and has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. A variable interest entity (VIE) is consolidated in the financial statements if the Company has the power to direct activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of the VIE and has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. We consolidate certain VIEs where we are both the primary beneficiary of the residual interests in the securitization trusts as well as the master servicer, which gives us the ability to unilaterally cause the securitization trust to return specific mortgages, other than through a clean up call. The assets and liabilities that are included in the consolidated VIEs include the mortgage loans and real estate owned collateralizing the debt securities which are included in securitized mortgage trust assets on our consolidated balance sheets and the debt securities payable to investors which are included in securitized mortgage trust liabilities on our accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
For consolidated securitizations that are structured as secured borrowings, we recognize interest income over the life of the securitized mortgage collateral and interest expense incurred for the securitized mortgage borrowings.
Investors in the securities issued by the securitization trust have no recourse to our non securitized assets or to us and have no ability to require us to provide additional assets, but rather have recourse only to the assets transferred to the trust.
Repurchase Reserve
When we sell loans through whole loan sales we are required to make normal and customary representations and warranties about the loans to the purchaser. Our whole loan sale agreements generally require us to repurchase loans if we breach a representation or warranty given to the loan purchaser. In addition, we may be required to repurchase loans as a result of borrower fraud or if a payment default occurs on a mortgage loan shortly after its sale.
Investors may request us to repurchase loans or to indemnify them against losses on certain loans which the investors believe either do not comply with applicable representations or warranties or defaulted shortly after its purchase. Upon completion of our investigation regarding the investor claims, we may reject the investor claim, repurchase or provide indemnification on certain loans, as appropriate. We maintain a liability reserve for expected losses on dispositions of loans expected to be repurchased or on which indemnification is expected to be provided. We regularly evaluate the adequacy of this repurchase liability reserve based on trends in repurchase and indemnification requests, actual loss experience, settlement negotiations, and other relevant factors including economic conditions.
We record a provision for losses relating to such representations and warranties as part of each loan sale transaction. The method used to estimate the liability for representations and warranties is a function of the representations and warranties given and considers a combination of factors, including, but not limited to, estimated future defaults and loan repurchase rates and the potential severity of loss in the event of defaults and the probability of reimbursement by the correspondent loan seller. We establish a liability at the time loans are sold and continually update our estimated repurchase liability. The level of the repurchase liability for representations and warranties is difficult to estimate and requires considerable management judgment. The level of mortgage loan repurchase losses is dependent on economic factors, investor demand strategies, and other external conditions that may change over the lives of the underlying loans.
Interest Income and Interest Expense
Interest income on securitized mortgage collateral and interest expense on securitized mortgage borrowings are recorded using the effective interest method for the period based on the previous quarter-end’s estimated fair value. Interest expense on long-term debt is recorded using the effective interest method based on estimated future interest rates and cash flows.
Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes is calculated using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized and reflect the net tax effect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes and certain changes in the valuation allowance. Deferred tax assets are recognized subject to management’s judgment that realization is more likely than not. A valuation allowance is recognized for a deferred tax
asset if, based on the weight of the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In making such judgments, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. We provide a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining the adequacy of the valuation allowance, we consider all forms of evidence, including: (1) historic earnings or losses; (2) the ability to realize deferred tax assets through carry back to prior periods; (3) anticipated taxable income resulting from the reversal of taxable temporary differences; (4) tax planning strategies; and (5) anticipated future earnings exclusive of the reversal of taxable temporary differences.
Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Financial Condition
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table shows the condensed consolidated balance sheets for the following periods:
At December 31, 2020, cash increased to $54.2 million from $24.7 million at December 31, 2019. Cash balances increased primarily due a decrease in warehouse haircuts (difference between loan balance funded and amount advanced by warehouse lenders). Offsetting the increase in cash was the payment of operating expenses, pay-down of $5.0 million in principal of the Convertible Notes as well as unencumbered loans funded with our cash.
Restricted cash decreased $6.9 million to $5.6 million as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $12.5 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease between periods was primarily the result of a reduction in restricted cash pledged as collateral for our warehouse lines as a result of right sizing our maximum borrowing capacity down from $1.7 billion at December 31, 2019 to $550.0 million as December 31, 2020.
Mortgage loans held-for-sale decreased $617.7 million to $164.4 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to $782.1 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease primarily relates to our temporary suspension of lending activities during the second quarter of 2020, which decreased our maximum origination capacity in the third and fourth quarters as a result of our reduced headcount and inability to adequately replace lost headcount as a result of market competition for talent. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had originations of $2.7 billion offset by $3.3 billion in loan sales.
As a normal course of our origination and sales cycle, loans held-for-sale at the end of any period are generally sold within one or two subsequent months.
Mortgage servicing rights decreased $41.1 million to $0.3 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to $41.5 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to $4.2 billion in UPB of MSR sales during the second and third quarters of 2020 as well as mark-to-market decreases in fair value of $22.0 million partially offset by additions of $2.1 million from servicing retained loan sales of $223.7 million in UPB. At December 31, 2020, we serviced $30.5 million in UPB for others as compared to $4.9 billion at December 31, 2019.
Warehouse borrowings decreased $549.6 million to $151.9 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to $701.6 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to a $617.7 million decrease in mortgage loans held-for-sale at December 31, 2020. During 2020, we have right-sized our warehouse lending capacity reducing it by $1.1 billion to $550.0 million and reduced warehouse counterparties from six to three.
We had a MSR financing facility of $60.0 million. This facility allowed us to borrow up to 60% of the fair market value of Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae (subject to an acknowledgment agreement) pledged mortgage servicing rights. At December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings against the facility and had no available capacity for borrowing as a result of the sale of the FHLMC servicing in the second quarter of 2020. In April 2020, Ginnie Mae announced they revised and expanded their issuer assistance program to provide financing to fund servicer advances through the Pass-Through Assistance Program (PTAP). We had withdrawn $448 thousand in PTAP funds in May 2020. The outstanding PTAP assistance funds were repaid in July 2020, upon the sale of the GNMA MSRs.
Repurchase reserve decreased $1.9 million to $7.1 million at December 31, 2020 as compared to $9.0 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to $7.1 million in settlements primarily related to repurchased loans as well as refunds of premiums to investors for early payoffs on loans sold, partially offset by $5.2 million increase in change in provision for repurchases as a result of an increase in expected early payoffs and future losses.
Book value per share decreased 85% to $0.74 at December 31, 2020 as compared to $4.90 at December 31, 2019. Book value per common share decreased 169% to ($1.70) as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.47 as of December 31, 2019 (inclusive of the remaining $51.8 million of liquidation preference on our preferred stock). In the event we are not successful in appealing the Preferred B litigation, inclusive of the Preferred B stock cumulative undeclared dividends in arrears of $17.5 million, common book value per share was ($2.53) at December 31, 2020.
The changes in our trust assets and trust liabilities as summarized below.
(1) At December 31, 2020, the UPB of trust assets and trust liabilities was approximately $2.5 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2019, the UPB of trust assets and trust liabilities was approximately $3.0 billion and $2.9 billion, respectively.
Since the consolidated securitization trusts are nonrecourse to us, trust assets and liabilities have been netted in the table above to present our interest in these trusts more simply, which are considered the residual interests in securitizations. The residual interests are represented by the fair value of securitized mortgage collateral and real estate owned, offset by the fair value of securitized mortgage borrowings. We receive cash flows from our residual interests in securitizations to the extent they are available after required distributions to bondholders and maintaining specified overcollateralization levels and other specified parameters (such as maximum delinquency and cumulative default) within the trusts. The estimated fair value of the residual interests, represented by the difference in the fair value of total trust assets and total trust liabilities, was $16.7 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $15.5 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in residual fair value at December 31, 2020 was the result of an increase in fair value of certain trusts as a
result of excess spread and an increase in prepayments due to the current interest rate environment partially offset by an increase in loss assumptions for certain trusts.
We update our collateral assumptions quarterly based on recent delinquency, default, prepayment and loss experience. Additionally, we update the forward interest rates and investor yield (discount rate) assumptions based on information derived from market participants. During the year ended December 31, 2020, actual losses were slightly elevated as compared to forecasted losses for the majority of trusts, including those with residual value. Principal payments, prepayments and liquidations of securitized mortgage collateral and securitized mortgage borrowings also contributed to the reduction in trust assets and liabilities.
● The estimated fair value of securitized mortgage collateral decreased $527.9 million during 2020 primarily due to reductions in principal from borrower payments and transfers of loans to REO for single-family and multi-family collateral. Additionally, other trust assets decreased $3.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease of $21.9 million in REO from liquidations. Partially offsetting the decrease was an increase of $10.9 million in REO from foreclosures and a $7.4 million increase in the net realizable value (NRV) of REO.
● The estimated fair value of securitized mortgage borrowings decreased $532.7 million during 2020 primarily due to reductions in principal balances from principal payments during the period for single-family and multi-family collateral partially offset by an increase in loss assumptions.
Prior to 2008, we securitized mortgage loans by transferring originated and acquired residential single-family mortgage loans and multi-family commercial loans (the “transferred assets”) into non-recourse bankruptcy remote trusts which in turn issued tranches of bonds to investors supported only by the cash flows of the transferred assets. Because the assets and liabilities in the securitizations are nonrecourse to us, the bondholders cannot look to us for repayment of their bonds in the event of a shortfall. These securitizations were structured to include interest rate derivatives. We retained the residual interest in each trust, and in most cases would perform the master servicing function. A trustee and sub-servicer, unrelated to us, was utilized for each securitization. Cash flows from the loans (the loan payments as well as liquidation of foreclosed real estate properties) collected by the loan sub-servicer are remitted to us, the master servicer. The master servicer remits payments to the trustee who remits payments to the bondholders (investors). The sub-servicer collects loan payments and performs loss mitigation activities for defaulted loans. These activities include foreclosing on properties securing defaulted loans, which results in REO. Our real estate services segment also performs loss mitigation activities for loans within the portfolio.
For the trusts we consolidate, the loans are included in the consolidated balance sheets as “securitized mortgage trust assets”, the foreclosed loans are included in the consolidated balance sheets as “real estate owned” and the various bond tranches owned by investors are included in the consolidated balance sheets as “securitized mortgage trust liabilities.” To the extent there is excess overcollateralization (as defined in the securitization agreements) in these securitization trusts, we receive cash flows from the excess interest collected monthly from the residual interest we own. Because (i) we elected the fair value option on the securitized mortgage collateral, securitized mortgage borrowings, and (ii) real estate owned is reflected at NRV, which closely approximates fair market value, the net of the trust assets and trust liabilities represents the estimated fair value of the residual interests we own.
To estimate fair value of the assets and liabilities within the securitization trusts each reporting period, management uses an industry standard valuation and analytical model that is updated monthly with current collateral, real estate, derivative, bond and cost (servicer, trustee, etc.) information for each securitization trust. We employ an internal process to validate the accuracy of the model as well as the data within this model. Forecasted assumptions sometimes referred to as “curves,” for defaults, loss severity, interest rates (LIBOR, which is currently available for periods beyond 2021, however there is a likelihood that this information will be replaced with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) in the near future) and prepayments are input into the valuation model for each securitization trust. We hire third-party market participants to provide forecasted curves for the aforementioned assumptions for each of the securitizations. Management employs a process to qualitatively and quantitatively review the assumption curves for reasonableness using other information gathered from the mortgage and real estate market (i.e., third party home price indices, published industry reports discussing regional mortgage and commercial loan performance and delinquency) as well as actual default and foreclosure information for each trust from the respective trustees.
We use the valuation model to generate the expected cash flows to be collected from the trust assets and the expected required bondholder distribution (trust liabilities). To the extent that the trusts are over collateralized, we may receive the excess interest as the holder of the residual interest. The information above provides us with the future expected cash flows for the securitized mortgage collateral, real estate owned, securitized mortgage borrowings, and the residual interests.
To determine the discount rates to apply to these cash flows, we gather information from the bond pricing services and other market participants regarding estimated investor required yields for each bond tranche. Based on that information and the collateral type and vintage, we determine an acceptable range of expected yields an investor would require including an appropriate risk premium for each bond tranche. We use the blended yield of the bond tranches together with the residual interests to determine an appropriate yield for the securitized mortgage collateral in each securitization.
The following table presents changes in the trust assets and trust liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020:
(1) Represents change in fair value of net trust assets, including trust REO gains in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Accounted for at net realizable value.
Inclusive of gains from REO, total trust assets above reflect a net loss of $85.2 million as a result of a decrease in fair value from securitized mortgage collateral of $92.6 million offset by gains from REO of $7.4 million. Net gains on trust liabilities were $79.5 million resulting from the decrease in fair value of securitized mortgage borrowings. As a result, other income, change in fair value of net trust assets, including trust REO gains (losses) increased by $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The table below reflects the net trust assets as a percentage of total trust assets (residual interests in securitizations):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the estimated fair value of the net trust assets increased as a percentage of total trust assets due to an increase in prepayments and prepayment assumptions and a decrease in forward LIBOR offset by an increase in losses and loss assumptions.
Since the consolidated securitization trusts are nonrecourse to us, our economic risk is limited to our residual interests in these securitization trusts. Therefore, in the following table we have netted trust assets and trust liabilities to present these residual interests more simply. Our residual interests in securitizations are segregated between our single-family (SF) residential and multi-family (MF) residential portfolios and are represented by the difference between trust assets and trust liabilities.
The following tables present the estimated fair value of our residual interests by securitization vintage year and other related assumptions used to derive these values at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
(1) 2002-2003 vintage year includes CMO 2007-A, since the majority of the mortgages collateralized in this securitization were originated during this period.
We utilize a number of assumptions to value securitized mortgage collateral, securitized mortgage borrowings and residual interests. These assumptions include estimated collateral default rates and loss severities (credit losses), collateral prepayment rates, forward interest rates and investor yields (discount rates). We use the same collateral assumptions for securitized mortgage collateral and securitized mortgage borrowings as the collateral assumptions determine collateral cash flows which are used to pay interest and principal for securitized mortgage borrowings and excess spread, if any, to the residual interests. However, we use different investor yields (discount rates) assumptions for securitized mortgage collateral and securitized mortgage borrowings and the discount rates used for residual interests based on underlying collateral characteristics, vintage year, assumed risk and market participant assumptions.
The table below reflects the estimated future credit losses and investor yield requirements for trust assets by product (SF and MF) and securitization vintage at December 31, 2020:
(1) Estimated future losses derived by dividing future projected losses by unpaid principal balances at December 31, 2020.
(2) Investor yield requirements represent our estimate of the yield third-party market participants would require to price our trust assets and liabilities given our prepayment, credit loss and forward interest rate assumptions.
(3) Represents less than 1%.
Long-Term Mortgage Portfolio Credit Quality
We use the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA) method to define delinquency as a contractually required payment being 30 or more days past due. We measure delinquencies from the date of the last payment due date in which a payment was received. Delinquencies for loans 60 days late or greater, foreclosures and delinquent bankruptcies were
$514.0 million or 20.9% of the long-term mortgage portfolio as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $511.3 million or 17.3% as of December 31, 2019.
The following table summarizes the unpaid principal balances of loans in our mortgage portfolio, included within securitized mortgage collateral, that were 60 or more days delinquent (utilizing the MBA method) as of the periods indicated:
(1) Represents properties in the process of foreclosure.
(2) Represents bankruptcies that are 30 days or more delinquent.
At December 31, 2020, mortgage loans 60 or more days delinquent (whether or not subject to forbearance) increased 0.5% as compared to December 31, 2019. Delinquency and forbearance are taken into account as part of our credit loss assumptions when determining the estimated fair value of our residual interests. At December 31, 2020, residential loss assumptions for certain trusts increased as compared to December 31, 2019. To the extent delinquencies and loans in forbearance increase in deals with residual fair value, the estimated fair value of our residual interests may decrease due to a reduction or delay in the timing of estimated cash flows.
The following table summarizes the UPB of securitized mortgage collateral, mortgage loans held-for-sale and real estate owned, that were non-performing as of the dates indicated (excludes 60-89 days delinquent):
Non-performing assets consist of non-performing loans (mortgages that are 90 or more days delinquent, including loans in foreclosure and delinquent bankruptcies plus REO). It is our policy to place a mortgage loan on nonaccrual status when it becomes 90 days delinquent and to reverse from revenue any accrued interest, except for interest income on securitized mortgage collateral when the scheduled payment is received from the servicer. The servicers are required to advance principal and interest on loans within the securitization trusts to the extent the advances are considered recoverable. IFC, a subsidiary of IMH and master servicer, may be required to advance funds, or in most cases cause the loan servicers to advance funds, to cover principal and interest payments not received from borrowers depending on the status of their mortgages. As of December 31, 2020, non-performing assets as a percentage of the total collateral was 19.1%. At December 31, 2019, non-performing assets to total collateral was 14.5%. Non-performing assets increased by approximately $40.1 million at December 31, 2020 as compared December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the estimated fair value of non-performing assets was $135.0 million or 5.7% of total assets. At December 31, 2019, the estimated fair value of non-performing assets was $158.4 million or 4.5% of total assets.
REO, which consists of residential real estate acquired in satisfaction of loans, is carried at the lower of cost or net realizable value less estimated selling costs. Adjustments to the loan carrying value required at the time of foreclosure are included in the change in the fair value of net trust assets. Changes in our estimates of net realizable value subsequent to the time of foreclosure and through the time of ultimate disposition are recorded as gains or losses from real estate owned in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $7.4 million increase in net realizable value of the REO compared to a decrease of $6.4 million for the comparable 2019 period. Increases and write-downs of the net realizable value reflect increases or declines in value of the REO subsequent to foreclosure date, but prior to the date of sale.
The following table presents the balances of the REO for continuing operations:
(1) Impairment represents the cumulative write-downs of net realizable value subsequent to foreclosure.
In calculating the cash flows to assess the fair value of the securitized mortgage collateral, we estimate the future losses embedded in our loan portfolio. In evaluating the adequacy of these losses, management takes many factors into consideration. For instance, a detailed analysis of historical loan performance data is accumulated and reviewed. This data is analyzed for loss performance and prepayment performance by product type, origination year and securitization issuance. The data is also broken down by collection status. Our estimate of losses for these loans is developed by estimating both the rate of default of the loans and the amount of loss severity in the event of default. The rate of default is assigned to the loans based on their attributes (e.g., original loan-to-value, borrower credit score, documentation type, geographic location, etc.) and collection status. The rate of default is based on analysis of migration of loans from each aging category. The loss severity is determined by estimating the net proceeds from the ultimate sale of the foreclosed property. The results of that analysis are then applied to the current mortgage portfolio and an estimate is created. We believe that pooling of mortgages with similar characteristics is an appropriate methodology in which to evaluate the future loan losses.
Management recognizes that there are qualitative factors that must be taken into consideration when evaluating and measuring losses in the loan portfolios. These items include, but are not limited to, economic indicators that may affect the borrower’s ability to pay, changes in value of collateral, political factors, employment and market conditions, competitor’s performance, market perception, historical losses, COVID-19 pandemic and industry statistics. The assessment for losses is based on delinquency trends and prior loss experience and management’s judgment and assumptions regarding various matters, including general economic conditions and loan portfolio composition. Management continually evaluates these assumptions and various relevant factors affecting credit quality and inherent losses.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019
Revenues
Gain on sale of loans, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, gain on sale of loans, net totaled $14.0 million compared to $98.8 million in the comparable 2019 period. The $84.8 million decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to the aforementioned temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020. The decrease in gain on sale of loans, net was most notably due to a $52.5 million decrease in gain on sale of loans, a $31.8 million increase in mark-to-market losses on loans held-for-sale (LHFS), a $9.9 million increase in realized and unrealized net losses on derivative financial instruments partially offset by a $260 thousand decrease in provision for repurchases.
As previously discussed, for the year ended December 31, 2020, the predominance of our decrease on gain on sale of loans, net was due to the substantial remarking of our NonQM loan portfolio held-for-sale as a result of spreads widening substantially on credit assets due to potential pandemic related payment delinquencies and forbearances, causing a severe decline in the values assigned by counterparties for NonQM assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated and sold $2.7 billion and $3.3 billion of loans, respectively, as compared to $4.5 billion and $4.1 billion of loans originated and sold, respectively, during the same period in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, margins decreased to approximately 51 bps as compared to 217 bps for the same period in 2019 as a result of our pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020 resulting in the aforementioned remarking of our LHFS portfolio as well as reduction in origination volume during the year. During the fourth quarter of 2020, margins increased to 265 bps as compared to 173 bps in the fourth quarter of 2019, as a result of the historically low mortgage interest rate environment during 2020 which led to wider gain on sale margins in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
Servicing fees, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, servicing fees, net was $3.6 million compared to $12.9 million in the comparable 2019 period. The decrease in servicing fees, net was the result of the sale of substantially all of our servicing portfolio, $4.2 billion in UPB of Freddie Mac and GNMA MSRs, in the second and third quarters of 2020. In addition, the substantial decrease in mortgage interest rates during 2019 and 2020 caused a significant increase in runoff of our mortgage servicing portfolio which combined with the servicing sales decreased the servicing portfolio average balance 72% to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to an average balance of $5.7 billion for the comparable period in 2019. As a result of the servicing sales in the second and third quarters of 2020, we will continue to see a reduction in servicing fees, net and recognize a servicing expense related to interim subservicing and other servicing costs related to the small UPB of remaining servicing portfolio. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $223.7 million and $290.7 million, respectively, in servicing retained loan sales.
Loss on mortgage servicing rights, net.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, loss on MSRs, net was $28.5 million compared to $24.9 million in the comparable 2019 period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $22.0 million loss from change in fair value of MSRs primarily due to changes in fair value associated with changes in market interest rates, inputs and assumptions as well as voluntary and scheduled prepayments. As a result of the aforementioned significant decrease in interest rates during 2019 and through the year ended December 31, 2020, $21.5 million of the $22.0 million change in fair value of MSRs was due to prepayments, with $17.7 million primarily due to an increase in prepayment speed assumptions and $3.8 million due to voluntary prepayments. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $6.5 million loss on sale of MSRs primarily the result of fees and costs associated with the aforementioned servicing sales during the second and third quarters of 2020.
Real estate services fees, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, real estate services fees, net were $1.3 million compared to $3.3 million in the comparable 2019 period. The $2.0 million decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in transactions related to the decline in the number of loans and the UPB of the long-term mortgage portfolio as compared to 2019.
Other revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other revenues were $1.5 million as compared to $479 thousand in the comparable 2019 period. The increase was the result of a $1.2 million increase in the cash surrender value associated with the corporate-owned life insurance trusts as a result of the payment of premiums, partially offset by a $137 thousand reduction in other revenues in 2020 as a result of a reduction in gain on mortgage-backed securities sold during 2019.
Expenses
Total expenses decreased by $15.6 million, or 16%, to $81.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $96.9 million for the comparable period 2019. Personnel expense decreased $12.3 million to $52.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease is primarily related to the temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020, which decreased originations and related employee commission expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period in 2019, partially offset by the aforementioned furlough during the second quarter of 2020. Although personnel expense decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, it increased to 192 bps of fundings as compared to 143 bps for the comparable 2019 period. The increase is the result of competition for talent, which has continued to be a binding constraint not only for us, but also industry wide. As a result of the temporary pause in lending, and resulting furlough during the second quarter of
2020, average headcount decreased 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
General, administrative and other expenses increased to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $22.4 million for the same period in 2019. The increase was partially related to a $1.4 million increase in premiums associated with the corporate-owned life insurance trusts we consolidated in the first quarter of 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase in general, administrative and other expenses was also due to a $1.5 million increase in legal and professional fees in part due to settlements of various wage and hour matters, ongoing litigation, as more fully described in Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as exploring alternative exit strategies for our NonQM loan portfolio held-for-sale during the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, occupancy expense increased $115 thousand primarily due to right of use (ROU) asset impairment as well as additional leased space as compared to 2019. In August 2019, we entered into an agreement to lease additional office space in our corporate office to accommodate the staffing increase during the third quarter of 2019. During the first quarter of 2020, as a result of the pandemic and subsequent reduction in lending activities, we consolidated one floor of our corporate office and recognized ROU asset impairment of $393 thousand for the additional space leased in August 2019. Offsetting these increases in expenses outlined above was a reduction in all other general, administrative and other expenses as a result of the reduction in origination volume due to our temporary pause in lending as compared to the same period in 2019.
Business promotion decreased $5.4 million to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.3 million for the comparable period in 2019. Business promotion decreased as a result of the aforementioned temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020. As we have reengaged lending, business promotion has remained low as compared to prior periods as a result of the current interest rate environment which requires significantly less business promotion to source leads. We intend to continue to source leads through digital campaigns, which allow for a more cost effective approach, increasing the ability to be more price and product competitive to more specific target geographies.
Other Income
Net Interest Income
We earn net interest income primarily from mortgage assets which include securitized mortgage collateral and loans held-for-sale, or collectively, “mortgage assets,” and, to a lesser extent, interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense is primarily interest paid on borrowings secured by mortgage assets, which include securitized mortgage borrowings and warehouse borrowings and, to a lesser extent, interest expense paid on long-term debt, Convertible Notes, MSR Financing and corporate owned life insurance trusts. Interest income and interest expense during the period primarily represents the effective yield, based on the fair value of the trust assets and liabilities.
The following tables summarize average balance, interest and weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, for the periods indicated.
(1) Net interest spread is calculated by subtracting the weighted average yield on interest-bearing liabilities from the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets.
(2) Net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest spread by total average interest-earning assets.
Net interest spread decreased $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily attributable to a decrease in the net interest spread between loans held-for-sale and their related warehouse borrowings, a decrease in the net interest spread on the securitized mortgage collateral and securitized mortgage borrowings, an increase in interest expense on the corporate owned life insurance trusts (within other liabilities), an increase in interest expense on MSR financing and convertible notes. Offsetting the decrease in net interest spread income was a decrease in interest expense on the long-term debt. As a result, net interest margin decreased to 0.20% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 0.26% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the yield on interest-earning assets decreased to 4.56% from 4.67% in the comparable 2019 period. The yield on interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 4.37% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 4.43% for the comparable 2019 period. In connection with the fair value accounting for securitized mortgage collateral and borrowings and long-term debt, interest income and interest expense are recognized using effective yields based on estimated fair values for these instruments. The decrease in yield for securitized mortgage collateral and securitized mortgage borrowings is primarily related to increased prices on mortgage-backed bonds which resulted in a decrease in yield as compared to the previous period.
Change in the fair value of long-term debt
Long-term debt (consisting of junior subordinated notes) is measured based upon an internal analysis which considers our own credit risk and discounted cash flow analyses. Improvements in our financial results and financial condition in the future could result in additional increases in the estimated fair value of the long-term debt, while deterioration in financial results and financial condition could result in a decrease in the estimated fair value of the long-term debt.
During 2020, the fair value of long-term debt decreased by $1.0 million to $44.4 million from $45.4 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in estimated fair value was the result of a $1.9 million change in the market specific credit risk as a result of a decrease in the forward LIBOR partially offset by a $28 thousand change in the instrument specific credit risk and a $850 thousand increase due to accretion.
During 2019, the fair value of the long-term debt increased by $578 thousand. The increase in the estimated fair value of long-term debt during 2019 was the result of a $1.4 million change in the market specific credit risk as a result of a decrease in the credit spread between LIBOR and the risk free rate as well as an increase due to accretion. Partially
offsetting the increase was a $909 thousand change in the instrument specific credit risk attributable to a change in our credit risk profile.
Change in fair value of net trust assets, including trust REO gains (losses)
The change in fair value related to our net trust assets (residual interests in securitizations) was a loss of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in fair value of net trust assets, excluding trust REO was due to $13.1 million in losses from changes in fair value of securitized mortgage borrowings and securitized mortgage collateral as a result of increases in loss assumptions on certain trusts during the period partially offset by a decrease in LIBOR during 2020 as compared to 2019. These losses were partially offset by an increase in the NRV of REO of $7.4 million during the period attributed to lower expected loss severities on properties within certain states held in the long-term mortgage portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The change in fair value related to our net trust assets (residual interests in securitizations) was a loss of $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in fair value of net trust assets, excluding trust REO was due to $3.4 million in losses from changes in fair value of securitized mortgage borrowings and securitized mortgage collateral primarily associated with an increase in prepayment and loss assumptions partially offset by a decrease in LIBOR during 2019. Additionally, the NRV of REO decreased $6.4 million during the period attributed to higher expected loss severities on properties held in the long-term mortgage portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
We recorded income tax expense (benefit) of $133 thousand and $(245) thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax expense of $133 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily the result of state income taxes from states where we do not have net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards or state minimum taxes. The income tax benefit of $245 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily the result of a benefit resulting from the intraperiod allocation rules that are applied when there is a pre-tax loss from continuing operations and pre-tax income from other comprehensive income partially offset by state taxes from states where the Company does not have NOL carryforwards or state minimum taxes, including AMT.
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal NOL carryforwards of $609.3 million. As of December 31, 2020, the estimated Federal NOL carryforward expiration schedule is as follows (in millions):
(1) NOL amounts are estimates until the final tax returns are filed in October 2021. Additionally, any NOLs that are generated subsequent to the enactment of the Tax Act on January 1, 2018, have an indefinite life.
As of December 31, 2020, we had California NOL carryforwards of $420.3 million, which begin to expire in 2028. We may not be able to realize the maximum benefit due to the nature and tax entities that holds the NOL.
Our deferred tax assets are primarily the result of net operating losses and basis differences on mortgage securities and goodwill. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 as it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The valuation allowance is based on the management's assessment that it is more likely than not that certain deferred tax assets, primarily net operating loss carryforwards, may not be realized in the foreseeable future due to objective negative evidence that we may not generate sufficient taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets.
A valuation allowance is recognized for a deferred tax asset if, based on the weight of the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In making such judgments, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. In determining the adequacy of the valuation allowance, we consider all forms of evidence, including: (1) historic earnings or losses; (2) the ability to realize deferred tax assets through carry back to prior periods; (3) anticipated taxable income resulting from the reversal of taxable temporary differences; (4) tax planning strategies; and (5) anticipated future earnings exclusive of the reversal of taxable temporary differences.
We are subject to federal income taxes as a regular (Subchapter C) corporation and file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return.
Results of Operations by Business Segment
We have three primary operating segments: Mortgage Lending, Real Estate Services and Long-Term Mortgage Portfolio. Unallocated corporate and other administrative costs, including the cost associated with being a public company as well as the interest expense related to the convertible notes and capital leases, are presented in Corporate. Segment operating results are as follows:
Mortgage Lending
Condensed Statements of Operations Data
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gain on sale of loans, net totaled $14.0 million compared to $98.8 million in the comparable 2019 period. The $84.8 million decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to the aforementioned temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020. The decrease in gain on sale of loans, net was most notably due to a $52.5 million decrease in gain on sale of loans, a $31.8 million increase in mark-to-market losses on LHFS, a $9.9 million increase in realized and unrealized net losses on derivative financial instruments partially offset by a $260 thousand decrease in provision for repurchases.
As previously discussed, for the year ended December 31, 2020, the predominance of our decrease on gain on sale of loans, net was due to the substantial remarking of our NonQM loan portfolio held-for-sale as a result of spreads widening substantially on credit assets due to potential pandemic related payment delinquencies and forbearances, causing a severe decline in the values assigned by counterparties for NonQM assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we originated and sold $2.7 billion and $3.3 billion of loans originated and sold, respectively, as compared to $4.5 billion and $4.1 billion of loans originated and sold, respectively, during the same period in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, margins decreased to approximately 51 bps as compared to 217 bps for the same period in 2019 as a result of our pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020 resulting in the aforementioned remarking of our LHFS portfolio as well as reduction in origination volume during the year. During the fourth quarter of 2020, margins increased to 265 bps as compared to 173 bps in the fourth quarter of 2019, as a result of the historically low mortgage interest rate environment during 2020 which led to wider gain on sale margins in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, servicing fees, net was $3.6 million compared to $12.9 million in the comparable 2019 period. The decrease in servicing fees, net was the result of the sale of substantially all of our servicing portfolio, $4.2 billion in UPB of Freddie Mac and GNMA MSRs, in the second and third quarters of 2020. In addition, the substantial decrease in mortgage interest rates during 2019 and 2020 caused a significant increase in runoff of our mortgage servicing portfolio which combined with the servicing sales decreased the servicing portfolio average balance 72% to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to an average balance of $5.7 billion for the comparable period in 2019. As a result of the servicing sales in the second and third quarters of 2020, we will continue to see a reduction in servicing fees, net and recognize a servicing expense related to interim subservicing and other servicing costs related to the small UPB of remaining servicing portfolio. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $223.7 million and $290.7 million, respectively, in servicing retained loan sales.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, loss on MSRs, net was $28.5 million compared to $24.9 million in the comparable 2019 period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $22.0 million loss from change in fair value of MSRs primarily due to changes in fair value associated with changes in market interest rates, inputs and assumptions as well as voluntary and scheduled prepayments. As a result of the aforementioned significant decrease in interest rates during 2019 and through the year ended December 31, 2020, $21.5 million of the $22.0 million change in fair value of MSRs was due to prepayments, with $17.7 million primarily due to an increase in prepayment speed assumptions and $3.8 million due to voluntary prepayments. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $6.5 million loss on sale of MSRs primarily the result of fees and costs associated with the aforementioned servicing sales during the second and third quarters of 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income decreased to $2.5 million as compared to $6.2 million in the comparable 2019 period. The $3.7 million decrease in other income was primarily due to a $3.1 million decrease in net interest spread between loans held-for-sale and their related warehouse borrowings during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the comparable period in 2019. The decrease in other income was also attributable to a $215 thousand decrease in interest income on mortgage-backed securities purchased and sold during 2019, a $303 thousand decrease on invested cash balances, a $137 thousand reduction in gain on mortgage-backed securities sold during 2019 and a $103 thousand increase in interest expense related to an increase in the utilization of the MSR financing facilities during 2020.
Personnel expense decreased $12.2 million to $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease is primarily related to the temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020, which decreased originations and related employee commission expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period in 2019, partially offset by the aforementioned furlough during the second quarter of 2020. Although personnel expense decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020, it increased to 169 bps of fundings as compared to 129 bps for the comparable 2019 period. The increase is the result of competition for talent, which has continued to be a binding constraint not only for us, but also industry wide. As a result of the temporary pause in lending, and resulting furlough during the second quarter of 2020, average headcount in the mortgage lending segment decreased 30% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
Business promotion decreased $5.4 million to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.3 million for the comparable period in 2019. Business promotion decreased as a result of the aforementioned temporary pause in lending during the second quarter of 2020. As we have reengaged lending, business promotion has remained low as compared to prior periods as a result of the current interest rate environment which requires significantly less business promotion to source leads. We intend to continue to source leads through digital campaigns, which allow for a more cost effective approach, increasing the ability to be more price and product competitive to more specific target geographies.
General, administrative and other expenses decreased to $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $11.6 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was partially related to a $572 thousand reduction in developed software amortization as part of the initial CCM transaction which was fully amortized in 2019. Occupancy expense decreased approximately $383 thousand due to the aforementioned reduction in personnel in the mortgage lending segment as a result of the temporary pause in lending, which reduced allocated rent to the mortgage lending division. Partially offsetting the reduction in occupancy expense was in increase in occupancy expense related to a ROU asset impairment as well as additional leased space as compared to the year ended 2019. In August 2019, we entered into an agreement to lease additional office space in our corporate office to accommodate the staffing increase during the third quarter of 2019. During the first quarter of 2020, as a result of the pandemic and subsequent reduction in lending activities, we consolidated one floor of our corporate office and recognized ROU asset impairment of $393 thousand for the additional space leased in August 2019. Additionally, data processing decreased $210 thousand and all other general, administrative and other expenses decreased $698 thousand as a result of the reduction in origination volume due to our temporary pause in lending as compared to the same period in 2019. Partially offsetting the decrease in general, administrative and other expenses was an $844 thousand increase in legal and professional fees in part due to settlements of various wage and hour matters, ongoing litigation, as more fully described in Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as exploring alternative exit strategies for our NonQM loan portfolio held-for-sale during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Long-Term Mortgage Portfolio
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest income totaled $5.1 million as compared to $5.1 million for the comparable 2019 period. Net interest income increased $62 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily attributable to a $532 thousand decrease in interest expense on the long-term debt associated with a decrease in three-month LIBOR as compared to the same period in 2019 partially offset by a $470 thousand decrease in net interest spread on the long-term mortgage portfolio as previously discussed.
During 2020, the fair value of long-term debt decreased by $1.0 million to $44.4 million from $45.4 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in estimated fair value was the result of a $1.9 million change in the market specific credit risk as a result of a decrease in the forward LIBOR partially offset by a $28 thousand change in the instrument specific credit risk and a $850 thousand increase due to accretion.
The change in fair value related to our net trust assets (residual interests in securitizations) was a loss of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in fair value of net trust assets, excluding trust REO was due to $13.1 million in losses from changes in fair value of securitized mortgage borrowings and securitized mortgage collateral as a result of increases in loss assumptions on certain trusts during the period partially offset by a decrease in LIBOR during 2020 as compared to 2019. These losses were partially offset by an increase in the NRV of REO of $7.4 million during the period attributed to lower expected loss severities on properties within certain states held in the long-term mortgage portfolio during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Real Estate Services
For the year ended December 31, 2020, real estate services fees, net were $1.3 million compared to $3.3 million in the comparable 2019 period. The $2.0 million decrease in real estate services fees, net was primarily the result of a $1.2 million decrease in real estate service fees, a $713 thousand decrease in loss mitigation fees and a $109 thousand decrease in real estate and recovery fees. The decrease in real estate service fees, loss mitigation and real estate and recovery fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a result of the continued decrease in transactions related to the decline in the number of loans and the UPB of the long-term mortgage portfolio as compared to 2019.
Corporate
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense increased to $2.4 million as compared to $1.8 million in the comparable 2019 period. The $554 thousand increase in interest expense was primarily a $393 thousand increase in interest expense associated with the premium financing associated with the corporate-owned life insurance trusts liability as well as a $241 thousand increase in interest expense associated with accretion related to warrants issued as part of the convertible note extension entered into in May 2020 as well as a reduction in interest income on invested cash balances. Partially offsetting the increase in interest expense was a reduction in the interest rate on the Notes from 7.5% to 7.0% per annum effective May 2020 as well as a reduction in interest expense following the pay-down of $5.0 million in principal of the Notes on November 9, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expenses increased to $17.1 million as compared to $15.4 million for the comparable 2019 period. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the primary increase in other expenses was a $1.4 million increase in premiums associated with the corporate-owned life insurance trusts liability, a $803 thousand increase in benefit claims and a $520 thousand increase in legal and professional fees as a result of ongoing litigation, as more fully described in Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as exploring alternative exit strategies for our NonQM loan portfolio held-for-sale during the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, occupancy expense increased $501 thousand in the corporate segment due to the aforementioned reduction in personnel in the mortgage lending segment as a result of the temporary pause in lending, which reduced allocated rent to the mortgage lending division and increased the rent in corporate. General, administrative and other expenses increased $767 thousand as a result of our temporary pause and reengagement in lending activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. Offsetting the increase in other expenses was a $1.2 million increase in the cash surrender value associated with the corporate-owned life insurance trusts as a result of the payment of premiums as well as a $1.1 million decrease in personnel expense as a result of a reduction in bonuses, incentives and other compensation expense in the corporate segment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we funded our operations primarily from mortgage lending revenues and, to a lesser extent, real estate services fees and cash flows from our residual interests in securitizations. Mortgage lending revenues include gain on sale of loans, net, servicing fees, net, proceeds from the sale of mortgage servicing rights and other mortgage related income. We funded mortgage loan originations using warehouse facilities, which are repaid once the loan is sold. We may also seek to raise capital by issuing debt or equity.
In mid-February we began instituting measures to increase liquidity as the risk of the rapidly spreading pandemic continued to outpace expectations. We satisfied all margin calls due under our To Be Announced (TBA) hedging agreements, and warehouse lending and repurchase facilities. In March 2020, we made the determination that our interest rate hedges were no longer effective in hedging asset market values as a result of the market dislocation, which caused an inability to monetize the value of our locked and funded loan portfolio. As a result, on March 18, 2020, we closed out the entirety of our TBA hedge position. In late March 2020, we instituted a temporary suspension of all lending activities believing it prudent to de-risk, protect liquidity and prepare for the potential of a prolonged global recession. During March 2020, we began to sell assets, repay debt, and generate additional cash liquidity. As of March 31, 2020, our unrestricted cash was $80.2 million. Between April 1, 2020 and May 31, 2020, we sold approximately $469.0 million in mortgage loans, repaid approximately $490.0 million of associated warehouse borrowings, completed the sale of $4.1 billion in UPB of Freddie Mac MSRs and repaid the associated $15.0 million outstanding on the MSR borrowing facility in its entirety. In July 2020, we sold the majority of the GNMA mortgage servicing for approximately $225 thousand receiving $163 thousand in proceeds upon sale. Additionally, we have right sized our warehouse borrowing capacity by electing to reduce the maximum borrowing capacity from $1.7 billion to $550.0 million and electing to reduce the warehouse counterparties from six to three.
Sources of Liquidity
Cash flows from our mortgage lending operations. We receive loan fees from loan originations. Fee income consists of application and underwriting fees and fees on cancelled loans. These loan fees are offset by the related direct loan origination costs including broker fees related to our wholesale and correspondent channels. In addition, we generally recognize net interest income on loans held-for-sale from the date of origination through the date of disposition. We sell or securitize substantially all of the loans we originate in the secondary mortgage market, with servicing rights released or retained. Loans are sold on a whole loan basis by entering into sales transactions with third-party investors in which we receive a premium for the loan and related servicing rights, if applicable. The mortgage lending operations sold $3.3 billion of mortgages through whole loan sales and securitizations during 2020. Additionally, the mortgage lending operations enter into IRLCs and utilize Hedging Instruments and forward delivery commitments to hedge interest rate risk. We may be subject to pair-off gains and losses associated with these instruments. Since we rely significantly upon loan sales to generate cash proceeds to repay warehouse borrowings and to create credit availability, any disruption in our ability to complete loan sales may require us to utilize other sources of financing, which, if available at all, may be on less favorable terms. In addition, delays in the disposition of our mortgage loans increase our risk by exposing us to credit and interest rate risk for this extended period of time.
In May 2020, we completed the sale of $4.1 billion in UPB of Freddie Mac MSRs for approximately $20.1 million, receiving $15.0 million in proceeds upon sale, with the remaining due upon transfer of the servicing and transfer of all trailing documents. The Company used the $15.0 million in proceeds from the MSR sale to pay off the MSR financing. In July 2020, we sold the majority of the GNMA mortgage servicing for approximately $225 thousand receiving $163 thousand in proceeds upon sale, with the remaining due upon transfer of the servicing and transfer of all trailing documents.
We receive servicing income net of subservicing cost and other related servicing expenses from our mortgage servicing portfolio. Servicing fees, net decreased to $3.6 million as a result of the servicing portfolio decreasing to an average balance of $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to an average balance of $5.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in servicing fees, net was the result of the sale of substantially all of our servicing portfolio, $4.2 billion in UPB of Freddie Mac and GNMA MSRs, in the second and third quarters of 2020. In addition, the substantial decrease in mortgage interest rates during 2019 and 2020 caused a significant increase in runoff of our mortgage servicing portfolio which combined with the servicing sales contributed to the 72% reduction in servicing portfolio average balance during the year ended December 31, 2020. Despite retaining a small amount of GNMA servicing at December 31, 2020, we will continue to see a significant reduction in our servicing fees, net as a result of the servicing sales in the second and third quarters of 2020, and expect net servicing expense due to interim subservicing and other servicing costs. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $223.7 million and $290.7 million, respectively, in servicing retained loan sales.
Fees from our real estate service business activities. We earn fees from various real estate business activities, including loss mitigation, real estate disposition, monitoring and surveillance services and real estate brokerage. We provide services to investors, servicers and individual borrowers primarily by focusing on loss mitigation and performance of our long-term mortgage portfolio.
Cash flows from our long-term mortgage portfolio (residual interests in securitizations). We receive residual cash flows on mortgages held as securitized mortgage collateral after distributions are made to investors on securitized mortgage borrowings to the extent required credit enhancements are maintained and performance covenants are complied with for credit ratings on the securitized mortgage borrowings. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our residual interests generated cash flows of $2.1 million. These cash flows represent the difference between principal and interest payments on the underlying mortgages and are affected by the following:
● servicing and master servicing fees paid;
● premiums paid to mortgage insurers;
● cash payments/receipts on derivatives;
● interest paid on securitized mortgage borrowings;
● principal payments and prepayments paid on securitized mortgage borrowings;
● overcollateralization requirements;
● actual losses, net of any gains incurred upon disposition of other real estate owned or acquired in settlement of defaulted mortgages;
● unpaid interest shortfall; and
● basis risk shortfall.
Additionally, we act as the master servicer for mortgages included in our long-term mortgage portfolio, which consists of CMO and REMIC securitizations. The master servicing fees we earn are generally 0.03% per annum (3 basis points) on the declining principal balances of these mortgages plus interest income on cash held in custodial accounts until remitted to investors, less any interest shortfall.
Uses of Liquidity
Acquisition and origination of mortgage loans. During 2020, the mortgage lending operations originated or acquired $2.7 billion of mortgage loans. Capital invested in mortgages is outstanding until we sell the loans. Initial capital invested in mortgage loans includes premiums paid when mortgages are acquired and originated and our capital investment, or “haircut,” required upon financing, which is generally determined by the type of collateral provided and the warehouse facility terms. The mortgage loan originations were financed with warehouse borrowings at a haircut generally between 2% to 10% of the outstanding principal balance of the mortgage loans which increases based upon the number of days on the line. The haircuts are normally recovered from sales proceeds.
Investment in mortgage servicing rights. As part of our business plan, we have selectively invested in mortgage servicing rights through the sale of mortgage loans on a servicing retained basis and to a lesser extent the purchase of MSR pools. Beginning in 2019 and throughout 2020, we began to retain less servicing by doing more whole loan sales and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we capitalized $2.1 million in mortgage servicing rights from selling $223.7 million in loans with servicing retained.
Cash flows from financing facilities and other lending relationships. We primarily fund our mortgage originations through warehouse facilities with third-party lenders which are primarily with national and regional banks. At December 31, 2020, the warehouse facilities borrowing capacity amounted to $550.0 million, of which $151.9 million was outstanding. The warehouse facilities are secured by and used to fund single-family residential mortgage loans until such loans are sold. Under the terms of these warehouse lines, the Company is required to maintain various financial and other covenants. These financial covenants include, but are not limited to, maintaining (i) minimum tangible net worth, (ii) minimum liquidity, (iii) a maximum leverage ratio and (iv) pre-tax net income requirements. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all warehouse lending related covenants. In order to mitigate the liquidity risk associated with warehouse borrowings, we attempt to sell or securitize our mortgage loans expeditiously.
Our ability to meet liquidity requirements and the financing needs of our customers is subject to the renewal of our warehouse facilities or obtaining other sources of financing, if required, including additional debt or equity from time to time. Any decision our lenders or investors make to provide available financing to us in the future will depend upon a number of factors, including:
● our compliance with the terms of existing warehouse lines and credit arrangements, including any financial covenants;
● the ability to obtain waivers upon any noncompliance;
● our financial performance;
● industry and market trends in our various businesses;
● the general availability of, and rates applicable to, financing and investments;
● our lenders or investors resources and policies concerning loans and investments; and
● the relative attractiveness of alternative investment or lending opportunities.
Repurchase Reserve. When we sell loans through whole loan sales we are required to make normal and customary representations and warranties about the loans to the purchaser. Our whole loan sale agreements generally require us to repurchase loans if we breach a representation or warranty given to the loan purchaser. In addition, we may be required to repurchase loans as a result of borrower fraud or if a payment default occurs on a mortgage loan shortly after its sale.
From time to time, investors have requested us to repurchase loans or to indemnify them against losses on certain loans which the investors believe either do not comply with applicable representations or warranties or defaulted shortly after its purchase. We record an estimated reserve for these losses at the time the loan is sold, and adjust the reserve to reflect the estimated loss.
Financing Activities
MSR Financing. In May 2018, IMC (Borrower) amended the Line of Credit Promissory Note (Freddie Mac and GNMA Financing) originally entered into in August 2017, increasing the maximum borrowing capacity of the revolving line of credit to $60.0 million, increasing the borrowing capacity up to 60% of the fair market value of the pledged mortgage servicing rights and reducing the interest rate per annum to one-month LIBOR plus 3.0%. As part of the May 2018 amendment, the obligations under the Line of Credit were secured by FHLMC and GNMA pledged mortgage servicing rights (subject to an acknowledgement agreement) and was guaranteed by IRES. In January 2020, the maturity of the line was extended to March 31, 2020. In April 2020, the maturity of the line was extended to May 31, 2020. In May 2020, the line was repaid with the proceeds from the MSR sale and the line expired.
MSR Advance Financing. In April 2020, Ginnie Mae announced they revised and expanded their issuer assistance program to provide financing to fund servicer advances through the PTAP. The PTAP funds advanced by Ginnie Mae bear interest at a fixed rate that will apply to a given months pass-through assistance and will be posted on Ginnie Mae’s website each month. The maturity date was the earlier of the seven months from the month the request and repayment agreement was approved, or July 30, 2021. In July 2020, the outstanding PTAP funds were repaid. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no PTAP funds outstanding.
Long-term Debt (consisting of Junior Subordinated Notes). The Junior Subordinated Notes are redeemable at par at any time with a stated maturity of March 2034 and require quarterly distributions at 3-month LIBOR plus 3.75% per annum. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 3.99%. We are current on all interest payments. At December 31, 2020, long-term debt had an outstanding principal balance of $62.0 million with an estimated fair value of $44.4 million and is reflected on our consolidated balance sheets as long-term debt.
Convertible Notes. In May 2015, we issued $25.0 million Convertible Promissory Notes (Notes) to purchasers, some of which are related parties. The Notes were originally due to mature on or before May 9, 2020 and accrue interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum, paid quarterly.
Noteholders may convert all or a portion of the outstanding principal amount of the Notes into shares of the Company’s common stock (Conversion Shares) at a rate of $21.50 per share, subject to adjustment for stock splits and dividends (Conversion Price). The Company has the right to convert the entire outstanding principal of the Notes into Conversion Shares at the Conversion Price if the market price per share of the common stock, as measured by the average volume-weighted closing stock price per share of the common stock on the NYSE AMERICAN (or any other U.S. national securities exchange then serving as the principal such exchange on which the shares of common stock are listed), reaches the level of $30.10 for any twenty (20) trading days in any period of thirty (30) consecutive trading days after the Closing Date (as defined in the Convertible Notes). Upon conversion of the Notes by the Company, the entire amount of accrued and unpaid interest (and all other amounts owing) under the Notes are immediately due and payable. To the extent the Company pays any cash dividends on its shares of common stock prior to conversion of the Notes, upon conversion of the Notes, the noteholders will also receive such dividends on an as-converted basis of the Notes less the amount of interest paid by the Company prior to such dividend.
On April 15, 2020, the Company amended and restated the outstanding Notes in the principal amount of $25.0 million originally issued in May 2015 pursuant to the terms of the Note Agreement between the Company and the noteholders of the Notes. The Notes were amended to extend the maturity date by six months (until November 9, 2020) and to reduce the interest rate on such Notes to 7.0% per annum. In connection with the issuance of the Amended Notes, the Company issued to the noteholders of the Notes, warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 212,649 shares of the Company’s common stock at a cash exercise price of $2.97 per share. The relative fair value of the warrants were $244 thousand and recorded as debt discounts, which are accreted over the term of the warrants (October 2020), using an effective interest rate of 8.9%. The warrants are exercisable commencing on October 16, 2020 and expire on April 15, 2025.
On October 28, 2020, the Company entered into agreements with certain holders of its Notes due November 9, 2020 in the aggregate principal amount of $25.0 million to further extend the maturity date of the Notes from November 9, 2020, by an additional 18-months to May 9, 2022 and to decrease the aggregate principal amount of the Notes to $20.0 million, following the pay-down of $5.0 million in principal of the Notes on November 9, 2020. The interest rate on the Notes remains at 7.0% per annum.
Operating activities. Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities was $633.9 million for 2020 as compared to $(377.5) million for 2019, primarily due to the timing of originations and sales of loans held-for-sale between 2020 and 2019. During 2020 and 2019, the primary sources of cash in operating activities were cash received from fees generated by our mortgage and real estate service business activities, cash received from mortgage lending and excess cash flows from our residual interests in securitizations offset by operating expenses.
Investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $460.3 million for 2020 as compared to $589.7 million for 2019. For 2020 and 2019, the primary source of cash from investing activities was provided by principal repayments on our securitized mortgage collateral, the sale of mortgage servicing rights, the sale of mortgage backed securities and proceeds from the liquidation of REO.
Financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $1.1 billion for 2020 as compared to $205.3 million for 2019. For 2020, significant uses of cash in financing activities were primarily for principal repayments on securitized mortgage borrowings as well as repayments of warehouse borrowings. For 2019, significant uses of cash in financing activities were primarily for principal repayments on securitized mortgage borrowings, partially offset by net borrowings against warehouse agreements.
Inflation. The consolidated financial statements and corresponding notes to the consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, inflation had no significant impact on our revenues or net income. Unlike industrial companies, nearly all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a greater effect on our performance than do the effects of general levels of inflation. Inflation affects our operations primarily through its effect on interest rates, since interest rates normally increase during periods of high inflation and decrease during periods of low inflation.
Our results of operations and liquidity are materially affected by conditions in the markets for mortgages and mortgage-related assets, as well as the broader financial markets and the general economy. Concerns over economic recession, geopolitical issues, unemployment, the availability and cost of financing, the mortgage market and real estate market conditions contribute to increased volatility and diminished expectations for the economy and markets. Volatility and uncertainty in the marketplace may make it more difficult for us to obtain financing or raise capital on favorable terms or at all. Our operations and profitability may be adversely affected if we are unable to obtain cost-effective financing and profitable and stable capital market distribution exits.
We originate loans which are intended to be eligible for sale to Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, (together, the GSEs), government insured or guaranteed loans, such as FHA, VA and USDA loans, and loans eligible for Ginnie Mae securities issuance (collectively, the Agencies), in addition to other investors and counterparties (collectively, the Counterparties). It is important for us to sell or securitize the loans we originate and, when doing so, maintain the option to also sell the related MSRs associated with these loans. Prepayment speeds on loans generated through our retail direct channel have been a concern for some investors dating back to 2016 which has resulted and could further result in adverse pricing or delays in our ability to sell or securitize loans and related MSRs on a timely and profitable basis. During the fourth quarter of 2017,
Fannie Mae sufficiently limited the manner and volume for our deliveries of eligible loans such that we elected to cease deliveries to them and we expanded our whole loan investor base for these loans. In 2019, with the creation of the uniform mortgage-backed securities (UMBS) market, which was intended to improve liquidity and align prepayment speeds across Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities, Freddie Mac raised concerns about the high prepayment speeds of our loans generated through our retail direct channel. During 2019 and 2020, we further expanded our investor base and completed servicing released loan sales to non-GSE whole loan investors and expect to continue to utilize these alternative exit strategies for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac eligible loans. In July 2020, we received notification from Freddie Mac that our eligibility to sell whole loans to Freddie Mac was suspended, without cause. While we believe that the overall volume delivered under purchase commitments to the GSE’s was immaterial for 2019 and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we are committed to operating actively and in good standing with our broad range of capital markets counterparties. We continue to take steps to manage our prepayment speeds to be more consistent with our industry peers and to reestablish the full confidence and delivery mechanisms to our investor base. We seek to satisfy the requirements as outlined by Freddie Mac to achieve reinstatement, while we continue to satisfy our obligations on a timely basis to our other counterparties, as we have done without exception. Despite being in a suspended status with Freddie Mac, we remain an approved originator and/or seller/servicer with the GSE’s, Agencies and Counterparties for agency, non-agency, and government insured or guaranteed loan programs.
We believe that current cash balances, cash flows from our mortgage lending operations, real estate services fees generated from our long-term mortgage portfolio, availability on our warehouse lines of credit and residual interest cash flows from our long-term mortgage portfolio are adequate for our current operating needs based on the current operating environment. We believe the mortgage and real estate services market is volatile, highly competitive and subject to increased regulation. Competition in mortgage lending comes primarily from mortgage bankers, commercial banks, credit unions and other finance companies which operate in our market area as well as throughout the United States. We compete for loans principally on the basis of the interest rates and loan fees we charge, the types of loans we originate and the quality of services we provide to borrowers, brokers and sellers. Additionally, performance of the long-term mortgage portfolio is subject to the current real estate market and economic conditions. Cash flows from our residual interests in securitizations are sensitive to delinquencies, defaults and credit losses associated with the securitized loans. Losses in excess of current estimates will reduce the residual interest cash receipts from our long-term mortgage portfolio.
While we continue to pay our obligations as they become due, the ability to continue to meet our current and long-term obligations is dependent upon many factors, particularly our ability to successfully operate our mortgage lending and real estate services segment and realize cash flows from the long-term mortgage portfolio. Our future financial performance and profitability are dependent in large part upon the ability to expand our mortgage lending platform successfully.
Operational and Market Risks
We are exposed to a variety of operation and market risks which include interest rate risk, credit risk, operational risk, real estate risk, prepayment risk, and liquidity risk.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest Rate Risk-Mortgage Lending. We are exposed to interest rate risks relating to our ongoing mortgage lending operations. We use derivative instruments to manage some of our interest rate risk. However, we do not attempt to hedge interest rate risk completely. Our interest rate risk arises from the financial instruments and positions we hold. This includes mortgage loans held-for-sale, MSRs and derivative financial instruments. These risks are regularly monitored by executive management that identify and manage the sensitivity of earnings or capital to changing interest rates to achieve our overall financial objectives.
Our principal market exposure is to interest rate risk, specifically changes in long-term Treasury rates and mortgage interest rates due to their impact on mortgage-related assets and commitments. We are also exposed to changes in short-term interest rates, such as LIBOR, on certain variable rate borrowings including our term financing and mortgage warehouse borrowings. The withdrawal and replacement of LIBOR with an alternative benchmark rate may introduce a number of risks for our business and the financial services industry. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect any discontinuance, modification or other reforms to LIBOR or any other reference rate, or the establishment of alternative reference rates will have on the Company. Refer to “Risk Factors” for additional discussion regarding risks associated with the replacement of LIBOR.
Our business is subject to variability in results of operations in both the mortgage origination and mortgage servicing activities due to fluctuations in interest rates. In a declining interest rate environment, we would expect our mortgage production activities’ results of operations to be positively impacted by higher loan origination volumes and gain on sale margins. Furthermore, with declining rates, we would expect the market value of our MSRs to decline due to higher actual and projected loan prepayments related to our loan servicing portfolio. Conversely, in a rising interest rate environment, we would expect a negative impact on the results of operations of our mortgage production activities but a positive impact on the market values of our MSRs. The interaction between the results of operations of our mortgage activities is a core component of our overall interest rate risk strategy.
We utilize a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the fair value of MSRs and the impact of parallel interest rate shifts on MSRs. The primary assumptions in this model are prepayment speeds, discount rates, costs of servicing and default rates. However, this analysis ignores the impact of interest rate changes on certain material variables, such as the benefit or detriment on the value of future loan originations, non-parallel shifts in the spread relationships between MBS, swaps and U.S. Treasury rates and changes in primary and secondary mortgage market spreads. We use a forward yield curve, which we believe better presents fair value of MSRs because the forward yield curve is the market’s expectation of future interest rates based on its expectation of inflation and other economic conditions.
Interest rate lock commitments (IRLCs) represent an agreement to extend credit to a mortgage loan applicant, or an agreement to purchase a loan from a third-party originator, whereby the interest rate on the loan is set prior to funding. Our mortgage loans held-for-sale, which are held in inventory awaiting sale into the secondary market, and our interest rate lock commitments, are subject to changes in mortgage interest rates from the date of the commitment through the sale of the loan into the secondary market. As such, we are exposed to interest rate risk and related price risk during the period from the date of the lock commitment through the earlier of (i) the lock commitment cancellation or expiration date; or (ii) the date of sale into the secondary mortgage market. Loan commitments generally range between 15 and 60 days; and our holding period of the mortgage loan from funding to sale is typically within 15 - 45 days for agency loans and 45 - 75 days for NonQM loans.
We manage the interest rate risk associated with our outstanding IRLCs and mortgage loans held-for-sale by entering into derivative loan instruments such as forward loan sales commitments or To-Be-Announced mortgage backed securities (TBA Forward Commitments). We expect these derivatives will experience changes in fair value opposite to changes in fair value of the derivative IRLCs and mortgage loans held-for-sale, thereby reducing earnings volatility. We take into account various factors and strategies in determining the portion of the mortgage pipeline (derivative loan commitments) and mortgage loans held-for-sale we want to economically hedge. Our expectation of how many of our IRLCs will ultimately close is a key factor in determining the notional amount of derivatives used in hedging the position.
Mortgage loans held-for-sale are financed by our warehouse lines of credit which generally carry variable rates. Mortgage loans held-for-sale are carried on our consolidated balance sheets on average for only 15 to 45 days after closing and prior to being sold. As a result, we believe that any negative impact related to our variable rate warehouse borrowings resulting from a shift in market interest rates would not be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Interest Rate Risk-Securitized Trusts and Long-term Debt. Our earnings from the long-term mortgage portfolio depend largely on our interest rate spread, represented by the relationship between the yield on our interest-earning assets (primarily securitized mortgage collateral) and the cost of our interest-bearing liabilities (primarily securitized mortgage borrowings and long-term debt). Our interest rate spread is impacted by several factors, including general economic factors, forward interest rates and the credit quality of mortgage loans in the long-term mortgage portfolio.
The residual interests in our long-term mortgage portfolio are sensitive to changes in interest rates on securitized mortgage collateral and the related securitized mortgage borrowings. Changes in interest rates can affect the cash flows and fair values of our trust assets and liabilities, as well as our earnings and stockholders’ equity.
We are also subject to interest rate risk on our long-term debt (consisting of junior subordinated notes). These interest bearing liabilities include adjustable rate periods based on three-month LIBOR plus a margin (junior subordinated notes). We do not currently hedge our exposure to the effect of changing interest rates related to these interest-bearing liabilities. Significant fluctuations in interest rates could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
Credit Risk
We provide representations and warranties to purchasers and insurers of the loans sold that typically are in place for the life of the loan. In the event of a breach of these representations and warranties, we may be required to repurchase a mortgage loan or indemnify the purchaser, and any subsequent loss on the mortgage loan may be borne by us unless we have recourse to our correspondent seller.
We maintain a reserve for losses on loans repurchased or indemnified as a result of breaches of representations and warranties on our sold loans. Our estimate is based on our most recent data regarding loan repurchases and indemnity payments, actual losses on repurchased loans, and recovery history, among other factors. Our assumptions are affected by factors both internal and external in nature. Internal factors include, among other things, level of loan sales, the expectation of credit loss on repurchases and indemnifications, our success rate at appealing repurchase demands and our ability to recover any losses from third parties. External factors that may affect our estimate includes, among other things, the overall economic condition in the housing market, the economic condition of borrowers, the political environment at investor agencies and the overall U.S. and world economy. Many of the factors are beyond our control and may lead to judgments that are susceptible to change.
Counterparty Credit Risk. We are exposed to counterparty credit risk in the event of non-performance by counterparties to various agreements. We monitor our counterparties and currently do not anticipate losses due to counterparty non-performance. As of December 31, 2020, we believe there were no significant concentrations of credit risk related to our exposure with any individual counterparty.
Credit Risk-Securitized Trusts. We manage credit risk by actively managing delinquencies and defaults through our servicers. Starting with the second half of 2007 we have not retained any additional mortgages in our long-term mortgage portfolio. Our securitized mortgage collateral primarily consists of non-conforming mortgages which when originated were generally within typical Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guidelines but had loan characteristics, which may have included higher loan balances, higher loan-to-value ratios or lower documentation requirements (including stated-income loans), that made them non-conforming under those guidelines.
Using historical losses, current portfolio statistics and market conditions and available market data, we have estimated future loan losses on the long- term mortgage portfolio, which are included in the fair value adjustment to our securitized mortgage collateral. The credit performance for the loans has been clearly far worse than our initial expectations when the loans were originated. We have seen some restoration of real estate values, however the ultimate level of realized losses will largely be influenced by local real estate conditions in areas where underlying properties are located, including the recovery of the housing market and overall strength of the economy. If market conditions deteriorate in excess of our expectations, we may need to recognize additional fair value reductions to our securitized mortgage collateral, which may also affect the value of the related securitized mortgage borrowings and residual interests.
We monitor our servicers to attempt to ensure that they perform loss mitigation, foreclosure and collection functions according to their servicing practices and each securitization trust’s pooling and servicing agreement. We have met with the management of our servicers to assess our borrowers’ current ability to pay their mortgages and to make arrangements with selected delinquent borrowers which will result in the best interest of the trust and borrower, in an effort to minimize the number of mortgages which become seriously delinquent. When resolving delinquent mortgages, servicers are required to take timely action. The servicer is required to determine payment collection under various circumstances, which will result in the maximum financial benefit. This is accomplished by either working with the borrower to bring the mortgage current by modifying the loan with terms that will maximize the recovery or by foreclosing and liquidating the property. At a foreclosure sale, the trusts consolidated on our consolidated balance sheets generally acquire title to the property.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is inherent in our business practices and related support functions. Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes or systems, human factors or external events. Operational risk may occur in any of our business activities and can manifest itself in various ways including, but not limited to, errors resulting from business process failures, material disruption in business activities, system breaches and misuse of sensitive information and failures of outsourced business processes. These events could result in non-compliance with laws or regulations, regulatory fines and penalties, litigation or other financial losses, including potential losses resulting from lost
client relationships.
Our business is subject to extensive regulation by federal, state and local government authorities, which require us to operate in accordance with various laws, regulations, and judicial and administrative decisions. While we are not a bank, our business subjects us to both direct and indirect banking supervision (including examinations by our clients' regulators), and each client may require a unique compliance model. In recent years, there have been a number of developments in laws and regulations that have required, and will likely continue to require, widespread changes to our business. The frequent introduction of new rules, changes to the interpretation or application of existing rules, increased focus of regulators, and near-zero defect performance expectations have increased our operational risk related to compliance with laws and regulations.
Our operational risk includes managing risks relating to information systems and information security. As a service provider, we actively utilize technology and information systems to operate our business and support business development. We also must safeguard the confidential personal information of our customers, as well as the confidential personal information of the employees and customers of our clients. We consider industry best practices to manage our technology risk, and we continually develop and enhance the controls, processes and systems to protect our information systems and data from unauthorized access.
To monitor and control this risk, we have established policies, procedures and a controls framework that are designed to provide sound and consistent risk management processes and transparent operational risk reporting.
Real Estate Risk
Residential property values are subject to volatility and may be negatively affected by numerous factors, including, but not limited to, national, regional and local economic conditions such as unemployment and interest rate environment; local real estate conditions including housing inventory and foreclosures; and demographic factors. Decreases in property values reduce the value of the collateral securing and the potential proceeds available to a borrower to repay our loans, which could cause us to suffer losses.
Prepayment Risk
Prepayment speed is a measurement of how quickly UPB is reduced. Items reducing UPB include normal monthly loan principal payments, loan refinancing’s, voluntary property sales and involuntary property sales such as foreclosures or short sales. Prepayment speed impacts future servicing fees, fair value of mortgage servicing rights and float income. When prepayment speed increases, our servicing fees decrease faster than projected due to the shortened life of a portfolio. Faster prepayment speeds will cause our mortgage servicing rights fair value to decrease.
We historically used prepayment penalties as a method of partially mitigating prepayment risk for those borrowers that have the ability to refinance. The economic downturn, lack of available credit and declines in property values in certain parts of the country have limited some borrowers’ ability to refinance. These factors have reduced prepayment risk within our long-term mortgage portfolio. With the seasoning of the long-term mortgage portfolio, prepayment penalties terms have expired, thereby eliminating prepayment penalty income.
Liquidity Risk
We are exposed to liquidity risks relating to our ongoing mortgage lending operations. We primarily fund our mortgage lending originations through warehouse facilities with third-party lenders and MSR financing facilities. Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information regarding liquidity.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
When we sell or broker loans through whole-loan sales, we are required to make normal and customary representations and warranties to the loan originators or purchasers, including guarantees against early payment defaults typically 90 days, and fraudulent misrepresentations by the borrowers. Our agreements generally require us to repurchase loans if we breach a representation or warranty given to the loan purchaser. In addition, we may be required to repurchase loans as a result of borrower fraud or if a payment default occurs on a mortgage loan shortly after its sale. Because the loans are no longer on our consolidated balance sheets, the representations and warranties are considered a guarantee.
During 2020, we sold $3.3 billion of loans subject to representations and warranties. At December 31, 2020, we had $7.1 million in repurchase reserve as compared to a reserve of $9.0 million as December 31, 2019.
See disclosures in the notes to the consolidated financial statements under “Commitments and Contingencies” for other arrangements that qualify as off balance sheets arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
As a smaller reporting company, we are not required to provide the information required by this Item.