Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). The forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements are identified by words such as “anticipates”, “believes”, “expects”, “intends”, “may”, “can”, “will”, “places”, “estimates”, and other similar expressions. However, these words are not the only way we identify forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements include any expectations, projections, or other characterizations of future events, or circumstances, and include statements regarding: the impact of COVID-19 on our business, including as to revenue, and potential cost reduction measures, and the impact of COVID-19 on our customers, suppliers, and on the economy in general; our strategy and our ability to execute our business plan; our competition and the market in which we operate; our customers and suppliers; our revenue and the recognition and components thereof; our costs and expenses; including capital expenditures; seasonality and demand; our investment in research and technology development; changes to general and administrative expenses; our foreign operations and the reinvestment of our earnings related thereto; our investment in and protection of our IP; our employees; capital expenditures and the sufficiency of our capital resources; unrecognized tax benefit and tax liabilities; the impact of changes in interest rates and foreign exchange rates, as well as our plans with respect to foreign currency hedging in general; changes in laws and regulations; including with respect to taxes; our plans related to and the impact of current and future litigation; our sublease and the timing and income related thereto; and our stock repurchase program.
Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict and many of which are outside of our control. Actual results could differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements, therefore we caution you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements include, among others, the following: the effects of the COVID-19 global pandemic on us and our business, and on the business of our suppliers and customers; unanticipated changes in the markets in which we operate; the effects of the current macroeconomic climate (especially in light of the ongoing adverse effects of the COVID-19 global pandemic); delay in or failure to achieve adoption of or commercial demand for our products or third party products incorporating our technologies; the inability of Immersion to renew existing licensing arrangements, or enter into new licensing arrangements for our patents and other technologies on favorable terms; the loss of a major customer; the ability of Immersion to protect and enforce our intellectual property rights; unanticipated difficulties and challenges in developing or acquiring successful innovations and our ability to patent those innovations; changes in patent law; confusion as to our licensing model or agreement terms; the ability of Immersion to return to consistent profitability in the future; the inability of Immersion to retain or recruit necessary personnel; the commencement, by others or by us, of legal or administrative action; risks related to our international operations and other factors.
Any forward-looking statements made by us in this report speak only as of the date of this report, and we do not intend to update these forward-looking statements after the filing of this report, unless required to do so by applicable law. You are urged to review carefully and consider our various disclosures in this report and in our other reports publicly disclosed or filed with the SEC that attempt to advise you of the risks and factors that may affect our business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions, including those related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, short-term investments, leases, income taxes and contingencies. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions.
We believe the following are our most critical accounting policies as they require our significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is primarily derived from fixed fee license agreements and per-unit royalty agreements, along with less significant revenue earned from development, services and other revenue.
Fixed fee license revenue
In certain contracts, we grant a fixed fee license to our existing patent portfolio at the inception of the license agreement as well as rights to the portfolio as it evolves throughout the contract term. For such arrangements, we have two separate performance obligations:
•Performance Obligation A - Transfer rights to our patent portfolio as it exists when the contract is executed;
•Performance Obligation B - Transfer rights to our patent portfolio as it evolves over the term of the contract, including access to new patent applications that the licensee can benefit from over the term of the contract.
For fixed fee license agreements that contain both Performance Obligation A and B, we will allocate the transaction price based on the standalone price for each of the two performance obligations. We use a number of factors primarily related to the attributes of our patent portfolio to estimate standalone prices related to Performance Obligation A and B to perform this allocation.
Per-unit Royalty revenue
As we generally do not receive the per-unit licensee royalty reports for sales during a given quarter within the time frame that allows us to adequately review the reports and include the actual amounts in our quarterly results for such quarter, we accrue the related revenue based on estimates of our licensees’ underlying sales, subject to certain constraints on our ability to estimate such amounts. We develop such estimates based on a combination of available data including, but not limited to, approved customer forecasts, a lookback at historical royalty reporting for each of our customers, and industry information available for the licensed products.
As a result of accruing per-unit royalty revenue for the quarter based on such estimates, adjustments will be required in the following quarter to true up revenue to the actual amounts reported by our licensees. The true-ups represent the difference between per-unit royalty based on actual sales reported by our licensees in a quarter-lag, and the estimate of per-unit royalty that was reported in the same quarter the underlying sales occurred.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is the vesting period.
Valuation and amortization methods - We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model, single-option approach to determine the fair value of standard stock options and Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) shares. All share-based payment awards are amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which are generally the vesting periods. Stock-based compensation expense recognized at fair value includes the impact of estimated forfeitures. We estimate future forfeitures at the date of grant and revise the estimates if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from these estimates. The determination of the fair value of stock-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as other business assumptions. These variables include actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors that impact the expected term, our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends.
We use the Monte-Carlo Simulation model to value our stock options and RSUs with a market condition. Valuation techniques such as the Monte-Carlo Simulation model have been developed to value path-dependent awards. The Monte-Carlo Simulation model is a generally accepted statistical technique used, in this instance, to simulate a range of our future stock prices.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense in future periods, or if we decide to use a different valuation model, the future periods may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period and could materially affect our operating results.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes as prescribed in ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes, tax losses, and credit carryforwards. This method requires a reduction of the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. Accordingly, the need to establish valuation allowances for deferred tax assets is assessed periodically based on the ASC 740 more-likely-than-not realization (“MLTN”) threshold criterion. This assessment considers matters such as future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. The evaluation of the recoverability of the deferred tax assets requires that we weigh all positive and negative evidence to reach a conclusion that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The weight given to the evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified.
Our judgments, assumptions, and estimates relative to the current provision for income tax take into account current tax laws including the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”), our interpretation of current tax laws, and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. We have established reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. Although we believe our judgments, assumptions, and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and any future tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements.
Our assumptions, judgments, and estimates relative to the value of a deferred tax asset take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations or capital gains income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render inaccurate our current assumptions, judgments, and estimates of recoverable net deferred tax assets. Any of the assumptions, judgments, and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations.
As disclosed in Note 5. Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we have made deposit payments to reimburse both Samsung and LGE for withholding taxes and related penalties paid by them as a result of assessments they have received from the South Korean tax authorities. These payments are recorded as Long-term deposits on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We believe that it is more likely than not that we will be reimbursed by both Samsung and LGE to the extent we ultimately prevail in the appeal in the Korean courts. We regularly assess the likelihood that we will prevail in these cases against the South Korean tax authorities and consequently the likelihood that these deposits will be recoverable. In the event that we do not ultimately prevail in our appeal in the Korean courts, the deposits included in Long-term deposits would be recorded as additional income tax expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss), in the period in which we do not ultimately prevail.
We are a U.S.-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. Certain portions of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the United States, we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries’ earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the United States. Our income tax rate depends in part on the extent to which our foreign earnings may be taxed by the U.S. through new provisions under the Tax Act such as the new Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) tax or as a result of our indefinite reinvestment assertion. Indefinite reinvestment is determined by management’s judgment about and intentions concerning our future operations.
Unanticipated changes in our tax rates could affect our future results of operations. Our future effective tax rates could be unfavorably affected by changes in the tax rates in jurisdictions where our income is earned, by changes in, our estimates related to, or our interpretation of, tax rules and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we do business, by unanticipated decreases in the amount of earnings in countries with low statutory tax rates, or by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. Countries in the European Union and other countries where we do business have been considering changes in relevant tax, accounting and other laws, regulations and interpretations, including changes to tax laws applicable to corporate multinationals. We began a reorganization of our corporate organization in 2019 in order to address changing international tax laws.
See Note 8 Income Taxes of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information concerning income taxes.
Results of Operations
Overview of 2020
Total revenues for 2020 were $30.5 million, a decrease of $5.5 million, or 15%, versus 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $7.2 million decrease in fixed fee license revenue partially offset by a $1.7 million increase in per-unit royalty revenue.
In 2020, we had net income of $5.4 million compared to a net loss of $20.0 million in 2019. The $25.4 million increase in net income was mainly related to a $29.2 million, or 51%, decrease in cost and operating expenses partially offset by a $5.5 million decrease in total revenue.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of total revenues:
Revenues
Our revenue is primarily derived from fixed fee license agreements and per-unit royalty agreements, along with less significant revenue earned from development, services and other revenue. Royalty and license revenue is composed of per unit royalties earned based on usage or net sales by licensees and fixed payment license fees charged for our IP and software.
A revenue summary for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows (in thousands, except for percentages):
Royalty and license revenue - Total royalty and license revenue for 2020 was $30.2 million, a $5.5 million, or 15%, decrease compared to $35.6 million for 2019.
Per-unit royalty revenue increased by $1.7 million, or 7%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily caused by a $3.5 million increase in royalties from our mobility licensees and a $0.8 million increase in royalties from our gaming licensees partially offset by a $2.7 million decrease in royalties obtained from our automotive licensees. The increase in mobility royalty revenue was due mainly to per-unit royalty agreements entered into during the second and third quarters of 2019. The increase in gaming revenue was primarily due to a volume increase resulting from a major product release by one of our customers partially offset by the impact of the end of contract adjustment of another licensee in 2019. The decrease in automotive royalty revenue was primarily due to lower shipment volume largely attributable to the impact of COVID-19.
Fixed fee license revenue decreased $7.2 million or 57% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a $5.0 million decrease in mobility license revenue and a $2.0 million decrease in gaming license revenue.
We expect royalty and license revenue to continue to be a major component of our future revenue as our technology is included in products and we succeed in our efforts to monetize our IP. Our fixed fee license revenue could fluctuate depending upon the timing of execution of new fixed license fee arrangements. We also anticipate that our royalty revenue will fluctuate relative to our customers’ unit shipments.
Development, services and other revenue - Development, services, and other revenue was $0.3 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Geographically, revenues generated in Asia, North America and Europe for the year ended December 31, 2020 represented 76%, 16%, and 8%, respectively, of our total revenue as compared to 65%, 28%, and 7%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
A summary of operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
Sales and Marketing - Our sales and marketing expenses primarily consisted of employee compensation and benefits, sales commissions, advertising, trade shows, collateral marketing materials, market development funds, travel, and allocated facilities costs. Sales and marketing expenses decreased $1.4 million, or 22%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily attributable to a $0.7 million decrease in compensation, benefits, and other related costs, $0.2 million decrease in marketing and advertising costs and a $0.2 million decrease in travel expenses. The decreases in compensation, benefits and other personnel related costs were primarily due to a lower headcount and decreases in variable compensation largely attributable to the cost reduction initiatives implemented during 2020 and delays in execution of some new license agreements due to COVID-19. The decreases in travel costs and marketing and advertising expenses were mainly attributable to reduced business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development - Our research and development expenses primarily consisted of employee compensation and benefits, outside services and consulting fees, tooling and supplies, and allocated facilities costs. Research and development expenses decreased $2.8 million, or 36%, during 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to a $1.9 million decrease in compensation, benefits, and other related costs, a $0.3 million decrease in facilities related costs, a 0.2 million decrease in travel costs and a $0.2 million decrease in outside services costs.
The decrease in compensation, benefits and other personnel related costs was primarily attributable to lower base salaries, a decrease in headcount and a decrease in variable compensation primarily attributable to the completed transition of our research and development function from San Jose, California to Montreal, Canada and the impact of cost reduction initiatives we implemented during 2020. In addition, we received the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy (“CEWS”) and recorded this subsidy as a reduction to compensation expense in the amount of $0.5 million in 2020. The reduction in facilities costs were attributable to lower rent expense following the sublease of the SJ Facility in the second quarter of 2020. The decrease in travel costs were primarily due to reduced business activities during 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 due to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe that continued investment in research and development is critical to our future success, and we expect to continue making targeted investments in areas of research and technology development to support future growth in key markets.
General and Administrative - Our general and administrative expenses primarily consisted of employee compensation and benefits, legal and professional fees, external legal costs for patents, office supplies, travel, and allocated facilities costs. General and administrative expenses decreased $24.9 million, or 58%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to a $18.8 million decrease in legal expenses, a $2.6 million decrease in compensation, benefits and other personnel related costs, a $2.3 million decrease in consulting and professional services.
The decrease in legal expense was primarily attributable to reduced activities following litigation settlements in 2019, as well as a decrease in patent maintenance and prosecution costs. The decrease in compensation, benefits and other personnel related costs was primarily due to lower salaries, variable compensation driven by the transition of our Accounting, Human Resources, Finance and IT functions from San Jose, California to Montreal, Canada and the impact of the COVID-19 related cost reduction initiatives implemented in 2020, partially offset by an increase in severance costs. The decrease in consulting and professional services fees was due to decreases in recruitment fees, accounting and audit fees and consulting and other professional fees in 2020 compared to 2019.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease in the future as we achieve targeted reductions in consulting and professional services, and other costs.
Interest and Other Income, Other Expense
A summary of interest and other income, other expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows (in thousands):
Interest and Other Income - Interest and other income consists primarily of interest income from cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. Interest and other income decreased $1.5 million during 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by a $1.5 million decrease in investment income from cash equivalents and short-term investments due to lower cash equivalents and short-term investments and a decrease in interest rates in 2020 compared to 2019.
Other Income (Expense), Net - Other income (expense),net consists primarily of foreign currency translation gain (loss) due to exchange rate fluctuations. Other income (expense), net increased $0.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to a $0.4 million increase in net foreign currency translation gains.
Benefit From (Provision For) Income Taxes
A summary of benefit from (provision for) income taxes and effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows (in thousands):
In 2020, we recorded a $2.2 million benefit from income taxes yielding an effective tax rate of (71.0)%. The 2020 income tax benefit reflects a one-time deferred tax benefit from the release of valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets of one of our foreign subsidiaries partially offset by estimated foreign income and foreign withholding taxes. Based upon our assessment of the realizability of our deferred tax assets in the United States as of December 31, 2020, we continue to maintain a full valuation allowance against all of our federal and state deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had deferred tax assets totaling $31.1 million and a valuation allowance of $28.5 million, resulting in a net deferred tax asset of $2.6 million.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was passed into law. The CARES Act includes several significant business tax provisions including modification to the taxable income limitation for utilization of net operating losses (“NOLs”) incurred in 2019 and 2020 and the ability to carry back NOLs from those years for a period of up to five years, an increase to the limitation on deductibility of certain business interest expense, bonus depreciation for purchases of qualified improvement property and special deductions on certain corporate charitable contributions. We analyzed the provisions of the CARES Act and determined there was no net effect on our provision for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Act was passed into law. Among other changes, the Tax Act reduced the US federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, required companies to pay a one-time transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously tax deferred and created new taxes on certain foreign sourced earnings. In addition, the Act introduced the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (the “BEAT”), which creates a new tax on certain related-party payments. We concluded that we have not met the threshold requirements of the BEAT. On July 9, 2020, the Internal Revenue Service issued final regulations regarding deductions for global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) and foreign-derived intangible income (“FDII”). On July 9, 2020, the Treasury Department released final regulations ("TD 9901") under IRC Section 250, which allows an annual deduction to a domestic corporation for its foreign-derived intangible income ("FDII") and global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI") inclusion. The final guidance is not expected to have a material impact on our condensed consolidated financial statements. Although the measurement period has closed, further technical guidance related to the Tax
Act, including final regulations on a broad range of topics, is expected to be issued. In accordance with ASC 740, we will recognize any effects of the guidance in the period that such guidance is issued.
In 2019, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $0.5 million yielding an effective tax rate of (2.4)%. The 2019 provision reflects estimated foreign taxes and foreign withholding tax expense. Based upon our assessment of the realizability of our deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2019, we reported a full valuation allowance against all of our federal and state, and certain of our foreign net deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2019, the aggregated balance of our deferred tax assets totaled $28.5 million with a valuation allowance of $28.1 million, resulting in a net deferred tax asset balance of $0.5 million.
As described above, we continue to maintain a valuation allowance of $28.5 million against certain of our deferred tax assets, including all federal, state, and certain foreign deferred tax assets as a result of uncertainties regarding the realization of the asset balance due to historical losses, the variability of operating results, and uncertainty regarding near term projected results. In the event that we determine the deferred tax assets are realizable based on an assessment of relevant factors, an adjustment to the valuation allowance may increase income in the period such determination is made. The valuation allowance does not impact our ability to utilize the underlying net operating loss carryforwards.
We also maintain liabilities for uncertain tax positions. As of December 31, 2020, we had unrecognized tax benefits under ASC 740 of approximately $4.5 million with no applicable interest. We had no unrecognized tax benefits that would affect our effective tax rate, if recognized. Our policy is to account for interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax provision. We do not expect to have any significant changes to unrecognized tax benefits during the next twelve months.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash equivalents, and short-term investments consist primarily of money market funds and U.S. treasury bills. All of our short-term investments are classified as available-for-sale. The securities are stated at market value, with unrealized gains and losses reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income, within stockholders’ equity.
As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments totaled $59.5 million, a decrease of $30.0 million from $89.5 million on December 31, 2019.
A summary of select cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities - Our operating activities primarily consists of net income (loss), adjusted for certain non-cash items including depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes and the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $22,000 during 2020 compared to $34.1 million cash used in operating activities during 2019. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to a $25.4 million decrease in net loss and a $11.8 million change in net operating assets and liabilities partially offset by $4.0 million decrease in noncash items.
Cash provided by investing activities - Our investing activities primarily consist of purchases of and proceeds from maturities of short-term investments and purchases of computer equipment, furniture and leasehold improvements related to facilities expansion.
Net cash provided by investing activities during 2020 was $3.0 million primarily consisting of proceeds from maturities of short-term investments.
Net cash provided by investing activities during 2019 was $10.9 million primarily consisting of $20.0 million in proceeds from maturities of short-term investments partially offset by $8.9 million purchases of short-term investments.
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities - Our financing activities primarily consist of cash proceeds from stock option exercises and stock purchases under our employee stock purchase plan and cash paid for repurchases of our common stock.
Net cash used in financing activities during 2020 was $29.9 million primarily consisting of $30.6 million in cash paid for stock repurchases partially offset by $0.7 million cash proceeds from stock option exercises and stock purchases under our employee stock purchase plan.
Net cash used in financing activities during 2019 was $1.3 million primarily consisting of $2.7 million in cash paid for stock repurchases partially offset by $1.4 million cash proceeds from stock option exercises and stock purchases under our employee stock purchase plan.
Our total cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were $59.5 million as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately 12% ($7.3 million) was held by our foreign subsidiaries and subject to repatriation tax effects. Our intent is to permanently reinvest a majority of our earnings from foreign operations, and current plans do not anticipate that we will need funds generated from foreign operations to fund our domestic operations.
We may continue to invest in, protect, and defend our extensive IP portfolio, which can result in the use of cash in the event of litigation.
In 2020, we repurchased approximately 4.9 million shares of our common stock for approximately $30.6 million at an average cost of $6.21 per share. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts available under our previously approved share repurchase program.
We anticipate that capital expenditures for property and equipment in 2021 will be less than $1.0 million.
While the unprecedented public health and governmental efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have created significant uncertainty as to general economic and capital market conditions for the first half of 2021 and beyond, as of March 5, 2021, the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe we have sufficient capital resources to meet our working capital needs for the next twelve months.
Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to the risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Subsequent Events
On February 3, 2021, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the Securities and Exchange Commission which became effective on February 9, 2021. The shelf registration statement is intended to provide us with financial flexibility to raise capital from the offering of up to $250 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, depository shares, units and/or debt securities, conducted in one or multiple offerings while the shelf registration statement is effective.
We intend to use the net proceeds from the sale of the securities offered by this prospectus for general corporate purposes.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into the Distribution Agreement with an investment banking firm to issue and sell shares up to $50 million in aggregated offering price of our common stock. In accordance with the terms of the Distribution Agreement, we will pay 2.25% commission on the gross sales proceeds from common stock sold, and we will also provide customary indemnification rights and reimburse legal fees and disbursements. The Distribution Agreement may be terminated by either party upon prior written notice to the other party, or at any time under certain circumstances. We are not obligated to sell any shares under the Distribution Agreement.
As of March 3, 2021, we sold 3.3 million shares of our common stock pursuant to the terms of the Distribution Agreement. We received net proceeds of approximately $36.3 million from the sales after deducting commissions and other estimated offering expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the effect of new accounting pronouncements on our financial statements.