ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statements
Some of the information in this section contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as "may," "will," "expect," "anticipate," "believe," "estimate" and "continue," or similar words.
We believe it is important to communicate our expectations. However, there may be events in the future that we are not able to accurately predict or over which we have no control. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless stated otherwise, the words “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” or “Fresh Harvest” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K collectively refers to Fresh Harvest Products, Inc., a New Jersey corporation (the “Parent Company”), and subsidiaries.
Overview
We were formed in New Jersey as a blank check company on April 21, 2005 with no operations, assets or purpose other than the purpose of seeking a privately held operating company as an acquisition or merger candidate. From December 16, 2005 through October 11, 2012, our business plan had been to develop proprietary natural, organic and healthy products to sell, market and distribute. Our goal is to bring healthy, great tasting natural and organic products at affordable prices to the mass markets. We sold our products to select supermarkets chains and retailers in the United States.
We sold our products to consumers at, what we believe are, reasonable prices through local, regional and national supermarkets, retailers, distributors, brokers, and wholesalers. Our strategy was to focus on finding and developing and selling the best organic and natural food products in the world. Part of this strategy is to have the “Wings of Nature™” or “AC LaRocco” names branded on our products, as well acquiring other natural and organic food brands.
During October 2012, the Parent Company began integrating a digital plan and strategy which shifted the Company’s focus to expanding the online network and community, as well as an expansion of online services, with a focus on developing various SaaS models in the health, wellness, fitness, lifestyles of health and sustainability (LOHAS) and healthcare industries.
The Company expects to develop, license and acquire software applications that will generate revenue through subscription fees, in-app upgrades, purchases and advertising. The Company is currently working on several software applications including a calorie calculator and food comparison software solution so that consumers can be informed and compare what foods they are eating and be able to accurately calculate their daily calories per item, as well as compare foods with each other to learn and understand what the healthier options are. The Company is actively seeking strategic partners and acquisition targets in order to grow and expand.
During the fiscal year ended October 31, 2012, we did not generate any revenues as we were integrating our new business model, and developing software products.
As of October 31, 2012, the Company had current assets of $0. The Company has no liquid cash and other liquid assets on hand as of October 31, 2012 and does not have sufficient funds to operate for the next 12 months. Accordingly, we will be required to raise additional funds to meet our short and long-term planned goals. There can be no assurance that such funds, if available at all, can be obtained on terms reasonable to us. In this regard, we have obtained and will continue to attempt to obtain (short and long term) loans for inventory purchases, new product development, expansion, advertising and marketing. We cannot assure you that we will be successful in obtaining the aforementioned financings (either debt or equity) on terms acceptable to us, or otherwise.
Our unaudited financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will be able to realize our assets and discharge our obligations in the normal course of business.
As of and for the years ended October 31, 2012 and 2011, our auditors have expressed substantial doubt we will continue as a going concern.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ending October 31, 2012 and October 31, 2011
Financial Information from Comparative Fiscal Year Periods
For the year ended October 31, 2012, we recorded gross revenues of $0 versus $0 for an increase of $0 or 0% over the year ended October 31, 2011, net of discontinued operations.
For the year ended October 31, 2012, gross profit was $0 versus $0 for a 0% change year ended October 31, 2011, net of discontinued operations.
For the year ended October 31, 2012, gross profit in percentages was 0% versus 0% over the year ended October 31, 2011, net of discontinued operations.
For the year ended October 31, 2012, operating expenses was $1,420,092 versus $988,588, an increase of 43.50% over the year ended October 31, 2011, net of discontinued operations. The increase is primarily due to an increase in general and administrative and sales and marketing expenses.
For the year ended October 31, 2012, interest expense on our convertible notes payable decreased to $81,192 from $91,579 or 11.34% over the year ended October 31, 2011. This decrease is primarily due to the conversion of several notes payable during the year ended October 31, 2012.
For the year ended October 31, 2012, we realized a net loss of $1,448,485 as compared to a net loss of $1,101,547 for the year ended October 31, 2011. The increase of 31.5% was due to several factors, including the increases in sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have not been able to finance our business from cash flows from operations and have been reliant upon loans and proceeds from the sale of equity which may not be available to us in the future, or if available, on reasonable terms. Accordingly, if we are unable to obtain funding from loans and the sale of our equity, it is unlikely that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
As of October 31, 2012, we had current assets of $0 and we had total liabilities of $2,100,017.
Currently, we do not have sufficient financial resources to implement or complete our business plan. We cannot be assured that revenue from operations will be sufficient to fund our activities during the next 12 months. Accordingly, we will have to seek alternate sources of capital. We can offer no assurance that we will be able to raise such funds on acceptable terms to us or otherwise. If we are unsuccessful in our attempts to raise sufficient capital, we may have to cease operations or postpone our plans to initiate or complete our business plan. Our insolvent financial condition also may create a risk that we may be forced to file for protection under applicable bankruptcy laws or state insolvency statutes. We also may face the risk that a receiver may be appointed. We face that risk and other risks resulting from our current financial condition. For these and other reasons, our management recognizes the adverse difficulties and continuing severe challenges we face. Apart from the limited funds that we have received there can be no assurance that we will receive any financing or funding from any source or if any financing should be obtained, that existing shareholders will not incur substantial, immediate, and permanent dilution of their existing investment.
If we are unable to raise the required financing, we may have to cease operations. Currently, we have a limited credit history with vendors, suppliers, manufacturers, packagers and food producers; we must pay for our purchases “up front” and are not granted credit terms. This will continue until we have established a satisfactory credit history. We cannot estimate, with any certainty, how long this may take, or if it will occur at all. Our inability to obtain credit from such providers has a significant impact upon our liquidity and our ability to utilize funds for other purposes. Similarly, if and when we hire additional personnel, including management and sales personnel, the cost related to such hiring will have a significant impact on our liquidity and deployment of funds.
As of October 31, 2012, the Company owed the Internal Revenue Service and New York State payroll related taxes in the amounts of $135,875 and $30,045, respectively, plus applicable interest and penalties. The total amount due to both taxing authorities including penalties and interest as of October 31, 2012 was $165,959 subject to further penalties and interest plus accruals on unpaid wages. The Internal Revenue Service has placed a federal tax lien on all of the assets of the Company.
On September 6, 2011, the Parent Company filed, with the Secretary of State of the State of New Jersey, a Certificate of Amendment to the Parent Company’s Certificate of Incorporation to increase the authorized number of shares of the Company’s common stock to 2,000,000,000 shares.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a significant impact on our results of operations for the periods presented.
Material Agreements
On October 11, 2012, Fresh Harvest Products, Inc. (referred to herein as the “Company”, “we”, “us” and “our”), the Company, AC LaRocco, Inc., the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Subsidiary”), ACL Foods, LLC (“Foods”), and Rose & Shore, Inc. (“R&S”), entered into an agreement (the “Agreement”) pursuant to which the parties have agreed to enter into a transaction whereby (i) Foods & R&S release the Company and the Subsidiary from their respective debt obligations to Foods & R&S, including the Secured Promissory Note, the Security Agreement, the Tri-party Agreement, the Assignment and License Agreement (between the Subsidiary and R&S), the Accounts Collection “Lock Box Agreement (between the Subsidiary and R&S), and the personal guaranty of the Subsidiaries obligations to R&S executed by Michael Friedman, the Company’s President & CEO; and, (ii) Foods shall assume obligations and fees due R&S and a certain food broker for a retail client of Subsidiary’s, in consideration for the assignment to Foods of the rights, title and interest in certain intellectual property rights of Subsidiary and R&S. Each of the parties had been or were a manufacturer (or related to manufacturer) of Subsidiary, up to the date of these Agreements, and both parties were creditors of Subsidiary.
Consulting Agreement
On October 11, 2012, the Company and Foods entered into a consulting agreement (the “Consulting Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company shall perform consulting services to Better For You Foods, LLC (“BFY”), for a fee of $50,000 upon the occurrence of a change in control, which is defined as the occurrence of any transaction that results in the affiliates of BFY no longer having direct or indirect control of at least 50% of the then voting powers of BFY.
Assignment of Property Agreement
On October 11, 2012, the Company, the Subsidiary, R&S and Foods entered into an Assignment of Intellectual Property Agreement pursuant to which the Company and the Subsidiary transferred to Foods at the Closing all of the Company’s and the Subsidiary’s right, title and interest in and to certain AC LaRocco brand properties, including without limitation all trademarks, trade names, copyrights, intellectual property rights and other related rights thereto (the “Transferred Property”).
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, including the recoverability of tangible and intangible assets, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the periods covered.
A summary of accounting policies that have been applied to the historical financial statements can be found in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. The most significant estimates relate to deferred financing and issuance costs, and the fair value of financial instruments. We base our estimates on historical company and industry experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which, form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ materially from those estimates.
The following is a brief discussion of our critical accounting policies and methods, and the judgments and estimates used by us in their application.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Because of the use of estimates inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results may differ significantly from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company maintains cash balances in a non-interest bearing account that currently does not exceed federally insured limits. For the purpose of the statements of cash flows, all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less are considered to be cash equivalents.
Net Loss Per Share Calculation
Basic net loss per common share ("EPS") is computed by dividing income available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per shares is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average shares outstanding, assuming all dilutive potential common shares were issued.
Revenue Recognition and Sales Incentives
Sales will be recognized when an online transaction is processed, which occurs when a user of one of software products purchases the products online or in an app. Sales are reported net of sales incentives, which could include discounts and promotions.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is the total of the current taxes payable and the net of the change in the deferred income taxes. Provision is made for the deferred income taxes where differences exist between the period in which transactions affect current taxable income and the period in which they enter into the determination of net income in the financial statements.
Advertising
Advertising is expensed when incurred.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments, including accounts payable are reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements at carrying value, which approximates fair value because of the short-term maturity of these instruments.
Share-based compensation
The Company accounts for common stock issued to employees, directors, and consultants in accordance with the provisions of the ASC 718 Stock Based Compensation. The compensation cost relating to share-based payment transactions will be recognized in the consolidated financial statements. The cost associated with common stock issued to employees, directors and consultants will recognized, at fair value, on the date issued. Awards granted to non-employee consultants will be subsequently re-measured to current fair value until performance is completed or a performance commitment exists.
For the years ended October 31, 2012 and 2011, the Company recognized $0 and $252,500 in stock based compensation expense.
Accounting for Uncertain Tax Positions
The Parent Company and or its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various state, and local jurisdictions. The Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal income tax examination by tax authorities for the years prior to October 31, 2006. With respect to state and local jurisdictions, with limited exception, the Parent Company and or its subsidiaries are no longer subject to income tax audits prior to October 31, 2007. In the normal course of business, the Company is subject to examination by various taxing authorities. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the Company believes that adequate amounts of tax, interest and penalties have been provided for any adjustments that may result from these open tax years.
As of October 31, 2012, based on Management’s review of the Company’s tax position, the Parent Company and or subsidiaries had no significant unrecognized tax liabilities