Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
General
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our discussion of cautionary statements and significant risks to the company’s business under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Revenue, Direct Expenses and Gross Margin
The Company had no revenue and incurred no direct expenses during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Direct expenses include the cost of finished product sold from the Company’s contract manufacturers, sales incentives, associated travel, and inventory return charges.
Research and Development
R&D expenses consist of payments made to contractors for services related to research and product development, product development costs, payments made for patents and licenses to which the Company has acquired rights to use. The Company’s spending on R&D has been primarily to maintain patents and licenses.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include salary and benefit costs for employees and contractors included in general and administrative functions, professional services, insurance, travel expenses, telecommunications, and office expenses. Professional services consist principally of external legal, audit, tax and other consulting services.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) consists of interest expense on borrowings, finance charges reflecting with debt issuance costs and changes in fair market value of derivative liabilities. During the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a non-cash gain upon the assignment of certain debt agreements with Cytocom.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of its results of operations. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Company’s Board of Directors. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout this section where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. Our preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates and such differences may be material.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). This standard requires all leases that have a term of over 12 months to be recognized on the balance sheet with the liability for lease payments and the corresponding right-of-use asset initially measured at the present value of amounts expected to be paid over the term. At December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company had no leases to which the standard applies.
At December 31, 2020, the Company was a party to an agreement to a short-term operating lease for office space in Orlando, Florida. This agreement allows for cancellation with thirty days’ notice. Rental expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $3,000 and $12,661, respectively.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from such estimates.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk are primarily cash and cash equivalents. The Company is exposed to credit risk, subject to federal deposit insurance, in the event of a default by the financial institutions holding its cash and cash equivalents to the extent of amounts recorded on the balance sheets. The cash accounts are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation up to $250,000. At December 31, 2020, the Company has no cash balances in excess of insured limits.
Segment and Geographic Information
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete information is available for evaluation by the chief operating decision maker, or decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. The Company views its operations and manages its business in one operating segment and does not segment the business for internal reporting or decision making.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
In accordance with the reporting requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 825, “Financial Instruments”, the Company calculates the fair value of its assets and liabilities which qualify as financial instruments under this standard and includes this additional information in the notes to the financial statements when the fair value is different than the carrying value of those financial instruments. Cash, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities are accounted for at cost which approximates fair value due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. The carrying value of notes payable also approximate fair value since they bear market rates of interest and other terms. None of these instruments are held for trading purposes.
Derivative Financial Instruments
FASB ASC 815, Fair Value Measurements requires bifurcation of certain embedded derivative instruments in certain debt or equity instruments, and measurement at their fair value for accounting purposes. A holder redemption feature embedded in the Company’s note payable requires bifurcation from its host instrument and is accounted for as a freestanding derivative.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred and are comprised of fees paid to consultants and patent related costs.
Income Taxes
The Company follows ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the financial statements and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the asset will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
The standard addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under ASC Topic 740, the Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. ASC Topic 740 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures. At the date of adoption, and as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company does not have a liability for unrecognized tax uncertainties. The Company’s policy is to record interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions as income tax expense. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company has not accrued any interest or penalties related to uncertain tax positions.
Stock-Based Compensation and Issuance of Stock for Non-Cash Consideration
The Company measures and recognizes compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors based on estimated fair values equaling either the market value of the shares issued, or the value of consideration received, whichever is more readily determinable. Generally, the non-cash consideration pertains to services rendered by consultants and others and has been valued at the fair value of the Company’s common stock at the date of the agreement.
The Company’s accounting policy for equity instruments issued to consultants and vendors in exchange for goods and services follows the provisions of ASC Topic 505-50, “Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees.” The measurement date for the fair value of the equity instruments issued is determined at the earlier of (i) the date at which a commitment for performance by the consultant or vendor is reached or (ii) the date at which the consultant or vendor’s performance is complete.
The Company did not grant any stock-based compensation awards during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net Income (Loss) per Share
Basic net income (loss) per share is calculated by dividing the net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period, without consideration for common stock equivalents.
The Company’s potentially dilutive securities, which include warrants and potential common shares issuable under certain convertible notes, have been included in the computation of diluted net income per share for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020. Net income per share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, was calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted-average number of common share outstanding for the period determined using the treasury-stock method and the if-converted method.
For the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2019, the potentially dilutive securities were excluded from the computation of diluted loss per share as the effect would be to reduce the net loss per common share. Therefore, the weighted-average common stock outstanding used to calculate both basic and diluted net loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues (dollar amounts in thousands):
We had no revenues from operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (dollar amounts in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
In 2020, selling, general and administrative expense was $760, compared to $2,368 for 2019, a decrease of $1,608 or 68%. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, selling, general and administrative expenses were made up as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense was attributable primarily to the reduction in payroll costs and on cost of legal and board fees as the Company has effected a realignment of its corporate strategy in 2020.
Research and development
R&D expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
R&D is overseen and managed internally, working with individuals, and universities in order to utilize patents that we have sub-licensed or acquired since our inception. We continue to seek to expand our pipeline of patents by reviewing other compounds, technologies, or capabilities. We also seek out promising compounds and innovative technologies developed by third parties to incorporate into our discovery and development processes or projects.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, research and development expenses were made up as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
Expenses for research and development decreased by 63% compared to expenses in the same period 2019. The change was primarily due to higher professional fees incurred in 2020 offset by reduced patent related expenses in the current year.
Stock issued for services
The cost of stock issued for services was zero in 2020 and $131 in 2019. The decrease in expense reflects that no such professional services were paid by the issuance of common stock in 2020. The number of shares issued for consulting services in 2019 was 3,300.
Warrant valuation expense
The Company did not issue any warrants in 2020. In 2019, the Company issued 14,600 warrants as part of notes payable at an exercise price of $5, for which it recorded a $0 warrant expense.
When the Company sells its stock to stockholders for cash, it periodically issues common stock warrants to certain stockholders to acquire additional stock at prices agreed at the date of the original sale. The Company incurs a cost for the rights attached to the warrants, which is calculated using the Black-Scholes Model. This expense is reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations above as the Warrant valuation expense.
Depreciation and amortization
All Fixed Assets of the Company were fully depreciated at December 31, 2020. The Company amortizes the costs incurred to acquire capitalized assets over the estimated useful life of the associated asset.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
Interest expense is comprised of loan origination fees and interest owed by the Company. The decrease year over year was attributable to the lower level of debt in the Company. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company assigned notes payable aggregating $2,728,731 to Cytocom.
Gain/(Loss) on assignment of certain debt and liabilities (dollar amounts in thousands):
The Company recorded $3,502,280 in 2020 recognizing a non-cash gain on the settlement of certain debt and liabilities with the assignment of these to Cytocom. The Company recorded no gain or loss in 2019 on such assignments.
Liquidity:
Liquidity is measured by the Company’s ability to secure enough cash to meet its contractual and operating needs as they arise. The Company had cash of $9,971 at December 31, 2020 compared to $4,925 at December 31, 2019.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash used in operating activities was $191,954 and $934, respectively. The Company had no cash inflows or outflows for investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. During 2020 the Company received proceeds of $197,000 from notes issuances. In 2019, the Company was able to cover its operating and investing cash-flow requirements through its existing cash balances and without the need to issue notes payable or to sell equity.
The Company cannot be certain that it will generate sufficient cash flows for the next 12 months to pay for operating expenses and to pay off current and past-due obligations. The Company expects to fund operations through sales of equity and notes payable, and conversions of exiting obligations into equity. Over the next 12 months, the Company believes it will require between $500,000 and $1,000,000 to meet its ongoing expenses and obligations.
If the Company is unable to generate sufficient cash flows from sales, or if it does not raise additional working capital to meet all its operating obligations and expenditures, the Company may have to modify its business plan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in item 303(a)(4) of the SEC’s Regulation S-K.