Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report. As used in this report, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” our” or “the Company” refer to Immunic, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing a pipeline of selective oral immunology therapies aimed at treating chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, including relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis ("RRMS"), ulcerative colitis ("UC"), Crohn’s disease ("CD") and psoriasis. We are headquartered in New York with our main operations in Gräfelfing, Germany. We currently have 28 employees.
We are currently pursuing three development programs, all orally available small molecule inhibitors in the clinical development phase. These include the IMU-838 program, which is focused on the development of oral formulations of small molecule inhibitors of the enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (“DHODH”); the IMU-935 program, which is focused on an inverse agonist of RORγt, an immune cell-specific isoform of retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor gamma (“RORγ”), and the IMU-856 program, which involves the development of a drug targeting the restoration of intestinal barrier function. These product candidates are being developed to address diseases such as RRMS, UC, CD, and psoriasis. In addition to these large markets, these products are also being developed to address certain rare diseases with high unmet medical needs, such as primary sclerosing cholangitis (“PSC”), and Guillain-Barré syndrome (“GBS”). We are also investigating IMU-838 as a potential treatment option for coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”).
We have incurred net losses since inception of $103.9 million through December 31, 2020. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. Due to the uncertainties involved with therapeutic product development and the clinical trial process, we cannot predict the timing or level of future expenses with certainty, when product approval might occur, if ever, or when profitability may be achieved or sustained.
Recent Events
1. $50M At-the-Market Offering
In December 2020, we filed a Prospectus Supplement for the offering, issuance and sale of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $50.0 million of common stock that may be issued and sold under an additional at-the-market sales agreement with SVB Leerink LLC (“SVB Leerink”) as agent (the "December 2020 ATM"). We intend to use the net proceeds from the offering to continue to fund the ongoing clinical development of our product candidates and for other general corporate purposes, including funding existing and potential new clinical programs and product candidates. The December 2020 ATM will terminate upon the earlier of (i) the issuance and sale of all of the shares through SVB Leerink on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the December 2020 ATM or (ii) termination of the December 2020 ATM as otherwise permitted thereby. The December 2020 ATM may be terminated at any time by either party upon ten days’ prior notice, or by SVB Leerink at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material adverse effect on us. As of December 31, 2020, $50.0 million in capacity remains under the December 2020 ATM. The prior at-the-market sales agreement between the Company and SVB Leerink, dated as of July 17, 2019, which provides for the offer and sale of common stock from time to time having an aggregate offering price of up to $40.0 million (the “July 2019 ATM”), remains in effect.
2. Shelf Registration Statement
In November 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “2020 Shelf Registration Statement”), which became effective in November 2020. The 2020 Shelf Registration Statement permits the offering, issuance and sale of up to $250.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, debt securities, and/or units in one or more offerings and in any combination of the foregoing.
3. Loan Agreement with The European Investment Bank
On October 19, 2020, we and Immunic AG entered into a Finance Contract with the European Investment Bank (“EIB”), pursuant to which EIB agreed to provide Immunic AG with a term loan in an aggregate amount of up to €24.5 million to
support the development of our lead asset, IMU-838, in moderate COVID-19, to be made available to be drawn in three tranches, with the second and third tranches subject to the completion of certain pre-defined milestones. We have the right to defer payment of principal and interest on the first and second tranches until five years after the respective borrowing dates, at which point such tranches must be repaid in full. The third tranche is repayable in annual installments commencing one year after its respective borrowing date and must be repaid in full no later than five years after such date. Any outstanding borrowings under the Loan Agreement will accrue interest as provided in the Loan Agreement.
From January 1, 2021 until December 31, 2030, we and Immunic AG are also obligated to pay EIB a very low single digit percentage of our revenue, as set forth in the Loan Agreement, subject to certain conditions and limitations tied to the total amount drawn under the Loan Agreement and subject to a cap of €8.6 million if only the first tranche is drawn and subject to a cap of €30 million if the full loan amount is drawn. The Loan Agreement also includes certain prepayment penalties that may be triggered by certain prepayments prior to the maturity date. We will guarantee Immunic AG’s obligations to EIB pursuant to a Guarantee Agreement to be executed by us, Immunic AG and EIB. As of December 31, 2020, no funds have been drawn down under the Loan Agreement.
4. Equity Financings
August 2020 Offering
On August 4, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with SVB Leerink, as representative of the several underwriters, relating to our public offering of 5,000,000 shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $18.00 per share. Under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days, to purchase up to an additional 750,000 shares of common stock (the “Option Shares”) at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions, which was exercised in full on August 6, 2020. On August 7, 2020, we closed the offering.
The net proceeds to us from this offering, after giving effect to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase the Option Shares, was approximately $96.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
June 2020 Offering
On June 10, 2020, we entered into a placement agency agreement with ROTH Capital Partners, LLC ("RCP") and Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc. relating to our public offering of 2,175,000 shares of our common stock. Pursuant to this agreement, we agreed to pay the placement agents a cash fee of 6.5% of the gross proceeds from the offering raised from investors and to reimburse the placement agents for certain costs incurred in connection therewith.
In addition, on June 10, 2020, we and certain institutional investors entered into securities purchase agreements relating to the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 2,175,000 shares of our common stock. The purchase price per share in this offering was $11.40 for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $25.0 million.
The net proceeds to us from this offering, after deducting our offering expenses, were approximately $23.0 million.
April 2020 Registered Direct Offering
On April 23, 2020, we entered into an engagement letter with RCP relating to our registered direct offering of common stock to select institutional investors. Pursuant to this agreement, we agreed to pay RCP a cash fee of 6.5% of the gross proceeds from the offering raised from investors and to reimburse RCP for certain costs incurred in connection therewith.
In addition, on April 23, 2020, we and the investors entered into a securities purchase agreement relating to the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 1,764,706 shares of our common stock. The purchase price per share was $8.50 for aggregate gross proceeds to us of approximately $15.0 million.
The net proceeds to us from this offering, after deducting our offering expenses, were approximately $13.9 million.
ATM Issuances
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised gross proceeds of $11.3 million pursuant to the July 2019 ATM through the sale of 733,728 shares of common stock at a weighted average price of $15.42 per share. The net proceeds from the July
2019 ATM were $11.0 million after deducting underwriter commissions of $339,356. As of December 31, 2020, there was $23.3 million available under the July 2019 ATM and $50.0 million available under the December 2020 ATM.
Other
Immunic Joins the NASDAQ Biotech Index
We were selected for addition to the NASDAQ Biotechnology Index (Nasdaq: NBI), effective prior to market open on December 21, 2020. The NASDAQ Biotechnology Index is designed to track the performance of a set of securities listed on The Nasdaq Stock MarketⓇ that are classified as either biotechnology or pharmaceutical according to the Industry Classification Benchmark. The NASDAQ Biotechnology Index is re-ranked annually. All securities in the index must be listed on the NASDAQ Global Market or the NASDAQ Global Select Market and meet minimum market value and share volume requirements, among other criteria.
Immunic Joins the Nasdaq Global Select Market
Effective October 7, 2020, we transferred the listing of our common stock from the Nasdaq Capital Market to the Nasdaq Global Select Market. The Global Select Market is the most selective of Nasdaq’s three market tiers.
Immunic Joins the Russell 3000 Index
At the conclusion of the 2020 Russell indexes annual reconstitution effective June 29, 2020, we joined the Russell 3000Ⓡ Index. Membership in the U.S. all-cap Russell 3000 Index, which remains in place for one year, means automatic inclusion in the large-cap Russell 1000 Index or small-cap Russell 2000 Index as well as the appropriate growth and value style indexes. FTSE Russell determines membership for its Russell indexes primarily by objective, market-capitalization rankings and style attributes.
Changes to Executive Team
Separation Agreement with Sanjay S. Patel
On April 17, 2020, our former Chief Financial Officer, Sanjay S. Patel, resigned and entered into a Confidential Severance Agreement and Full and General Release with the Company (the “Separation Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Separation Agreement, Mr. Patel’s employment terminated on April 17, 2020.
Executive Chairman Agreement with Duane Nash
On April 15, 2020, the compensation committee of our Board independently reviewed and approved entering into an employment agreement with our current Chairman of the Board, Duane Nash, MD, JD, MBA (the “Executive Chairman Agreement”) and pursuant to such approval, on April 17, 2020, we and Mr. Nash entered into the Executive Chairman Agreement. The Executive Chairman Agreement establishes an “at will” employment relationship pursuant to which Mr. Nash serves as Executive Chairman and contemplated a term that ends on October 15, 2020. On October 15, 2020, we and Mr. Nash entered into an addendum to the Executive Chairman Agreement, pursuant to which the term of the agreement was extended to April 15, 2021. In connection therewith, we agreed to make a one-time award of 120,000 stock options to Mr. Nash, which began to vest monthly starting on November 15, 2020. All other terms of the employment agreement remain the same.
Promotion of Glenn Whaley
On April 17, 2020, Glenn Whaley, the Company’s Principal Accounting Officer and Controller, was promoted to the position of Vice President Finance, Principal Financial and Accounting Officer. Mr. Whaley has assumed day-to-day financial management responsibilities, and reports directly to Daniel Vitt, Ph.D., Chief Executive Officer and President of the Company.
Daiichi Sankyo Option Exercise
On January 5, 2020, Immunic AG, under the terms of the Daiichi Sankyo Agreement, exercised its option to obtain the exclusive worldwide right to commercialization of IMU-856. Among other things, the option exercise grants Immunic AG the rights to Daiichi Sankyo’s patent application related to IMU-856. In connection with the option exercise, we paid a one-time upfront licensing fee to Daiichi Sankyo. Under the Daiichi Sankyo Agreement, Daiichi Sankyo is also eligible to receive future development, regulatory and sales milestone payments, as well as royalties related to IMU-856.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("US"), or GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management makes its best estimate of the ultimate outcome for these items based on historical trends and other information available when the financial statements are prepared. Changes in estimates are typically recognized in the period when new information regarding estimates becomes available to management. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. See below for what we believe are our Critical Accounting Policies.
Foreign Currency Translation and Presentation
The Company’s reporting currency is US dollars. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Immunic AG’s operations were located in Germany with the euro being its functional currency. Immunic Australia Pty Ltd.’s functional currency is the Australian dollar. All amounts in the financial statements where the functional currency is not the US dollar are translated into US dollar equivalents at exchange rates as follows:
• assets and liabilities at reporting period-end rates;
• income statement accounts at average exchange rates for the reporting period; and
• components of equity at historical rates.
Gains and losses from translation of the financial statements into US dollars are recorded in stockholders’ equity net of the anticipated income tax effects as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Realized and unrealized gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are reflected as general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses related to long-term intercompany loans that are payable in the foreseeable future are recorded in Other Income. The Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows were prepared by using the average exchange rate in effect during the reporting period which reasonably approximates the timing of the cash flows.
Goodwill
Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method. The total purchase price of an acquisition is allocated to the underlying identifiable net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, probabilities of success, discount rates, and asset lives, among other items. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Examples of such events or circumstances include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in legal or business climate, an adverse regulatory action or unanticipated competition.
The Company assesses qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances would indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company were to determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the Company would perform a quantitative test that compares the fair value to its carrying value to determine the amount of any impairment. Impairment testing for goodwill is done at the reporting unit level. The Company has determined that it operates in a single operating segment and has a single reporting unit. The Company has determined there was no goodwill impairment as of December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in research and development activities, which include clinical trials, contract research services, certain milestone payments, salaries and related employee benefits, allocated facility costs and other outsourced services. Research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred.
The Company enters into agreements with CROs to provide clinical trial services for individual studies and projects by executing individual work orders governed by a Master Service Arrangement (“MSA”). The MSAs and associated work orders provide for regular recurrent payments and payments upon the completion of certain milestones. The Company regularly assesses the timing of payments against actual costs incurred to ensure a proper accrual of related expenses in the appropriate accounting period.
Collaboration Arrangements
Certain collaboration and license agreements may include payments to or from the Company of one or more of the following: non-refundable or partially refundable upfront or license fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; payment for manufacturing supply services; partial or complete reimbursement of research and development costs; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. The Company assesses whether such contracts are within the scope of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” and ASU No. 2018-18, “Collaborative Arrangements”, ("ASU 2018-18"). ASU 2018-18, clarifies that certain elements of collaborative arrangements could qualify as transactions with customers in the scope of ASC 606.
In October 2018, the Company entered into an option and license agreement (the "Daiichi Sankyo Agreement") with Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd. ("Daiichi Sankyo") which granted the Company the right to license a group of compounds, designated by the Company as IMU-856, as a potential new oral treatment option for diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea, immune checkpoint inhibitor induced colitis and other barrier function associated diseases. During the option period, the Company performed agreed upon research and development activities for which it was reimbursed by Daiichi Sankyo up to a maximum agreed-upon limit. Such reimbursement is recorded as other income.
On January 5, 2020, the Company exercised its option to obtain the exclusive worldwide right to commercialization of IMU-856. Among other things, the option exercise grants Immunic AG the rights to Daiichi Sankyo’s patent application related to IMU-856. In connection with the option exercise, the Company paid a one-time upfront licensing fee to Daiichi Sankyo. Under the Daiichi Sankyo Agreement, Daiichi Sankyo is also eligible to receive future development, regulatory and sales milestone payments, as well as royalties related to IMU-856.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for equity awards based on the grant-date fair value of the award recognized generally as an expense (i) on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for those awards whose vesting is based upon a service condition, and (ii) on an accelerated method for awards whose vesting is based upon a performance condition, but only to the extent it is probable that the performance condition will be met. Stock-based compensation is estimated (i) at the date of grant based on the award’s fair value for equity classified awards and (ii) final measurement date for liability classified awards. Forfeitures are recorded in the period in which they occur.
The Company estimates the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, which requires the use of estimates and subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected dividend yield of the Company’s common stock, the expected volatility of the price of the Company’s common stock, and the expected term of the option. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, the Company’s stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to corporate income tax laws and regulations in the U.S., Germany and Australia. Tax regulations within each jurisdiction are subject to the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and require significant judgment in their application.
The Company utilizes the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the audited
consolidated financial statements. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of changes in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred taxes are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, the Company maintained a full valuation allowance against the balance of deferred tax assets.
It is the Company’s policy to provide for uncertain tax positions and the related interest and penalties based upon management’s assessment of whether a tax benefit is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. The Company recognizes interest and penalties accrued on any unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with our research activities, including our product discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates. Our research and development expenses include:
•external research and development expenses and milestone payments incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as CROs, contract manufacturing organizations, collaborations with partners, consultants, and our scientific advisors; and
•internal personnel expenses.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are capitalized as prepaid expenses and expensed when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received.
Since our inception in March 2016, we have spent a total of approximately $82.4 million in research and development expenses through December 31, 2020.
These costs primarily include external development expenses and internal personnel expenses for the three development programs, IMU-838, IMU-935 and IMU-856. We have spent the majority of our research and development resources on IMU-838, our lead development program for clinical trials in RRMS, UC, COVID-19 and PSC. IMU-935 is currently being tested in a Phase 1 clinical trial in healthy volunteers, which was initiated in September 2019. IMU-856 is currently being tested in a Phase 1 clinical trial in healthy volunteers, which was initiated in August 2020.
In August 2019, Immunic AG received a grant of up to approximately $730,000 from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, in support of the InnoMuNiCH (Innovations through Munich-Nippon Cooperation in Healthcare) project. The grant funds will be used to fund a three-year research project relating to autoimmune diseases by us and our three project partners. Since the inception of the grant, we have received $101,000 which was recorded in other income in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct ongoing regulatory and development activities, initiate new preclinical and clinical trials and build our pipeline. The process of commercialization, conducting clinical trials and preclinical studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain and may not result in approved products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the development and regulatory success of each product candidate, and ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, professional fees for legal, accounting, tax and business consulting services, insurance premiums and stock-based compensation.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our money market funds and bank accounts which are a portion of our cash and cash equivalents balance. Our interest income has not been significant due to low interest rates earned on invested balances.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income consists primarily of reimbursement of research and development expenses in connection with our option and licensing agreement with Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., the gain on the settlement of a note receivable in connection with the sale of ELAD Assets (See Note 4), a research and development tax incentive related to clinical trials performed in Australia and foreign currency transaction gains and losses related to long-term intercompany loans that are payable in the foreseeable future.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased by $16.1 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase reflects (i) a $9.6 million increase in external development costs for IMU-838 related to the Phase 2 clinical trial in patients with COVID-19 since the trial was started in 2020, (ii) a $5.0 million increase in license fees, drug supply and Phase 1 costs related to IMU-856 since these trials have ramped up in 2020, (iii) a $2.1 million increase in drug supply, Phase 1 and preclinical costs related to IMU-935 since these trials have ramped up in 2020, (iv) a $1.5 million increase in personnel expenses, (v) a $0.7 million increase in drug supply costs related to IMU-838, and (vi) a $0.7 million increase for a bioequivalence study related to IMU-838. The increases were partially offset by (i) a $2.0 million decrease related to the Phase 2 clinical trial of IMU-838 in patients with RRMS as the clinical trial came to an end in 2020, and (ii) a $1.5 million decrease in costs related to a Phase 2 clinical trial in patients with Crohn’s disease.
General and administrative expenses decreased by $4.2 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to (i) $5.1 million lower stock compensation expense as a result of non-recurring costs recorded in 2019 related to the Transaction, (ii) $0.9 million of decreased legal, accounting and consultancy costs, and (iii) a $0.7 million decrease in travel costs due to worldwide travel
restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was partially offset by (i) a $2.2 million increase in personnel expenses, and (ii) $0.3 million of increased costs across numerous categories.
Total other income increased by $2.9 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to (i) a $2.5 million foreign exchange gain on a $68.0 million intercompany loan between Immunic, Inc. and Immunic AG, and (ii) a $0.9 million increase in research and development tax incentives for clinical trials in Australia as a result of increased spending on clinical trials in Australia. This increase was partially offset by (i) the $0.4 million difference between the face value and fair value of the promissory note collected in full in September 2019 in connection with the sale of ELAD Assets, offset by the $0.1 million write-off of the investment in VTL China included in the ELAD Assets sale, and (ii) a $0.2 million decrease of recognized income attributable to reimbursements of research and development expenses in connection with the Daiichi Sankyo Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since our inception in 2016. Our net losses were approximately $44.0 million and $34.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $103.9 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future as we initiate and continue the pre-clinical and clinical development of our product candidates and add personnel necessary to operate as a company with an advanced clinical pipeline of product candidates. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds, although we can provide no assurance that these sources of funding will be available on reasonable terms.
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have raised net cash of approximately $216.8 million from private and public offerings of preferred and common stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $127.5 million. With these funds, we expect to be able to fund our operations beyond twelve months from the date of the issuance of the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
We currently have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the SEC which expires in June 2021. The shelf registration statement currently permits the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate offering price of $200.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, debt securities or units in one or more offerings and in any combination, of which $40.0 million may be offered, issued and sold under an at-the-market sales agreement with SVB Leerink. We may use the net proceeds from the offering to continue to fund the ongoing clinical development of our product candidates and for other general corporate purposes, including funding existing and potential new clinical programs and product candidates. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised gross proceeds of $11.3 million pursuant to the July 2019 ATM through the sale of 733,728 shares of common stock at a weighted average price of $15.42 per share. The net proceeds from the July 2019 ATM were $11.0 million after deducting underwriter commissions of $339,356. As of December 31, 2020, there was $23.3 million available under the July 2019 ATM.
In November 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3. The 2020 Shelf Registration Statement permits the offering, issuance and sale of up to $250.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, debt securities, and/or units in one or more offerings and in any combination of the foregoing.
In December 2020, we filed a Prospectus Supplement for the offering, issuance and sale of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $50.0 million of common stock that may be issued and sold under an additional at-the-market sales agreement with SVB Leerink as agent. We intend to use the net proceeds from the offering to continue to fund the ongoing clinical development of our product candidates and for other general corporate purposes, including funding existing and potential new clinical programs and product candidates. The December 2020 ATM will terminate upon the earlier of (i) the issuance and sale of all of the shares through SVB Leerink on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the December 2020 ATM or (ii) termination of the December 2020 ATM as otherwise permitted thereby. The December 2020 ATM may be terminated at any time by either party upon ten days’ prior notice, or by SVB Leerink at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material adverse effect on us. As of December 31, 2020, $50.0 million in capacity remains under the December 2020 ATM.
Debt Financing
On October 19, 2020, Immunic, Inc. and Immunic AG entered into the Loan Agreement with EIB, pursuant to which EIB agreed to provide Immunic AG with a term loan in an aggregate amount of up to €24.5 million to support the development of our lead asset, IMU-838, in moderate COVID-19, to be made available to be drawn in three tranches, with the second and third tranches subject to the completion of certain pre-defined milestones. We have the right to defer payment of principal and interest on the first and second tranches until five years after the respective borrowing dates, at which point such tranches must be repaid in full. The third tranche is repayable in annual installments commencing one year after its respective borrowing date and must be repaid in full no later than five years after such date. Any outstanding borrowings under the Loan Agreement will accrue interest as provided in the Loan Agreement.
From January 1, 2021 until December 31, 2030, we and Immunic AG are also obligated to pay EIB a very low single digit percentage of our revenue, as set forth in the Loan Agreement, subject to certain conditions and limitations tied to the total amount drawn under the Loan Agreement and subject to a cap of €8.6 million if only the first tranche is drawn and subject to a cap of €30 million if the full loan amount is drawn. The Loan Agreement also includes certain prepayment penalties that may be triggered by certain prepayments prior to the maturity date.
Immunic, Inc. will guarantee Immunic AG’s obligations to EIB pursuant to a Guarantee Agreement to be executed by Immunic, Inc., Immunic AG and EIB. As of December 31, 2020, no funds have been drawn down under the Loan Agreement.
Public Equity Offerings
August 2020 Offering
On August 4, 2020, we entered into an Underwriting Agreement with SVB Leerink, as representative of the several underwriters, relating to our public offering of 5,000,000 shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $18.00 per share. Under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days, to purchase up to an additional 750,000 shares of common stock at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions, which option was exercised in full on August 6, 2020. On August 7, 2020, we closed the offering.
The net proceeds to us from this offering, after giving effect to the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase the Option Shares, was approximately $96.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
June 2020 Offering
On June 10, 2020, we entered into a placement agency agreement with RCP and Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc. relating to our public offering of 2,175,000 shares of our common stock. Pursuant to this agreement, we agreed to pay the placement agents a cash fee of 6.5% of the gross proceeds from the offering raised from investors and to reimburse the placement agents for certain costs incurred in connection therewith.
In addition, on June 10, 2020, we and certain institutional investors entered into securities purchase agreements relating to the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 2,175,000 shares of our common stock. The purchase price per share in this offering was $11.40 for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $25.0 million. The net proceeds to us from this offering, after deducting our offering expenses, were approximately $23.0 million.
April 2020 Registered Direct Offering
On April 23, 2020, we entered into an engagement letter with RCP relating to our registered direct offering of common stock to select institutional investors. Pursuant to this agreement, we agreed to pay RCP a cash fee of 6.5% of the gross proceeds from the offering raised from investors and to reimburse RCP for certain costs incurred in connection therewith.
In addition, on April 23, 2020, we and certain institutional investors entered into a securities purchase agreement relating to the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 1,764,706 shares of our common stock. The purchase price per share was $8.50 for aggregate gross proceeds to us of approximately $15.0 million.
The net proceeds to us from this offering, after deducting our offering expenses, were approximately $13.9 million.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31 (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $46.1 million of cash. The use of cash related to our net loss of $44.0 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $2.7 million related to stock-based compensation and was partially offset by a $2.5 million unrealized foreign currency gain as well as a $2.4 million net change in our operating assets and liabilities. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of an increase of $2.8 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets partially offset by $0.4 million increase in other current liabilities, accrued expenses and accounts payable. The increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets is primarily due to higher prepaid clinical costs, increased receivable for the Australian research and development credit and other miscellaneous items. The increase in liabilities is primarily due to an increase in clinical costs as a result of more Phase 2 clinical studies than in the prior year, the timing of year-end 2020 bonus payments partially offset by lower deferred income related to Daiichi Sankyo at year-end 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net investing activities used $0.1 million of cash, primarily due to purchase of equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided $144.4 million of cash of consisting of net cash proceeds from the sale of common stock under the July 2019 ATM and the April 2020, June 2020, and August 2020 equity offerings.
Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the timing and structure of any strategic options and transactions, if any;
•the cost, timing and outcome of any future litigation costs;
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and other compensation expenses related to retention and termination of personnel;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of research and development and any future clinical trials;
•the cost and timing of future regulatory submissions;
•the cost and timing of developing and validating the manufacturing processes for any potential product candidates;
•the cost and timing of any commercialization activities, including reimbursement, marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•our ability to establish new collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the number and characteristics of any future product candidates we pursue, if any;
•the costs involved with being a public company;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patents, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
•the timing, receipt and amount from the sales of, or royalties on any future product candidates, if any.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of stock offerings, debt financings, strategic alliances, collaborations and licensing arrangements. We do not expect to achieve revenue from product sales prior to the use of the net proceeds from our public and private offerings to date. We do not have any committed external source of funds other than the Loan Agreement with the EIB. Additional funds may not be available on acceptable terms, if at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted and it may be on terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt or other terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaborations and licensing arrangements with third parties, we would expect to relinquish substantial rights to our technologies or our future products, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we were to complete a merger, we may relinquish all control over the organization and could experience detrimental tax effects. If we are unable to raise adequate funds, we may have to liquidate some or all of our assets. Any of these factors could harm our operating results.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through December 31, 2020, we have not entered into and did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial collaborations, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purpose.
Other Commitments and Obligations
In May 2016, the Company entered into a purchase agreement (the “Agreement”) with 4SC whereby the Company acquired certain assets, including the rights to patents and patent applications, trademarks and know-how. This transaction was accounted for as an asset acquisition under Accounting Standards Update 2017-01 - Business Combinations (Topic 805): Clarifying the Definition of a Business. The Agreement included payments (Tranches III and IV) that were contingent upon the occurrence of certain events and required the Company to pay royalties equal to 4.4% of the aggregated net sales for a certain period as defined in the Agreement (Tranche III) upon commercialization of the acquired assets. Effective April 12, 2019, the parties agreed to settle Tranche IV by issuing 120,070 shares of the Company’s common stock, immediately following the Transaction, to 4SC while keeping the obligation to pay Tranche III in effect. Approximately $1.5 million of expense was recorded as a result of the issuance of these shares on April 12, 2019. No royalties are payable as of December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019 as sales have not commenced.
See Note 6 regarding the Company’s obligations under the option agreement with Daiichi Sankyo, which includes the potential payment of future development, regulatory and sales milestone payments, as well as royalties related to IMU-856.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our cash flows in future periods:
The purchase obligations above represent non-cancelable contractual obligations under certain agreements related to our development programs IMU-838, IMU-935 and IMU-856.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment." This guidance eliminates Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test, instead requiring an entity to recognize a goodwill impairment charge for the amount by which the goodwill carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. The Company adopted this ASU, as required, in the quarter ended March 31, 2020 on a prospective basis. The adoption of this ASU did not have a significant impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement - Disclosure Framework” ("ASU 2018-13.") ASU 2018-13 modifies the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. The amendments relate to disclosures regarding unrealized gains and losses, the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements and the narrative description of measurement uncertainty, and are to be applied prospectively for only the most recent interim or annual period presented in the initial fiscal year of adoption. All other amendments must be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon their effective date. The Company adopted this ASU, as required, in the quarter ended March 31, 2020. The adoption of this ASU did not have a significant impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-18, “Collaborative Arrangements” ("ASU 2018-18"). ASU 2018-18, clarifies that elements of collaborative arrangements could qualify as transactions with customers in the scope of ASC 606. The Company adopted this ASU, as required, in the quarter ended March 31, 2020. The Company does not have any agreements that meet the definition of a collaboration arrangement at this time.