ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional factors relating to such statements and see “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Past operating results are not necessarily indicative of operating results in any future periods.
COVID-19 Update
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). The pandemic has had and continues to have a significant effect on economic conditions in the United States of America (“United States” or “U.S.”), as the efforts of federal, state, local and foreign governments to react to the public health crisis with mitigation measures have created and continue to cause significant uncertainties in the U.S. and global economy. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our business, operations and financial results depends, and will continue to depend, on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict such as further government and health authorities restrictions, progress in and effectiveness of vaccination efforts in the United States or in the countries in which we operate and conduct business.
In response to the pandemic, our top priority has been to take appropriate actions to protect the health and safety of our employees. We have adjusted standard operating procedures within our business operations to ensure continued worker safety, and are continually monitoring evolving health guidelines and responding to changes as appropriate. These procedures include reconfiguring facilities to reduce employee density, expanded and more frequent cleaning within facilities, implementation of appropriate and mandated distancing programs, employee temperature monitoring and requiring use of certain personal protective equipment at our U.S. headquarters and call centers in Mexico and Guatemala. As of December 31, 2020, all of our facilities are open and operating with adjustments to ensure social distancing and facial covering requirements established by state and local regulations.
Notwithstanding the operational challenges created by these measures, our business continues to function and, to date, our customer service has not been adversely affected in any material respect. Despite these efforts, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to pose the risk that we or our employees, sending and paying agents, as well as consumers and their beneficiaries, are or may become further restricted from conducting business activities, partially or completely, for an indefinite period of time, including due to shutdowns requested or mandated by governmental authorities or imposed by our management, or that the pandemic may otherwise interrupt or impair business activities. These risks could be magnified if the recent resurgence of COVID-19 illnesses continues or is not adequately contained and governmental authorities once again impose restrictions on commercial and social activities or businesses that employ our customers take actions that adversely affect the incomes of those employees.
The operational changes noted above had only a limited effect on the Company’s financial results. Although we saw a slight year-over-year decrease in our volume of transactions at the beginning of the pandemic, the year ended December 31, 2020 has shown a year-over-year increase in both dollar volume and transactions, including all-time highs for one-month sales in August and again in October, as well as a quarterly record for sales in the fourth quarter of 2020. The economic effects of the pandemic caused increased foreign exchange volatility, particularly with respect to the Mexican peso, which has created additional operational challenges; however, the overall effect on our results of operations to date has been positive. Despite positive trends during the second half of the year, we continue to monitor this evolving pandemic and its potential effects on the Company’s operations.
Although governmental authorities took measures that restricted the normal course of operations of businesses and consumers that were in place for much of the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company and our sending agents are considered essential businesses under current governmental guidance and such measures did not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company’s business is dependent upon the willingness and ability of its employees, network of agents and consumers to conduct money transfer services and the ultimate effects of the economic disruption caused by the pandemic and responses thereto. Although the Company’s operations continued effectively despite social distancing and other measures taken in response to the pandemic, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows is subject to future developments, including the duration of the pandemic and the related extent of its severity, as well as its impact on the economic conditions, particularly the level of unemployment of our customers, which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. If the global response to contain and remedy the COVID-19 pandemic escalates further or is unsuccessful, or if governmental decisions to ease pandemic related restrictions are ineffective, premature or counterproductive, the Company could experience a material adverse effect on its financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Index
Further quantification and discussion of these pandemic related effects, to the extent relevant and material, are included in the discussion of results of operations below.
Overview
We are a rapidly growing and leading money remittance services company focused primarily on the United States to Latin America and the Caribbean (“LAC”) corridor, which includes Mexico, Central and South America and the Caribbean. In 2019, we expanded our services to allow remittances to Africa from the United States and also began offering sending services from Canada to Latin America and Africa. We utilize our proprietary technology to deliver convenient, reliable and value-added services to our customers through a broad network of sending and paying agents. Our remittance services, which include a comprehensive suite of ancillary financial processing solutions and payment services, are available in all 50 states in the U.S., Washington D.C., Puerto Rico and 13 provinces in Canada, where customers can send money to beneficiaries in 17 LAC countries, seven countries in Africa and two countries in Asia. Our services are accessible in person through over 100,000 independent sending and paying agents and 34 Company-operated stores, as well as online and via Internet-enabled mobile devices. Additionally, we have expanded our product and service portfolio to include online payment options, pre-paid debit cards and direct deposit payroll cards, which may present different cost, demand, regulatory and risk profiles relative to our core remittance business.
Money remittance services to LAC countries, primarily Mexico and Guatemala, are the primary source of our revenue. These services involve the movement of funds on behalf of an originating customer for receipt by a designated beneficiary at a designated receiving location. Our remittances to LAC countries are primarily generated in the United States by customers with roots in Latin American and Caribbean countries, many of whom do not have an existing relationship with a traditional full-service financial institution capable of providing the services we offer. We provide these customers with flexibility and convenience to help them meet their financial needs. We believe many of our customers who use our services may have access to traditional banking services, but prefer to use our services based on reliability, convenience and value. We generate money remittance revenue from fees paid by our customers (i.e., the senders of funds), which we share with our sending agents in the originating country and our paying agents in the destination country. Remittances paid in local currencies that are not pegged to the U.S. dollar can also generate revenue through if we are successful in our daily management of currency exchange spreads.
Our money remittance services enable our customers to send funds through our broad network of locations in the United States and Canada that are primarily operated by third-party businesses, as well as through our Company-operated stores. Transactions are processed and payment is collected by our agent (“sending agent(s)”) and those funds become available for pickup by the beneficiary at the designated destination, usually within minutes, at any Intermex payer location (“paying agent(s)”). We refer to our sending agents and our paying agents collectively as agents. In addition, our services are offered digitally through Intermexonline.com and via Internet-enabled mobile devices. During the three years ended December 31, 2020, we have grown our agent network by approximately 40% and increased our remittance transactions volume by more than 33%. In 2020, we processed approximately 32 million remittances, representing over 12% growth in transactions as compared to 2019.
As a non-bank financial institution in the United States, we are regulated by the Department of Treasury, the Internal Revenue Service, FinCEN, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”), the Department of Banking and Finance of the State of Florida and additionally by the various regulatory institutions of those states in which we hold an operating license. We are duly registered as a Money Service Business (“MSB”) with FinCEN, the financial intelligence unit of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. We are also subject to a wide range of regulations in the United States and other countries, including anti-money laundering laws and regulations; financial services regulations; currency control regulations; anti-bribery laws; money transfer and payment instrument licensing laws; escheatment laws; privacy, data protection and information security laws, such as the Graham-Leach-Bliley Act (“GLBA”); and consumer disclosure and consumer protection laws, such as the California Consumer Privacy Act (“CCPA”).
Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Business
Various trends and other factors have affected and may continue to affect our business, financial condition and operating results, including, but not limited to:
•the COVID-19 pandemic, responses thereto and the economic and market effects thereof, including unemployment levels and increased capital market volatility;
•competition in the markets in which we operate;
•volatility in foreign exchange rates that could affect the volume of consumer remittance activity and/or affect our foreign exchange related gains and losses;
•cyber-attacks or disruptions to our information technology, computer network systems and data centers;
•our ability to maintain banking relationships necessary for us to conduct our business;
Index
•credit risks from our agents and the financial institutions with which we do business;
•bank failures, sustained financial illiquidity, or illiquidity at our clearing, cash management or custodial financial institutions;
•new technology or competitors that disrupt the current ecosystem by introducing digital platforms;
•our ability to satisfy our debt obligations and remain in compliance with our credit facility requirements;
•interest rate risk from elimination of LIBOR as a benchmark interest rate;
•our success in developing and introducing new products, services and infrastructure;
•customer confidence in our brand and in consumer money transfers generally;
•our ability to maintain compliance with the regulatory requirements of the jurisdictions in which we operate or plan to operate;
•international political factors or implementation of tariffs, border taxes or restrictions on remittances or transfers of money out of the United States and Canada;
•changes in U.S. tax laws;
•political instability, currency restrictions and volatility in countries in which we operate or plan to operate;
•consumer fraud and other risks relating to customer authentication;
•weakness in U.S. or international economic conditions;
•changes in immigration laws and their enforcement;
•our ability to protect our brand and intellectual property rights; and
•our ability to retain key personnel.
Throughout 2020, Latin American political and economic conditions have remained unstable, as evidenced by high unemployment rates in key markets, currency reserves, currency controls, restricted lending activity, weak currencies, low consumer confidence, some of which reflect the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors. Specifically, continued political and economic unrest in parts of Mexico and some countries in South America contributed to volatility. Our business has generally been resilient during times of economic instability as money remittances are essential to many recipients, with the funds used by the receiving parties for their daily needs; however, long-term sustained appreciation of the Mexican peso or Guatemalan quetzal as compared to the U.S. Dollar could negatively affect our revenues and profitability.
Money remittance businesses have continued to be subject to strict legal and regulatory requirements, and we continue to focus on and regularly review our compliance programs. In connection with these reviews, and in light of regulatory complexity and heightened attention of governmental and regulatory authorities related to cybersecurity and compliance activities, we have made, and continue to make, enhancements to our processes and systems designed to detect and prevent cyber-attacks, consumer fraud, money laundering, terrorist financing and other illicit activities, along with enhancements to improve consumer protection, including the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and similar regulations outside the United States. In coming periods, we expect these enhancements will continue to result in changes to certain of our business practices and may result in increased costs.
We maintain a regulatory compliance department, under the direction of our Chief Compliance Officer, whose responsibility is to monitor transactions, detect suspicious activity, maintain financial records and train our employees and agents. An independent third-party consulting firm periodically reviews our policies and procedures to ensure the efficacy of our anti-money laundering and regulatory compliance program.
The market for money remittance services is very competitive. Our competitors include a small number of large money remittance providers, financial institutions, banks and a large number of small niche money remittance service providers that serve select regions. We compete with larger companies, such as Western Union, MoneyGram and Euronet, and a number of other smaller MSB entities. We generally compete for money remittance agents on the basis of value, service, quality, technical and operational differences, commission structure and marketing efforts. As a philosophy, we sell credible solutions to our sending agents, not discounts or higher commissions, as is typical for the industry. We compete for money remittance customers on the basis of trust, convenience, service, efficiency of outlets, value, technology and brand recognition.
Index
We have encountered and continue to expect to encounter increasing competition as new electronic platforms emerge that enable customers to send and receive money through a variety of channels, but we do not expect adoption rates to be as significant in the near term for the customer segment we serve. Regardless, we continue to innovate in the industry by differentiating our money remittance business through programs to foster loyalty among agents as well as customers and have expanded our channels through which our services are accessed to include online and mobile offerings which are experiencing customer adoption.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), enacted on April 5, 2012. An “emerging growth company” can take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies.” These provisions include:
•an exemption from the auditor attestation requirement of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the assessment of the emerging growth company’s internal control over financial reporting;
•an exemption from the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards until they would apply to private companies; and
•an exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board requiring mandatory audit firm rotation or communication of Critical Audit Matters (“CAMs”) in the auditor’s report. A CAM is defined as any matter arising from the audit of the financial statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements; and (2) involves especially challenging, subjective, or complex auditor judgment.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earlier of (1) the earliest of the last day of the fiscal year (a) following January 19, 2022, the fifth anniversary of us becoming a publicly-traded company, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our prior second fiscal quarter, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period. As of June 30, 2020, the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates approximated $307.5 million.
The Merger
As discussed in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Merger was completed on July 26, 2018 (the “Closing Date”) and was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization where FinTech was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the Merger was treated as the equivalent of Intermex issuing stock for the net assets of FinTech, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of FinTech were stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets resulting from the Merger. The consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations prior to the Closing Date of the Merger are those of Intermex, and FinTech’s assets, liabilities and results of operations are consolidated with Intermex beginning on the Closing Date. The shares and corresponding capital amounts included in common stock and additional paid-in capital, pre-merger, have been retroactively restated as shares reflecting the exchange ratio in the Merger for all periods. The historical financial information and operating results of FinTech prior to the Merger have not been separately presented in this Annual Report as they were not significant or meaningful.
In connection with the closing of the Merger, FinTech redeemed a total of 4.9 million shares of its common stock at a redemption price of $10.086957 per share, resulting in a total payment to redeemed stockholders of approximately $49.8 million. The aggregate consideration paid in the Merger consisted of approximately (i) $102.0 million in cash and (ii) 17.2 million shares of FinTech common stock.
After the completion of the transactions on the Closing Date, there were 36.2 million shares of International Money Express, Inc. outstanding common stock, warrants to purchase 9 million shares of common stock (“Warrants”) and 3.4 million shares reserved for issuance under the International Money Express, Inc. 2018 Equity Compensation Plan, of which stock options to purchase 2.8 million shares of common stock and restricted stock units in respect of 21.2 thousand shares of common stock were granted to employees and independent directors of the Company in connection with the completion of the transaction. All of the Warrants were eliminated following the Closing Date through a tender offer and mandatory conversion that resulted in the issuance, between April and May of 2019, of approximately 1.8 million shares of common stock and the payment by the Company of approximately $10.0 million in cash in exchange for the Warrants tendered in the tender offer (the “Warrants Offer”). These transactions resulted in the Company having a total of approximately 38.0 million shares of Common Stock outstanding following the issuance.
Secondary Offerings
In September 2020 and September 2019, the Company conducted underwritten secondary public offerings in which certain selling stockholders sold an aggregate of 5.7 million shares of the Company’s common stock at a price to the public of $13.50 per share and 6.0 million shares of the Company’s common stock at a price to the public of $12.75 per share, respectively. The Company did not receive any proceeds from these sales of common stock.
Index
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are revenues, service charges from agents and banks, salaries and benefits, other selling, general and administrative expenses and net income. To help us assess our performance with these key indicators, we use Adjusted net income, Adjusted earnings per share and Adjusted EBITDA as non-GAAP financial measures. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to investors and expanded insight to measure our revenue and cost performance as a supplement to our U.S. GAAP consolidated financial statements. See the “Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share” and “Adjusted EBITDA” sections below for reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to net income and earnings per share, our closest GAAP measures.
Revenues
Transaction volume is the primary generator of revenue in our business. Revenue on transactions is derived primarily from transaction fees paid by customers to transfer money. Revenues per transaction vary based upon send and receive locations and the amount sent. In certain transactions involving different send and receive currencies, we generate foreign exchange gains based on the difference between the set exchange rate charged by us to the sender and the rate available to us in the wholesale foreign exchange market.
Operating Expenses
Service Charges from Agents and Banks
Service charges and fees primarily consist of agent commissions and bank fees. Service charges and fees vary based on agent commission percentages and the amount of fees charged by the banks. Sending agents earn a commission on each transaction they process of approximately 50% of the transaction fee. Service charges and fees may increase if banks or payer organizations increase their fee structure or sending agents use higher fee methods to remit funds to us. Service charges also vary based on the method the customer selects to send the transfer and the payer organization that facilitates the transaction.
Salaries and Benefits
Salaries and benefits include cash and share-based compensation associated with our corporate employees and sales team as well as employees at our Company-operated stores. Corporate employees include management, customer service, compliance, information technology, finance and human resources. Our sales team, located throughout the United States and Canada, is focused on supporting and growing our sending agent network. Share-based compensation is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period; unrecognized compensation expense related to options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) of approximately $6.3 million is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.2 years.
Other Selling, General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of fixed overhead expenses associated with our operations, such as information technology, rent, insurance, professional services, non-income taxes, facilities maintenance and other similar types of expenses. A portion of these expenses relate to our Company-operated stores; however, the majority relate to the overall business and compliance requirements of a regulated publicly traded financial services company. Selling expenses include expenses such as advertising and promotion, provision for bad debt and expenses associated with increasing our network of agents. These expenses are expected to continue to increase at a slower pace than our increase in revenues.
Transaction Costs
We incurred transaction costs associated with the Merger in 2018. These costs included all internal and external costs directly related to the transaction, consisting primarily of legal, consulting, accounting, advisory fees and certain incentive bonuses. Due to their significance, they are presented separately in our consolidated financial statements. There were no similar transaction costs incurred in 2020 and 2019.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation largely consists of depreciation of computer equipment and software that supports our technology platform. Amortization of intangible assets is primarily related to our agent relationships, trade name and developed technology.
Index
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest associated with our debt, which consists of a term loan and revolving credit facility. The effective interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 for the term loan facility and revolving credit facility were 5.78% and 1.00%, respectively. Interest on the term loan and revolving credit facilities is determined by reference to either LIBOR or a “base rate”, in each case, plus an applicable margin of 4.50% per annum for LIBOR loans or 3.50% per annum for base rate loans. The Company is also required to pay a fee on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility equal to 0.35% per annum.
Income tax provision
Our income tax provision includes the expected benefit of all deferred tax assets, including our net operating loss carryforwards. With few exceptions, our net operating loss carryforwards will expire from 2029 through 2037. After consideration of all evidence, both positive and negative, management has determined that no valuation allowance is required at December 31, 2020 on the Company’s U.S. federal or state deferred tax assets; however, a valuation allowance of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2020 has been recorded on deferred tax assets associated with Canadian net operating loss carryforwards. Our income tax provision reflects the effects of state taxes, non-deductible expenses, share-based compensation expenses, and foreign tax rates applicable to the Company’s foreign subsidiaries that are higher or lower than the U.S. statutory rate. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, enacted in December 2017, reduced our federal corporate tax rate from 34% to 21% beginning in 2018.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income (loss) is determined by subtracting operating and non-operating expenses from revenues.
Earnings (Loss) per Share
Basic earnings (loss) per share is calculated by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for each period. Diluted earnings (loss) per share is calculated by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of common shares and common share equivalents outstanding for each period. Diluted earnings (loss) per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if outstanding stock options and warrants at the presented dates are exercised and shares of restricted stock have vested, using the treasury stock method.
Segments
Our business is organized around one reportable segment that provides money transmittal services between the United States and Canada to Mexico, Guatemala and other countries in Latin America, Africa and Asia through a network of authorized agents located in various unaffiliated retail establishments and 34 Company-operated stores throughout the U.S. and Canada. This is based on the objectives of the business and how our chief operating decision maker, the CEO and President, monitors operating performance and allocates resources.
Index
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the above periods are presented below:
Wire transfer and money order fees, net of $307.9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $34.8 million from $273.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $34.8 million was primarily due to a 18% increase in transaction volume largely due to the continued growth in our agent network, which grew by 5% from December 2019 to December 2020.
Revenues from foreign exchange gain, net of $46.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $2.5 million from $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to higher transaction volume achieved by growth in our agent network and a higher average amount sent by our customers as a result of increased foreign exchange volatility during the year.
Index
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the above periods are presented below:
Service charges from agents and banks- Service charges from agents and banks were $238.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $212.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $25.9 million, or 12%, was primarily due to the increase in transaction volume described above.
Salaries and benefits- Salaries and benefits were $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represented an increase of $2.1 million from $30.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2.1 million is primarily due to $1.9 million in increased wages, largely in management and other areas, to support the continued growth of our business and $0.6 million increase in share-based compensation. These increases are partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in commission expense for our representatives primarily due to a lower than expected gross margin achieved compared to established goals.
Other selling, general and administrative expenses- Other selling, general and administrative expenses of $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $5.0 million from $27.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease was the result of:
•$3.7 million - nonrecurrence of settlement and legal fees associated with a Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (“TCPA”) class action lawsuit in 2019;
•$1.2 million - primarily lower legal and professional fees in connection with the 2020 secondary offering of the Company’s common stock as compared to the 2019 fees, as well as the fees related to the Warrants Offer in 2019;
•$1.1 million - decrease in travel expenses due to reduced employee travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•$0.9 million - reduction in advertising and promotion expense due to a change in marketing strategy.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•$1.0 million - higher IT related expenses incurred to sustain our business expansion;
•$0.4 million - higher rent and other operating expenses;
•$0.3 million - loss incurred in the closure of a financial institution in Mexico; and
•$0.2 million - higher provision for bad debt as a result of higher account receivable balances due to the increase in volume.
Depreciation and amortization- Depreciation and amortization of $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $1.9 million from $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is mainly due to $2.4 million less amortization related to the trade name, developed technology and agent relationships during the year ended December 31, 2020 as these intangibles are being amortized on an accelerated basis, which declines over time. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in depreciation of $0.5 million associated primarily with additional computer equipment to support our growing business and agent network.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense- Interest expense was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.9 million from $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in interest rates paid under the Credit Agreement (as defined below) and lower drawings under the revolving credit facility.
Income tax provision- Income tax provision was $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.2 million from an income tax provision of $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the income tax provision was mainly attributable to higher taxable income resulting from higher revenues.
Index
Net Income
We reported net income of $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net income of $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which resulted in an increase of $14.2 million due to the same factors discussed above.
Earnings per Share
Earnings per Share - Basic for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.89, representing an increase of $0.37, or 71.2%, compared to $0.52 for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the same factors discussed above.
Earnings per Share - Diluted for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.88, representing an increase of $0.36, or 69.2%, compared to $0.52 for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the same factors discussed above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings Per Share and Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our performance, both internally and as compared with our peers, because these measures exclude certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results, as well as items that can vary widely among companies within our industry. For example, non-cash compensation costs can be subject to volatility from changes in the market price per share of our common stock or variations in the value and number of shares granted, and amortization of intangible assets is subject to acquisition activity, which varies from period to period and amortization of intangibles expense is primarily related to the effects of push down accounting resulting from acquisitions.
We present these non-GAAP financial measures because we believe they are frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. Furthermore, we believe they are helpful in highlighting trends in our operating results by focusing on our core operating results and are useful to evaluate our performance in conjunction with our GAAP financial measures. Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings Per Share and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income, net income or earnings per share as a measure of operating performance or cash flows or as a measure of liquidity. Non-GAAP financial measures are not necessarily calculated the same way by different companies and should not be considered a substitute for or superior to GAAP measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is one of the primary metrics used by management to evaluate the financial performance of our business because it excludes, among other things, the effects of certain transactions that are outside the control of management, while other measures can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the jurisdictions in which we operate and capital investments.
In particular, Adjusted EBITDA is subject to certain limitations, including the following:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the amounts necessary to service interest or principal payments on our Credit Agreement;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income tax provision (benefit), and because the payment of taxes is part of our operations, tax provision is a necessary element of our costs and ability to operate;
•Although depreciation and amortization are eliminated in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any costs of such replacements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the noncash component of share-based compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters we consider not to be reflective, on a recurring basis, of our ongoing operations; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We adjust for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA, as well as our other non-GAAP financial measures, only as supplemental information.
Index
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share
Adjusted Net Income is defined as net income adjusted to add back certain charges and expenses, such as non-cash amortization of intangible assets resulting from push-down accounting, which will recur in future periods until these assets have been fully amortized, and excludes the amortization of other intangible assets related to the acquisition of Company-operated stores, non-cash compensation costs, litigation settlements and other items set forth in the table below, as these charges and expenses are not considered a part of our core business operations and are not an indicator of ongoing, future company performance.
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Basic and Diluted is calculated by dividing Adjusted Net Income by GAAP weighted-average common shares outstanding (basic and diluted).
Adjusted Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $42.3 million, representing an increase of $9.7 million, or 30.0%, from Adjusted Net Income of $32.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Adjusted Net Income was primarily due to the increase in revenues of $37.6 million, offset primarily by an increase in service charges from agents and banks of $25.9 million due to higher transaction volume.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted Net Income:
(a)Stock options and restricted stock were granted to employees and independent directors of the Company.
(b)Represents expenses incurred for professional and legal fees in connection with secondary offerings for the Company’s common stock and Warrants Offer.
(c)Represents legal fees and charge for the settlement of a class action lawsuit related to the TCPA.
(d)Represents a loss incurred in 2020 related to the closure of a financial institution in Mexico.
(e)Represents severance costs incurred during 2019 related to departmental changes.
(f)Includes loss on disposal of fixed assets and foreign currency (gains) losses.
(g)Represents the amortization of certain intangible assets that resulted from the application of push-down accounting.
(h)Represents the current and deferred tax impact of the taxable adjustments to net income using the Company’s blended federal and state tax rate for each period. Relevant tax-deductible adjustments include all adjustments to net income.
Index
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Basic (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.11, representing an increase of $0.24, or 27.6%, compared to $0.87 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Diluted (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.10, representing an increase of $0.23, or 26.4%, compared to $0.87 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table presents the reconciliation of GAAP Earnings per Share, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted Earnings per Share:
NM - Per share amounts are not meaningful.
The table above may contain slight summation differences due to rounding.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income taxes, and also adjusted to add back certain charges and expenses, such as non-cash compensation costs and other items set forth in the table below, as these charges and expenses are not considered a part of our core business operations and are not an indicator of ongoing, future company performance.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $68.4 million, representing an increase of $10.8 million, or 18.7%, from $57.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to the increase in revenues of $37.6 million, offset by an increase in service charges from agents and banks of $25.9 million due to an increase in volume transaction as well as increases in other operating expenses to support the growth in our business.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
Index
(a)Stock options and restricted stock were granted to employees and independent directors of the Company.
(b)Represents expenses incurred for professional and legal fees in connection with secondary offerings for the Company’s common stock and Warrants Offer.
(c)Represents legal fees and charge for the settlement of a class action lawsuit related to the TCPA.
(d)Represents a loss incurred in 2020 related to the closure of a financial institution in Mexico.
(e)Represents severance costs incurred during 2019 related to departmental changes
(f)Includes loss on disposal of fixed assets and foreign currency (gains) losses.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenues
Revenues for the above periods are presented below:
Wire transfer and money order fees, net of $273.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $40.7 million from $232.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase of $40.7 million was primarily due to a 19% increase in transaction volume largely due to the continued growth in our agent network, which has grown by 10% from December 2018 to December 2019.
Revenues from foreign exchange of $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $4.5 million from $39.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to higher transaction volume achieved by growth in our agent network.
Index
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the above periods are presented below:
Service charges from agents and banks- Service charges from agents and banks were $212.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $182.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $30.2 million, or 17%, million was primarily due to the increase in transaction volume.
Salaries and benefits- Salaries and benefits were $30.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which represented a decrease of $2.2 million from $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease of $2.2 million is primarily due to $4.7 million of share-based compensation in the year ended December 31, 2018 related to the accelerated vesting of incentive units in connection with the Merger that did not reoccur in 2019. This decrease during the year ended December 31, 2019 was offset by $1.0 million in increased wages, largely in management and other areas to support our growing operations and a $1.5 million increase related to share-based compensation.
Other selling, general and administrative expenses- Other selling, general and administrative expenses of $27.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $7.7 million from $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The increase was the result of:
•$3.7 million - settlement and legal fees associated with a TCPA class action lawsuit;
•$1.8 million - legal and other professional fees associated with the Company’s SEC filings, including the Warrants Offer and a secondary offering in 2019 of the Company’s common stock;
•$1.1 million - higher insurance premiums, property taxes and other operating expenses; and
•$1.1 million - higher IT related expenses incurred to sustain our business expansion.
Transaction costs- Transaction costs of $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 include costs related to the Merger, consisting primarily of employee bonuses, termination of management fee agreement, change in control fee to our lender and legal and other professional fees. There were no transaction costs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Depreciation and amortization- Depreciation and amortization of $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased by $3.0 million from $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease is due to $3.1 million less amortization related to the trade name, developed technology and agent relationships during the year ended December 31, 2019 as these intangibles are being amortized on an accelerated basis, which declines over time. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in depreciation of $0.1 million associated primarily with additional computer equipment to support our growing business and agent network.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense- Interest expense was $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $9.9 million from $18.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease of $9.9 million was due to a reduction in the interest rates paid under the Credit Agreement, which accounted for $4.6 million, and the write-off of unamortized debt origination costs and a prepayment penalty of $3.5 million and $1.8 million, respectively, related to the November 2018 refinancing of our senior secured credit facility, which were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2018 and did not reoccur in 2019.
Income tax provision- Income tax provision was $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $6.4 million from an income tax provision of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in the income tax provision was mainly due to an $8.5 million increase attributable to higher taxable income, offset by $1.6 million less non-deductible expenses and $0.5 million of write-offs of transaction costs and net operating losses and other items.
Index
Net Income (Loss)
We reported net income of $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to net loss of $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, which resulted in an increase of $26.8 million due primarily to the same factors discussed above.
Earnings (Loss) per Share
Earnings per Share - Basic and Diluted for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.52, representing an increase of $0.80, or 285.7%, compared to a Loss per Share - Basic and Diluted of $0.28 for the year ended December 31, 2018 due primarily to the same factors discussed above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share
Adjusted Net Income (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $32.6 million, representing an increase of $14.2 million, or 77%, from Adjusted Net Income of $18.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in Adjusted Net Income was primarily due to the increase in revenues of $45.7 million and a decrease in interest expense and salaries and benefits, offset by an increase in service charges from agents and banks of $30.2 million as well as increases in other operating expenses to support the growth in our business.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income (Loss), our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted Net Income:
(a)Represents direct costs related to the Merger, which consist primarily of legal, consulting, accounting, advisory fees and certain incentive bonuses.
(b)In connection with the Merger, incentive units were granted to our employees, which became fully vested and were paid out upon the closing of the Merger.
(c)Stock options and restricted stock were granted to employees and independent directors of the Company.
Index
(d)Represents expenses incurred for professional and legal fees in connection with a secondary offering of the Company’s common stock and the Warrants Offer.
(e)Represents recruiting fees and severance costs related to managerial changes in connection with becoming a publicly-traded company in 2018.
(f)Represents payments under a management agreement with a related party pursuant to which we paid a quarterly fee for certain advisory and consulting services. In connection with the Merger, this agreement was terminated.
(g)Represents legal fees and charges for settlement of class action lawsuits related to the TCPA.
(h)Represents professional fees in connection with the registration of common stock underlying outstanding warrants.
(i)Represents severance costs incurred related to departmental changes.
(j)Includes loss on disposal of fixed assets, foreign currency (gains) losses and legal expenses considered to be non-recurring.
(k)Represents the amortization of certain intangible assets that resulted from the application of push-down accounting.
(l)Represents the current and deferred tax impact of the taxable adjustments to net income using the Company’s blended federal and state tax rate for each period. Relevant tax-deductible adjustments include all adjustments to net income except for $1.7 million of offering costs for the year ended December 31, 2019, $4.3 million of non-deductible transaction costs and $4.7 million of non-deductible incentive units plan expense in the year ended December 31, 2018.
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Basic and Diluted (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.87, representing an increase of $0.15, or 20.8%, compared to $0.72 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The following table presents the reconciliation of GAAP Earnings per Share, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted Earnings per Share:
NM - Per share amounts are not meaningful.
The table above may contain slight summation differences due to rounding.
Index
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $57.6 million, representing an increase of $10.5 million, or 22%, from $47.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to the increase in revenues of $45.7 million, offset by an increase in service charges from agents and banks of $30.2 million as well as increases in other operating expenses to support the growth in our business.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income (Loss), our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
(a)Represents direct costs related to the Merger, which consist primarily of legal, consulting, accounting, advisory fees and certain incentive bonuses.
(b)In connection with the Merger, incentive units were granted to our employees, which became fully vested and were paid out upon the closing of the Merger.
(c)Stock options and restricted stock were granted to employees and independent directors of the Company.
(d)Represents expenses incurred for professional and legal fees in connection with a secondary offering of the Company’s common stock and the Warrants Offer.
(e)Represents recruiting fees and severance costs related to managerial changes in connection with becoming a publicly-traded company in 2018.
(f)Represents payments under a management agreement with a related party pursuant to which we paid a quarterly fee for certain advisory and consulting services. In connection with the Merger, this agreement was terminated.
(g)Represents legal fees and charges for settlement of class action lawsuits related to the TCPA.
(h)Represents professional fees in connection with the registration of common stock underlying outstanding warrants.
(i)Represents severance costs incurred related to departmental changes.
(j)Includes loss on disposal of fixed assets, foreign currency (gains) losses and legal expenses considered to be non-recurring.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We consider liquidity in terms of cash flows from operations and their sufficiency to fund business operations, including working capital needs, debt service, acquisitions, contractual obligations and other commitments. In particular, to meet our payment service obligations at all times, we must have sufficient highly liquid assets and be able to move funds on a timely basis.
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash generated by operating activities supplemented with borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our primary cash needs are for day to day operations, to pay interest and principal on our indebtedness, to fund working capital requirements and to make capital expenditures.
Index
Notwithstanding the recent effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. economy, we have funded and still expect to continue funding our liquidity requirements through internally generated funds, supplemented in the ordinary course, with borrowings under our revolving credit facility. While our operating cash flows may be affected by the economic conditions resulting from the pandemic and other factors, we maintain a strong cash balance position and have access to committed funding sources, which we have used only on a limited and ordinary course basis during the year ended December 31, 2020. Therefore, we believe that our projected cash flows generated from operations, together with borrowings under our revolving credit facility are sufficient to fund our principal debt payments, interest expense, our working capital needs and our expected capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months. We will, however, continue to evaluate the nature and extent of these potential impacts to our business and liquidity and capital resources and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity, such as limiting discretionary spending and re-prioritizing our capital projects, to ensure that our business can continue to operate during these uncertain times.
The Company and certain of its domestic subsidiaries as borrowers (the “Loan Parties”) entered into a financing agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”) with a group of banking institutions. The Credit Agreement provides for a $35 million revolving credit facility, a $90 million term loan facility and an up to $30 million incremental facility of which $12 million was utilized in the second quarter of 2019 to pay for the cash portion of the Warrants Offer. The Credit Agreement also provides for the issuance of letters of credit, which would reduce availability under the revolving credit facility. The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is November 7, 2023.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total indebtedness of $89.4 million, consisting of borrowings under the term loan facility and excluding debt origination costs of $1.8 million. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no outstanding amounts drawn on the revolving credit facility. There were $53.0 million of additional borrowings available under these facilities as of December 31, 2020.
Interest on the term loan facility and revolving credit facility under the Credit Agreement is determined by reference to either LIBOR or a “base rate”, in each case plus an applicable margin of 4.50% per annum for LIBOR loans or 3.50% per annum for base rate loans. The Company is also required to pay a fee on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility equal to 0.35% per annum. The effective interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 for the term loan and revolving credit facility were 5.78% and 1.00%, respectively.
The principal amount of the term loan facility under the Credit Agreement must be repaid in consecutive quarterly installments of 5.0% in year 1, 7.5% in years 2 and 3, and 10.0% in years 4 and 5, in each case on the last day of each quarter, which commenced in March 2019 with a final payment at maturity. The loans under the Credit Agreement may be prepaid at any time without payment or penalty.
The Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that require the Company to maintain a quarterly minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.25:1.00 and a quarterly maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 3.25:1.00. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement also contains covenants that limit the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, grant liens, incur additional indebtedness, make acquisitions or investments, dispose of certain assets, change the nature of their businesses, enter into certain transactions with affiliates or amend the terms of material indebtedness.
In addition, the Credit Agreement establishes certain restrictions on payment of dividends or cash distributions other than for certain purposes, including the following: i) to pay cash dividends to the Company in an amount necessary to cover reasonable and customary corporate and operating expenses, ii) to purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire warrants, rights or options on the Company’s common stock of an aggregate amount of up to $10 million plus the Available Amount (as defined in the Credit Agreement), iii) to repurchase the Company’s common stock from current or former employees in an aggregate amount of up to $5 million per calendar year, and iv) other restricted payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5 million plus the Available Amount.
As a result of the restrictions described above, among others, substantially all of the Company’s net assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are considered restricted net assets.
The obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by the Company and certain domestic subsidiaries of the Company and secured by liens on substantially all of the assets of the Loan Parties, subject to certain exclusions and limitations.
On April 20, 2020, the Company received funds under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “Program”) in the amount of $3.5 million. Although the Company believes that it met all eligibility criteria for a loan under the Program at the time of its application, subsequent to receiving the funds, the Small Business Administration (“SBA”), in consultation with the Department of the Treasury (“Treasury”), provided additional guidance to address public, borrower and lender questions concerning the eligibility criteria under the Program. Based on this guidance provided by the SBA and Treasury, the Company returned the funds received under the Program on April 29, 2020.
Our indebtedness could adversely affect our ability to raise additional capital, limit our ability to react to changes in the economy or our industry, expose us to interest rate risk and prevent us from meeting our obligations. See “Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our
Index
Indebtedness-We have a substantial amount of indebtedness, which may limit our operating flexibility and could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.”
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the changes to our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $53.4 million from net cash provided by operating activities of $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $53.4 million is a result of $66.3 million related to changes in working capital, primarily due to prefunding activity with our paying agents, offset by $12.9 million of cash generated by our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, which were positively impacted by the further growth of the business.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $32.7 million from $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $32.7 million is a result of additional cash generated by our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2019, which were positively impacted by the further growth of the business, and also $15.5 million related to changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.6 million from $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in cash used was primarily due to lower purchases of property and equipment, partially as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and no acquisitions of agent locations during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.2 million from $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase in cash used was primarily due to higher purchases of property and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2019 consistent with the growth of our agent network and IT department infrastructure.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of scheduled quarterly repayments due on the term loan facility, offset by proceeds from issuance of stock as a result of the exercise of options.
Net cash used in financing activities was $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted primarily of $30.0 million in revolving credit line repayments, $10.0 million related to payments made in connection with the Warrants Offer and $5.0 million of quarterly payments due on the term loan facility, partially offset by $12.0 million in borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The year ended December 31, 2018 included the repayment of the term loan of $95.8 million, the payment of $3.5 million in debt origination costs and $1.8 million of a prepayment penalty, offset by borrowings of $90.0 million as part of the refinancing of a former senior secured credit facility, $10.0 million of net borrowings under the revolving facility and net proceeds related to the Merger.
Index
Contractual Obligations
The following table includes aggregated information about contractual obligations that affect our liquidity and capital needs. At December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations over the next several periods were as follows:
Our consolidated balance sheet reflects $87.6 million of debt as of December 31, 2020, as the principal payment obligations of $89.4 million are gross of unamortized debt origination costs of $1.8 million. The above table reflects the principal and interest of the revolver and term loan under the Credit Agreement that will be paid through the maturity of the debt using the rates in effect on December 31, 2020 and assuming no voluntary prepayments of principal.
Non-cancelable operating leases include various office leases, including our office headquarters.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not a party to any material off-balance sheet arrangements, such as guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests, certain derivative instruments and variable interest entities that either have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
Critical accounting policies are those policies that management believes are very important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations, and that require management to make estimates that are difficult, subjective or otherwise complex. Based on these criteria, management has identified the following critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
Revenues for wire transfer and money order fees are recognized at the time the transaction is processed. The Company acts as the principal for these transactions as the Company controls the service at all times prior to transferring the funds to the beneficiary, is primarily responsible for fulfilling the customer contracts, has the risk of loss and has the ability to establish transaction prices. Therefore, these fees are recognized on a gross basis equal to the full amount of the fee charged to the customer. These fees also vary by transaction primarily depending upon, the principal amount sent, the send and receive locations, as well as the respective currencies of the send and receive locations. Foreign exchange gain, which represents the difference between the exchange rate set by the Company and the rate realized, is recognized upon the disbursement of U.S. dollars to entities from which the Company is acquiring foreign currency. Other income primarily represents revenues for technology services provided to the independent network of agents who utilize the Company’s technology in processing transactions and check cashing services, for which revenue is derived by a fee per transaction.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new accounting standard, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as amended, which modified the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. Refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 4, “Revenue Recognition Standard” for further information about the impact of the adoption of this new accounting standard.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded upon initiation of the wire transfer and are typically due to us within five days. We maintain an allowance for credit losses for estimated losses resulting primarily from the inability of our sending agents to make required payments. When preparing these estimates, we consider a number of factors, including the aging of a sending agent’s account, creditworthiness of specific sending agents, historical trends and other information. We review our allowance for credit losses policy periodically, reflecting current risks and changes in industry conditions and, when necessary, will increase our allowance for credit losses and recognize a
Index
provision for bad debt expense, included in other selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets result primarily from business combination acquisitions. Intangible assets include agent relationships, trade name, developed technology and other intangibles, all with finite lives. Our agent relationships, trade name and developed technology are currently amortized utilizing an accelerated method over their estimated useful lives. Other intangible assets are amortized straight-line over a useful life of 10 years. Upon the acquisition, the purchase price is first allocated to identifiable assets and liabilities, including the trade name and other intangibles, with any remaining purchase price recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is not amortized, rather, an impairment test is conducted on an annual basis, at the beginning of the fourth quarter, or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. For purposes of the annual impairment test, management initially performs a qualitative assessment, which includes consideration of the economic, industry and market conditions in addition to our overall financial performance and the performance of these assets. If our qualitative assessment does not conclude that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, we perform a quantitative analysis. In a quantitative test, the fair value of a reporting unit is determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various assumptions, including assumptions about future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on our long-term projections. Assumptions used in our impairment testing are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If not, we compare the implied fair value of goodwill with its carrying amount. To the extent the carrying amount exceeds its implied fair value, an impairment charge would be necessary.
We review for impairment indicators of finite-lived intangibles and other long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with GAAP which require, among other things, recognition of future tax benefits measured at enacted tax rates attributable to deductible temporary differences between financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and to tax net operating loss carryforwards to the extent that realization of said benefits is more likely than not.
We account for tax contingencies by assessing all material positions, including all significant uncertain positions, for all tax years that are open to assessment or challenge under tax statutes. Those positions that have only timing consequences are separately analyzed based on the recognition and measurement model provided in the tax guidance.
As required by the uncertain tax position guidance, we recognize the financial statement benefit of a position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the positions following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various state jurisdictions. Tax regulations within each jurisdiction are subject to the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and require significant judgment to apply. We apply the uncertain tax position guidance to all tax positions for which the statute of limitations remains open. Our policy is to classify interest accrued as interest expense and penalties as operating expenses.
Our foreign subsidiaries are subject to taxes by local tax authorities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, for further discussion.