Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (dollars in thousands).
Certain statements set forth under this caption constitute “forward-looking statements.” See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” on page 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional factors relating to such statements.
The Company is engaged primarily in the manufacturing, distributing, marketing and sale of vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products. The Company’s customers are located primarily throughout the United States, Luxembourg and Canada.
Our financial results are substantially dependent on net sales. Net sales are partly dependent on the mix of contract manufactured products and other nutraceutical sales, which are difficult to forecast. Factors that could cause demand to be different from our expectations include: customer acceptance of our pricing and our competitors’ pricing; changes in customer order patterns; changes in the level of customer inventory; and changes in business and economic conditions, including conditions in the credit market that could affect consumer confidence and result in lower than expected demand for our manufactured products and to a lesser extent, our other nutraceutical business products. Additionally, our financial results may continue to be impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe that we have established and developing business relationships, facilities, personnel, product offerings, and competitive and financial resources in place for business success; however, future revenue, costs, gross margins, and profits are all influenced by a number of factors, including those discussed above, all of which are inherently difficult to forecast. Except as otherwise noted, all dollar amounts below are “in thousands”.
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, our net sales from operations increased by $10,790 to approximately $63,559 from approximately $52,769 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Our net sales in the Contract Manufacturing Segment increased by $10,509 and in our Other Nutraceuticals Segment by $281. Net sales increased in our Contract Manufacturing Segment primarily due to increased sales volumes to Life Extension and Herbalife, our two significant customers, in the amount of $6,995 and $3,015, respectively. In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, our gross profit increased by approximately $2,753 to $9,480 from approximately $6,727 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Our profit margins increased by 2.1% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, from 12.8% to 14.9% primarily as a result of the increased sales volume in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 coupled with increased sales dollars used to offset the fixed manufacturing overhead costs. We had consolidated selling and administrative expenses of approximately $3,696 and $3,468 in the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in the consolidated selling and administrative expenses of $228, or approximately 6.6%, was primarily from the increases in two non-cash items, stock compensation expense by $172 and depreciation and amortization by $16 and an increase in insurance costs of $34. In the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had operating income of approximately $5,784 and $3,259, respectively.
Our revenue from our two significant customers in our Contract Manufacturing Segment is dependent on their demand within their respective distribution channels for the products we manufacture for them. As in any competitive market, our ability to match or beat other contract manufacturers pricing for the same items may also alter our outlook and the ability to maintain or increase revenues. We will continue to focus on our core businesses and push forward in maintaining our cost structure in line with our sales and expanding our customer base.
The global outbreak of COVID-19, or coronavirus, has the potential to cause a disruption in our supply chain. Most of our materials may be obtained from more than one supplier; however, due to port closures and other restrictions resulting from the coronavirus outbreak throughout the world, these suppliers, located both inside and outside of the United States, may have limited supply of such materials, which has caused prices of some materials to increase. As of September 2, 2021, we have had delays, however; we have not experienced a significant disruption in the supply chain for our raw materials. We have taken measures to secure some surplus stock and have informed our customers who may be affected of the potential price increase. In addition, the significant outbreak of this contagious disease in the human population has resulted in a widespread health crisis that could adversely affect the economies and financial markets of many countries, resulting in an economic downturn that could affect demand for our products and impact our operating results.
While, as of September 2, 2021, we haven’t experienced a major disruption in the supply chain for our manufactured products, we did, however, see a disruption in the supply chain for personal protection equipment (“PPE”) and cleaning supplies used in our manufacturing facilities in accordance with our standard operating procedures and the updated guidelines issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”) for personal safety. The U.S. Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration has adopted the CDC guidelines and as such we are required to provide the PPE for our employees to wear while working. When we did obtain the out of stock items, such as face masks, gloves and other protective personal items, the cost of such items were substantially higher than the historical costs. Due to increased volumes of sales, the increased costs of PPE did not impact our gross margins. Additionally, if we are unable to obtain cleaning supplies in the future, we may have to temporarily close areas of production until the needed supplies are obtained.
In addition to supply chain issues resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we are experiencing supply chain disruptions relating to fuel refinery and transportation issues as it pertains to the production of plastics. This is impacting the supply and demand of bottles and caps, key components in our Contract Manufacturing Segment. Transportation, in general, continues to be an issue in the delay of receiving materials and our ability to meet promised delivery dates to our customers in the Contract Manufacturing Segment.
We do not currently anticipate any negative impact to our margins resulting from the coronavirus outbreak, however; if we are unable to obtain the necessary materials to produce a supplement within our standard lead times or the necessary PPE and cleaning supplies, it may delay the production and shipment of those supplements, thereby shifting the timing of recognizing the resulting sale to our customers.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The most significant estimates include:
● sales returns and allowances;
● allowance for doubtful accounts;
● inventory valuation;
● valuation and recoverability of long-lived assets;
● income taxes and valuation allowances on deferred income taxes; and
● accruals for, and the probability of, the outcome of current litigation, if any.
On a continual basis, management reviews its estimates utilizing currently available information, changes in facts and circumstances, historical experience and reasonable assumptions. After such reviews, and if deemed appropriate, those estimates are adjusted accordingly. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts and Sales Returns
Our management makes judgments as to its ability to collect outstanding receivables and provides allowances for the portion of receivables for which collection becomes doubtful. Provisions are made based upon a specific review of all significant outstanding amounts. We continuously monitor payments from our customers and maintain allowances for estimated losses for doubtful accounts in the period they become known.
If the historical data we use to calculate the allowance provided for doubtful accounts does not reflect the future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions for doubtful accounts may be needed and the future results of operations could be materially affected. In recording any additional allowances, a respective charge against income is reflected in the general and administrative expenses; and would reduce the operating results in the period in which the increase is recorded.
Our return policy in our contract manufacturing business is to only accept returns for defective products. If defective products are returned, our agreement with our customers is to cure the defect and re-ship the product. Based on this policy, when the product is shipped we make an estimate of any potential returns or allowances. With respect to our branded proprietary nutraceutical products, our return policy is also to accept returns for defective products and re-ship replacement items for the damaged product. In most instances, the damaged goods are a small portion of the overall order and we instruct our customer to dispose of the damaged product and we issue them a credit for the dollar amount of the damaged goods plus any cost of disposal. We also estimate and make allowances at the time of shipment.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, which reflects management’s estimates of net realizable value. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method. As a result of our inventory being manufactured primarily on a purchase order basis, the quantity of both raw materials and finished goods inventory provides for minimal risk of potential overstock or obsolescence.
Mail and Internet order inventory is expiration date sensitive. Accordingly, we review this inventory, consider sales levels (by SKU), term to expiration date, potential for retesting to extend expiration date, and evaluate potential for obsolescence or overstock.
Long Lived Assets
We record impairment losses on long lived assets when events and circumstances indicate that such assets might be impaired and the estimated fair value of any such asset is less than its recorded amount. The Company reviews the value of its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable or that the useful lives of these assets are no longer appropriate. Conditions that would necessitate an impairment assessment include material adverse changes in operations, significant adverse differences in actual results in comparison with initial valuation forecasts prepared at the time of acquisition, a decision to abandon certain acquired products, services, or marketplaces, or other significant adverse changes that would indicate the carrying amount of the recorded asset might not be recoverable. Tests for impairment or recoverability are performed at least annually and require significant management judgment and the use of estimates which the Company believes are reasonable and appropriate at the time of the impairment test. The Company also re-evaluates the periods of amortization to determine whether circumstances warrant revised estimates of current useful lives. No impairment losses were identified in the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 or 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company records deferred tax assets and liabilities for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between tax bases of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating losses and tax credit carry-forwards. The Company measures deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to be applied to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company reduces deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that these benefits will not be realized.
The Company uses a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities.
General Litigation
From time to time, the Company is a defendant or plaintiff in various legal actions which arise in the normal course of business. As such, the Company is required to assess the likelihood of any adverse outcomes to these matters as well as potential ranges of probable losses. A determination of the amount of the provision required for these commitments and contingencies, if any, which would be charged to earnings, is made after careful analysis of each matter. The provision may change in the future due to new developments or changes in circumstances. Changes in the provision could increase or decrease the Company’s earnings in the period the changes are made. In the opinion of management, after consultation with legal counsel, the ultimate resolution of these matters cannot be determined at this time as to the whether there could be material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes product sales revenue, the prices of which are fixed and determinable, when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer, when estimated provisions for product returns, rebates, charge-backs and other sales allowances are reasonably determinable, and when collectability is reasonably assured. Accruals for these items are presented in the consolidated financial statements as reductions to sales. The Company’s net sales represent gross sales invoiced to customers, less certain related charges for discounts, returns, rebates, charge-backs and other allowances. Cost of sales includes the cost of raw materials and all labor and overhead associated with the manufacturing and packaging of the products. Gross margins are affected by, among other things, changes in the relative sales mix among our products and valuation and/or charge off of slow moving, expired or obsolete inventories. To perform revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps:
●
identification of the promised goods or services in the contract;
●
determination of whether the promised goods or serves are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract;
●
measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration;
●
allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and
●
recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in ASC 606.
Results of Operations (in thousands, except share and per share amounts)
The following table sets forth the income statement data of the Company as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
Year ended June 30, 2021 Compared to the Year ended June 30, 2020
Sales, net. Net sales for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $63,559 and $52,769, respectively, an increase of $10,790 or 20.4%. The increase is comprised of the following:
In each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, a significant portion of our consolidated net sales, approximately 92%, were concentrated among two customers, Life Extension and Herbalife, customers in our Contract Manufacturing Segment. Life Extension and Herbalife represented approximately 69% and 26%, respectively, of our Contract Manufacturing Segment’s net sales in the each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Innophos (a customer of our Other Nutraceutical Businesses), while not a significant customer of our consolidated net sales, represented approximately 9% and 10% of the Other Nutraceutical Businesses net sales in the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The loss of any of these customers could have a significant adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
The increase in net sales of approximately $10,790 was primarily the result of increased net sales in our Contract Manufacturing Segment by approximately $10,509 which was primarily due to increased sales volumes to each of our major customers, Life Extension and Herbalife, in the amounts of $6,995 and $3,015, respectively, in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to the comparable prior year.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales increased by $8,037 to $54,079 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to $46,042 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 17.5%. Cost of sales as a percentage of sales was approximately 85% and 87% for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in the cost of goods sold amount is consistent and expected with the increase in net sales. The decrease in the cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales and the resulting increase in gross profit, was primarily the result of the increased net sales not needed to offset the fixed manufacturing overhead.
Selling and Administrative Expenses. There was a increase in selling and administrative expenses of $228 or approximately 6.6% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. As a percentage of sales, net, selling and administrative expenses were approximately 5.8% and 6.6% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily from increases in (i) in non-cash expenses of $188, (a) $172 related to employee stock compensation expense as a result of issuing stock options in November 2020, with no grant of options in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 and (b) $16 from increased depreciation and amortization costs primarily from increased leasehold improvement assets of approximately $144 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, (ii) insurance costs of $34 due to increased premiums from the unknown business risks associated with the COVID 19 pandemic, and (iii) other business expenses of $48 (primarily increased salaries and employee benefits of $32 and investor relations related expenses of $16). These increases were offset in part by a decrease in travel and entertainment of $42 as a result of travel and entertainment restrictions imposed by both state and federal governments relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net was approximately $1,463 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $(171) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, and is composed of:
Our interest expense in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 decreased by $141 from the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, primarily resulting from of lower average daily balances outstanding under the Senior Credit Facility with PNC and from the decrease in the interest rates on our Senior Credit Facility resulting from rate cuts in the federal funds borrowing rates of 2.00% and a 0.25% rate reduction in the refinancing with PNC Bank on May 15, 2019.
The PPP Note forgiveness amount of $1,659 represents principal of $1,639 and interest of $20 that qualified for loan forgiveness under the SBA guidelines and was paid to PNC Bank by the SBA on June 28, 2021, resulting in the other income of $1,659 recorded in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
In the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we sold 16,000 and 60,000 shares of iBio Stock for a gain of $56 and $72, respectively. Also, in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 we had an unrealized loss on the remaining iBio Stock of approximately $53 compared to an unrealized gain of $103 on investment in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
In the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had other income of $42 and $47, respectively from providing back office and operational support for unrelated entities that sell consumer products through retail and internet-based outlets. The balance of other income (expense), net was primarily from the disposition of property and equipment.
Federal and state income tax, net. In the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we released a portion of the valuation reserves for the deferred tax assets related to our federal net operating losses in the amount of $2,282 and $1,890, respectively. Management determined that the amount of the release was more likely than not to be realized by the Company. In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had deferred income taxes of $1,190 and $549, respectively and current state tax expense of approximately $619 and $369, respectively.
We continue to maintain a reserve on a portion of our deferred tax assets as it has been determined that based upon past losses, the Company’s past liquidity concerns and the current economic environment, it is “more likely than not” that the Company’s deferred tax assets may not be fully realized.
The increase in the state tax expense from 2020 to 2021 was the result of increased taxable income for the combined group.
Net income. Our net income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $8,013 and $4,108, respectively. The increase of approximately $3,905 was primarily the result of increased operating income of $2,525 and the PPP Note forgiveness in the amount of $1,659.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the Company’s net cash flows provided by or used in operating, investing and financing activities:
At June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company had working capital of $8,762 and $3,362, respectively. Our current assets increased by $1,537 and current liabilities decreased by approximately $3,863 from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021. The increase in the current assets is primarily from increases in inventories in the amount of $1,594 and the decrease in current liabilities is primarily from the decrease of $1,873 in advances under revolving credit facility and the PPP Note forgiveness in the amount of $1,659.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $3,050 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 includes net income of approximately $8,013. After excluding the effects of non-cash expenses and income, including PPP Note forgiveness, depreciation and amortization, compensation expense for employee stock options, accretion of financial instruments, changes in deferred tax assets and unrealized gains on investments, the adjusted cash used in operations before the effect of the changes in working capital components was an increase of approximately $6,096. Cash in the amount of approximately $3,046 from our working capital assets and liabilities was used in our operating activities and was primarily the result of increases in inventories of approximately $1,594, accounts receivable of $294, and decreases in operating lease obligations of $490 and accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities of $711, offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of approximately $43.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $1,339 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 includes net income of approximately $4,108. After excluding the effects of non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization, compensation expense for employee stock options, accretion of financial instruments, changes in deferred tax assets and unrealized gains on investments, the adjusted cash used in operations before the effect of the changes in working capital components was an increase of approximately $3,448. Cash in the amount of approximately $2,109 from our working capital assets and liabilities was used in our operating activities and was primarily the result of increases in inventories of approximately $1,282, accounts receivable of $1,082, other assets of $7 and decreases in operating lease obligations of $462 offset, in part, by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities of approximately $724.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was used for the purchase of machinery and equipment for approximately $295 and $214 in the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, offset in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 by proceeds received from the sale of fixed assets of $0 and $3, from the sale of iBio, Stock of $96 and $101, a net use of cash approximately $199 and $110, respectively.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was approximately $3,043 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and consists of; (i) $57,662 received from advances under our revolving credit facility, and (ii) $23 received from the exercise of employee stock options, offset by (i) repayments under our revolving credit facility of $59,535 (See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), (ii) repayments of principal under our term notes in the amount of $1,118 (See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) and (iii) repayments of $75 under our capitalized lease obligations.
Cash used in financing activities was approximately $1,302 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 and consists of; (i) 47,213 received from advances under our revolving credit facility; (ii) $1,639 received from PNC Bank under the PPP of the CARES Act (See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K); and (iii) $7 received from the exercise of employee stock options, offset in part by (i) repayments under our revolving credit facility of $49,001 (See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), (ii) repayments of principal under our term notes in the amount of $966 (See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) and (iii) repayments of $194 under our capitalized lease obligations.
As of June 30, 2021, we had cash of approximately $210, funds available under our revolving credit facility of approximately $5,508 and working capital of $8,762. Our working capital includes approximately $2,173 outstanding under our revolving line of credit which is not due until May 2024 but classified as current due to a subjective acceleration clause that could cause the advances to become currently due. (See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Furthermore, we had income from operations of approximately $5,784 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and net income of approximately $8,013. After taking into consideration our interim results and current projections, management believes that operations, together with the revolving credit facility and equipment financing will support our working capital requirements at least through the twelve-month period ending September 2, 2022.
Our total annual commitments at June 30, 2021 for long term non-cancelable leases of approximately $582 consists of obligations under operating leases for facilities and operating lease agreements for the rental of warehouse equipment and office equipment.
Capital Expenditures
The Company's capital expenditures in the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $295 and $214, respectively. The Company has budgeted approximately $500 for capital expenditures for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022. The total amount is expected to be funded from cash provided from the Company’s operations and from lease financing.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
The Company does not believe that inflation has significantly affected its results of operations.