ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, our expectations regarding revenue, gross margin, operating expenses, cash flows and other financial items; the severity, magnitude, duration and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic; the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and related impacts will materially and adversely affect our business operations, financial performance, results of operations, financial position, stock price and personnel; achievement of strategic objectives; any statements of the plans, strategies and objectives of management for future operations and personnel; statements regarding the Acquisition; remaining payments under the 2020 Restructuring Plan; the impact of new customer network footprint on our gross margin; statements regarding our ERP systems; impacts of the recent presidential administration change in the United States; the effects of seasonal patterns in our business; factors that may affect our operating results; anticipated customer acceptance of our solutions; statements concerning new products or services, including new product features; statements related to capital expenditures; statements related to working capital and liquidity; statements related to future economic conditions, performance, market growth, competitor consolidation or our sales cycle; our ability to identify, attract and retain highly skilled personnel; our ability to protect our technology and intellectual property, the frequency of claims related to our intellectual property and the value of our intellectual property; our ability to protect our technology and intellectual property, the frequency of claims related to our intellectual property and the value of our intellectual property; statements related to our convertible senior notes and credit facility; statements related to the impact of tax regulations; statements related to the proliferation and impact of environmental regulation; statements related to the proliferation and impact of environmental regulation; statements related to the effects of litigation on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows; statements related to factors beyond our control, such as natural disasters, acts of war or terrorism, epidemics and pandemics; statements related to new accounting standards; statements as to industry trends and other matters that do not relate strictly to historical facts; and statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing. These statements are often identified using of words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” "should," "will," or "would," and similar expressions or variations. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review these risk factors for a more complete understanding of the risks associated with an investment in our securities. Such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. We disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our “Selected Financial Data” included in Part II, Item 6 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a global supplier of networking solutions comprised of networking equipment, software and services. Our portfolio of solutions includes optical transport platforms, converged packet-optical transport platforms, optical line systems, disaggregated router platforms, and a suite of networking and automation software offerings, and support and professional services.
Our customers include telecommunications service providers, ICPs, cable providers, wholesale carriers, research and education institutions, large enterprises and government entities. Our networking solutions enable our customers to deliver business and consumer communications services. Our comprehensive portfolio of networking solutions also enables our customers to scale their transport networks as end-user services and applications continue to drive growth in demand for network bandwidth. These end-user services and applications include, but are not limited to, high-speed internet access, business ethernet services, 4G/5G mobile broadband, cloud-based services, high-definition video streaming services, virtual and augmented reality and the Internet of Things.
Our systems are highly scalable, flexible and designed with open networking principles for ease of deployment. We build our systems using a combination of internally manufactured and third-party components. Our portfolio includes systems that leverage our innovative optical engine technology, comprised of large-scale PICs and DSPs. We optimize the manufacturing process by using indium phosphide to build our PICs, which enables the integration of hundreds of optical functions onto a set of semiconductor chips. This large-scale integration of our PICs and advanced DSPs allows us to deliver high-performance transport networking platforms with features that customers care about the most, including low cost per bit, low power consumption and space savings. In addition, we design our optical engines to increase the capacity and reach performance of our products by leveraging coherent optical transmission. We believe our vertical integration strategy becomes increasingly more valuable as our customers transition to 800 gigabits per second (“Gb/s”) per wavelength transmission speeds and beyond, as the combination of our optical integration, DSP, and tightly integrated packaging enables a leading optical performance at higher optical speeds. Over time, we plan to integrate our optical engine technology into a broader set of transport platforms in order to enhance customer value and lower production costs.
Over the past several years, we expanded our portfolio of solutions, evolving from our initial focus on the long-haul and subsea optical transport markets to offering a more complete suite of packet-optical networking solutions that address multiple markets within the end-to-end transport infrastructure. We achieved this expansion both by developing products internally and through acquisitions of Transmode AB in 2015 and Coriant in 2018. In particular, our acquisition of Coriant enhanced our ability to serve a global customer base and also enabled us to expand the breadth of customer applications we can address, including metro aggregation and switching, disaggregated routing, and software-enabled multi-layer network management and control.
Our high-speed optical transport platforms are differentiated by the Infinite Capacity Engine (ICE), our optical engine technology. ICE enables different subsystems that can be customized for a variety of network applications in different transport markets, including metro, DCI, long-haul and subsea. Our latest generation of available optical engine technology delivers multi-terabit opto-electronic subsystems powered by our fourth-generation PIC and latest generation FlexCoherent DSP (the combination of which we market as “ICE4”).
As part of the Acquisition, we expanded our high-speed optical transport portfolio with 600 Gb/s transmission capabilities powered by our CloudWave T technology, which enabled us to expand the high-speed transmission applications we can address.
Our products are designed to be managed by a suite of software solutions that enable end-to-end common network management, multi-layer service orchestration, and automated operations. We also provide software-enabled programmability that offers differentiated capabilities such as Instant Bandwidth. Combined with our differentiated hardware solutions, Instant Bandwidth enables our customers to purchase and activate bandwidth as needed through our unique software licensing feature set. This, in turn, allows our customers to accomplish two key objectives: (1) limit their initial network startup costs and investments; and (2) instantly activate new bandwidth as their customers’ and their own network needs evolve.
We believe our end-to-end portfolio of solutions benefits our customers by providing a unique combination of highly scalable capacity and features that address various applications and ultimately simplify and automate packet-optical network operations.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic in March 2020. We have been and will continue monitoring and adjusting our operations, as appropriate, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Employees
We have taken a number of precautionary steps to safeguard our business and our employees from the effects of the outbreak of COVID-19, including temporarily closing or substantially limiting the presence of personnel in our offices in several impacted locations, implementing travel restrictions and withdrawing from various industry events. Since a large percentage of our workforce is accustomed to online work environments and online collaboration tools, we are able to remain productive and in contact with one another and our customers and vendors. For those employees who may need to be in offices, laboratory and manufacturing environments, or at business partner sites to perform their roles, we are taking appropriate measures to protect their health and safety and create and maintain a safe working environment. However, sustained restrictions on
the ability of our engineers to work in our offices as a result of restrictions imposed by governments, or us, has made and could continue to make it more difficult for them to collaborate as effectively as desired in the development of new products, which can affect development schedules.
Business Operations
In addition, we have implemented certain business continuity plans in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to minimize any business disruption and to protect our supply chain, customer fulfillment sites and support operations. Although we believe these actions have mitigated the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we have experienced some disruption and delays in our supply chain and manufacturing operations, logistics, and customer support operations, including shipping delays, higher transport costs, and certain limitations on our ability to access customer fulfillment and service sites. We are dependent on sole source and limited source suppliers for several key components, and we have experienced capacity issues, longer lead times and increased costs with certain of these component suppliers, impacting our operational processes and results of operations. We have also seen disruptions in customer demand, including due to delays in the customer certification process resulting from customer facility closures or access restrictions. During fiscal 2020, some of these disruptions negatively impacted our revenue and our results of operations. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of operations in fiscal 2021 remains uncertain and is dependent in part on future infection rates, the emergence of new strains of the virus, the effectiveness and availability of vaccinations, and broader global macroeconomic developments.
We continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and actively assess potential implications to our business, supply chain and customer demand. If the COVID-19 pandemic or its adverse effects become more severe or prevalent or are prolonged in the locations where we, our customers, suppliers or contract manufacturers conduct business, or we experience more pronounced disruptions in our operations, or in economic activity and demand generally, our business and results of operations in future periods could be materially adversely affected.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have implemented measures to preserve cash and enhance liquidity, including suspending salary increases and bonuses, reducing salaries paid to a portion of our workforce, instituting a broad-based hiring freeze, significantly reducing business travel, reducing capital expenditures, and delaying or eliminating discretionary spending. We are also focused on managing our working capital needs, maintaining as much flexibility as possible around timing of taking and paying for inventory and manufacturing our products while managing potential changes or delays in installations.
While we believe we have enough cash to operate our business for the next 12 months, if the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business and financial position is more extensive than expected, we may need additional capital to enhance liquidity and working capital. We have historically been successful in our ability to secure other sources of financing, such as accessing capital markets, and implementing other cost reduction initiatives such as restructuring, delaying or eliminating discretionary spending to satisfy our liquidity needs. However, our access to these sources of capital could be materially and adversely impacted and we may not be able to receive terms as favorable as we have historically received. Capital markets have been volatile and there is no assurance that we would have access to capital markets at a reasonable cost, or at all, at times when capital is needed. In addition, some of our existing debt has restrictive covenants that may limit our ability to raise new debt, which would limit our ability to access liquidity by those means without obtaining the consent of our lenders.
On August 12, 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement with Jefferies under which we issued and sold through Jefferies, acting as agent and/or principal, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of $96.3 million, to raise funds for general corporate purposes, including working capital and capital expenditures. During the year ended December 26, 2020, we sold 12,000,000 shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement, for net proceeds of approximately $93.4 million, after paying Jefferies a sales commission of approximately $2.9 million related to services provided as the sales agent with respect to the sales of those shares.
Financial and Business Highlights
Total revenue was $1,355.6 million in 2020 as compared to $1,298.9 million in 2019, a 4% increase. The year over year increase in revenue was driven by revenue growth from service providers in APAC and from key customers in the United States. This growth was partially offset by lower revenue from our Cable vertical and a large European service provider which had strong revenue related to new deployments in the second half of 2019. In 2021, we anticipate benefiting from a diversified customer base and see several prospective opportunities to grow revenue by driving adoption of new and existing solutions. Our results will depend on overall market conditions and, as is typical, quarter-over-quarter revenue could be volatile, affected by the ongoing pandemic and more generally, customer buying patterns, supply chain disruptions and the timing of customer network deployments.
Gross margin increased to 30.2% in 2020 from 25% in 2019. The year over year increase in gross margin was primarily driven by lower integration and restructuring costs, which were higher in 2019 following the Coriant acquisition in 2018, and successful cost reductions stemming from enhanced manufacturing efficiencies as we benefited from site and systems consolidations that were completed during 2019. In 2020, we continued to lower our fixed cost structure and practiced pricing discipline, particularly on products acquired in the Acquisition. In 2021, we intend to continue to improve our fixed cost structure and practice pricing discipline. Additionally, with our ICE6 platform we intend to expand our vertical integration capabilities across more of our product portfolio, which we expect will lower our cost structure and drive continued margin improvement over time.
Operating expenses declined to $564.0 million in 2020 from $676.2 million in 2019, a 17% decrease. This decrease was attributable to lower headcount costs, lower costs on travel related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower integration and restructuring costs, which were higher in 2019 following the Coriant acquisition. In 2021, we intend to continue to balance prudent cost management with investments in technology innovation and other activities that will drive our future growth.
One customer accounted for approximately 11% and 13% of our revenue in 2020 and 2019, respectively. No other customers accounted for over 10% of our revenue in 2020 or 2019.
We primarily sell our products through our direct sales force, with the remainder sold indirectly through channel partners. We derived 77% and 79% of our revenue from direct sales to customers in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In the future, we expect to continue generating a majority of our revenue from direct sales.
We are headquartered in San Jose, California, with employees located throughout North America, LATAM, EMEA and APAC.
Results of Operations
The following sets forth, for the periods presented, certain consolidated statements of operations information (in thousands, except percentages):
*NMF - not meaningful
Revenue
2020 Compared to 2019. Product revenue increased by $34.1 million, or 3%, in 2020 from 2019. This increase was primarily driven by aforementioned growth from key customers in APAC and the United States. This increase was partially offset by lower revenue from our Cable vertical and a large European customer which had strong revenue related to new deployments in the second half of 2019.
Services revenue increased by $22.7 million, or 8%, in 2020 from 2019. This increase was attributable to an increase in amortized revenue stemming from higher services maintenance revenue, driven by a new customer and growth in existing customer renewals, and an increase in professional services revenue primarily from network installations.
2019 Compared to 2018. Product revenue increased by $247.9 million, or 32%, in 2019 from 2018, primarily attributable to the inclusion of Coriant’s revenue for all of 2019 as compared to only the fourth quarter of 2018. Revenue growth was also driven by strong year over year growth from our ICP and Tier 1 verticals. Overall growth was partially offset by a decline from our cable vertical, as compared to a very strong 2018.
Services revenue increased by $107.6 million, or 60%, in 2019 from 2018, primarily attributable to the inclusion of Coriant's services revenue for all of 2019 as compared to only the fourth quarter of 2018. Services revenue was slightly offset by lower revenue from our largest cable customer.
In line with typical seasonality in our industry, we expect our total revenue will be lower in the first quarter of 2021 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2020, as our customers take time to determine and operationalize their 2021 budgets.
Revenue by geographic region is based on the shipping address of the customer. The following table summarizes our revenue by geography and sales channel for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
2020 Compared to 2019. Domestic revenue increased by $2.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to strong growth from ICP customers. In 2020, the growth from our ICP vertical was nearly offset by moderate declines from certain Cable and Tier 1 customers.
International revenue increased by $54.4 million, or 8%, in 2020 compared to 2019. In this period, revenue in APAC increased strongly due to certain large new deployments. We also enjoyed growth in Other Americas and in EMEA in 2020.
Indirect revenue increased $49.3 million, or 19% primarily due to our growth in international revenue, where in certain regions we typically sell through channel partners as opposed to selling directly to customers.
2019 Compared to 2018. Domestic revenue increased by $151.3 million, or 32%, in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily attributable to the inclusion of Coriant’s revenue for all of 2019 as compared to only the fourth quarter of 2018. In 2019 we saw a significant increase in spending from our ICP and Tier 1 verticals. Growth was partially offset by lower spending from cable operators in 2019, compared to a very strong 2018.
International revenue increased by $204.2 million, or 44%, in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily attributable to the inclusion of Coriant’s revenue for all of 2019 as compared to only the fourth quarter of 2018. Additionally, we also benefited from increased ICE4 sales to a key customer in Europe.
Indirect revenue increased $161.9 million, or 155% due to the Acquisition, as Coriant’s business model carried a higher proportion revenue driven by channel partners than Infinera’s did historically.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
2020 Compared to 2019. Gross margin increased to 30.2% in 2020 from 25% in 2019. In this period our margins benefited from reductions in integration-related expenses and restructuring costs. We also reduced costs attributable to completing site and systems consolidations over the course of 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. Gross margin decreased to 25% in 2019 from 34.0% in 2018. This decline was primarily due to the mix of products acquired from the Acquisition, as Coriant products historically had a lower margin. As the time of the Acquisition, Coriant carried a higher cost structure largely due to not being vertically integrated. Integration and restructuring expenses also contributed to the gross margin decline. Over the course of 2019, we were able to improve margins by improving pricing discipline and executing on our integration strategy of lowering our cost structure by reducing headcount and transitioning costs to lower cost regions and variable cost models.
In any given quarter, gross margins can fluctuate based on a number of factors, including the mix of footprint versus fill, product mix, customer mix and overall volume.
We currently expect that gross margin in the first quarter of 2021 will be slightly lower than that of the fourth quarter of 2020. In the first quarter we will look to optimally spread our fixed costs across the seasonally lower anticipated revenue and intend to continue practicing pricing discipline and lowering costs
Amortization of Intangible Assets
2020 Compared to 2019. Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $3.3 million in 2020 from 2019 due to certain technologies becoming fully amortized in the third quarter of 2020. The decrease was partially offset by capitalization of in-process technology to developed in the fourth quarter of 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. Amortization of intangible assets increased by $9.1 million in 2019 from 2018 primarily due to a full year of amortization expense on intangible assets acquired from Coriant.
Acquisition and Integration Costs
2020 Compared to 2019. Acquisition and integration costs decreased by $26.6 million in 2020 from 2019. This reduction has been the result of lower integration-related headcount, third-party contractors, and vendor spend during 2020 as we have largely completed our integration efforts.
2019 Compared to 2018. Acquisition and integration costs increased by $28.4 million in 2019 from 2018 as a result of the Acquisition. Costs in 2019 were predominantly integration related, which included the transition of our Berlin manufacturing activities to a contract manufacturer, start-up costs around a new European distribution center, and contractors and employees focused on integration-specific activities.
See Note 7, “Business Combination” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the Acquisition.
Restructuring and Related
2020 Compared to 2019. In 2020, within cost of revenue, we incurred $4.1 million in restructuring and other related costs, including $4.0 million of severance and related costs and $0.1 million of asset impairment charges and impaired facilities charges. The restructuring and related costs decreased by $25.8 million due to the substantial completion of restructuring initiatives under the 2018 Restructuring Plan in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was partially offset by additional costs under the 2020 Restructuring Plan initiated in the second quarter of 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018. In 2019, within cost of revenue, we incurred $29.9 million in restructuring and other related costs, including $26.6 million of severance and related costs and $2.2 million of asset impairment charges and $1.2 million of impaired facilities charges. These charges were primarily associated with the closure of our Berlin, Germany site and the reduction of headcount at our Munich, Germany site.
See Note 10, “Restructuring and Other Related Costs” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our restructuring plans.
Operating Expenses
The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
The following table summarizes the stock-based compensation expense included in our operating expenses for the periods presented (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
2020 Compared to 2019. Research and development expenses decreased by $22.3 million, or 8% in 2020 from 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower employee-related costs and lower travel costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decreases were partially offset by higher outside services spend associated with bringing our new technologies to market. As employee-related costs have declined, we have continued to make targeted innovation investments in research and development to support our strategy of expanding our vertically integrated product portfolio, including bringing new products to market quickly.
2019 Compared to 2018. Research and development expenses increased by $43.7 million, or 18%, in 2019 from 2018, primarily due to increased headcount as a result of the Acquisition. Over the course of 2019, R&D expenses grew at a slower rate than revenue, largely due to reducing headcount and lower spending in equipment and materials as we started to benefit from company-wide cost reduction and integration efforts.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
2020 Compared to 2019. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $21.8 million, or 14%, in 2020 from 2019. This decrease was driven by lower travel and marketing-related expenses, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also had lower employee-related spend during these periods, primarily due to workforce reduction initiatives. The 2020 decrease was partially offset by higher stock-based compensation expenses.
2019 Compared to 2018. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $27.2 million, or 22%, in 2019 from 2018, primarily due to the inclusion of the Coriant business and higher commission expense as a result of higher revenue. Sales and marketing expenses grew at a slower rate than revenue due to reducing headcount and lower demo and trial spend in conjunction with company-wide cost reduction and integration efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
2020 Compared to 2019. General and administrative expenses decreased by $14.1 million, or 11%, in 2020 from 2019. The decrease was attributable to lower outside services spend stemming from cost management initiatives, lower employee-related expenses, lower travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a litigation settlement in the second quarter of 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. General and administrative expenses increased by $45.4 million, or 56%, in 2019 from 2018, primarily due to the inclusion of headcount associated expenses from the Coriant business and higher outside professional services. General and administrative expenses grew faster than revenue to ensure we had sufficient infrastructure and operations to support the larger company.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
2020 Compared to 2019. Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $8.7 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily due to higher amortization of backlog by $8.1 million in 2019. Backlog is amortized over the expected customer lives.
2019 Compared to 2018. Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $2.0 million in 2019 from 2018, primarily due to higher amortization of backlog in 2018 compared to 2019 offset by higher amortization of customer relationship intangible assets in 2019 as a result of the Acquisition.
Acquisition and Integration Costs
2020 Compared to 2019. Acquisition and integration costs decreased by $28.9 million in 2020 from 2019 primarily due to lower integration-related headcount, third-party contractors and vendor spend as we largely completed our integration efforts in 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018. Acquisition and integration costs increased by $26.7 million in 2019 from 2018 as a result of the Acquisition. Costs in 2019 were predominantly integration-related including the convergence of three ERP systems into one new corporate ERP system, other systems-related integration activities, and costs related to contractors and headcount focused on integration-specific activities.
See Note 7, “Business Combination” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the Acquisition.
Restructuring and Related
2020 Compared to 2019. Restructuring and related costs decreased by $16.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The severance and related costs decreased by $11.2 million due to the substantial completion of restructuring initiatives under the 2018 Restructuring Plan in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was partially offset by additional costs under the 2020 Restructuring Plan initiated in the second quarter of 2020. Facilities-related impairment charges decreased by $4.9 million due to impairment of a facility in Naperville, Illinois in 2019. The decrease was by offset additional impairment charges on our facility in Naperville and impairment of certain other leased facilities recorded in fiscal 2020.
2019 Compared to 2018. In 2019, within operating expenses, we incurred $40.9 million in restructuring and other related costs, including $25.3 million of severance and related costs and $14.7 million of impaired facilities charges. These charges were primarily associated with the closure of our Berlin, Germany site, the reduction of headcount at our Munich, Germany site and impairment of a facility in Naperville, Illinois.
See Note 10, “Restructuring and Other Related Costs” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our restructuring plans.
Other Income (Expense), Net
2020 Compared to 2019. Interest income decreased by $1.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the liquidation of investments in 2019. Interest expense increased by $15.1 million, primarily due to amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs of $6.3 million and contractual interest of $4.0 million on the new convertible debt issued in March 2020, $1.9 million increase in amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs on the 2024 Notes (as described below), a $0.9 million increase in interest on a financing assistance arrangement obtained in May 2019, and a $3.7 million increase in interest and other related charges related to the Credit Facility (as described and defined below) obtained in August 2019, and as amended. This increase was offset by a $1.4 million of interest credit from a supplier and reduction in miscellaneous interest charges of $0.3 million.
The change in other gain (loss), net, in 2020 from 2019 was $4.0 million due to a decrease in foreign exchange losses, primarily driven by the favorable foreign currency exchange rate changes.
2019 Compared to 2018. Interest income decreased $1.3 million in 2019 from 2018, primarily due to a lower average investment balance during the year. Interest expense for 2019 increased by $9.6 million due to $18.6 million of additional interest and amortization related to the 2024 Notes issued in September 2018, $0.3 million of interest on cash collateral obtained in March 2019, $0.5 million of interest on a financing assistance arrangement obtained in May 2019, $1.1 million of interest and other related charges related to the Credit Facility (as defined under “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Liquidity” below) obtained in August 2019, and $1.7 million of other interest charges. The increase to interest expense was offset by a reduction of $6.5 million related to financing lease obligations, which we assumed in connection with the Acquisition and were reclassified in 2019
on adoption of the new leasing standard, and $6.2 million interest on 2018 Notes that matured in 2018. Other gain (loss), net, primarily consisted of a $3.7 million loss primarily related to foreign exchange related transactions and a $1.1 million gain on the sale of non-marketable equity investments.
Provision for/(Benefit From) Income Taxes
We recognized an income tax expense of $6.0 million on a loss before income taxes of $200.7 million, $3.0 million on a loss before income taxes of $383.7 million, and an income tax benefit of $0.7 million on a loss before income taxes of $215.0 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The resulting effective tax rates were (3.0)%, (0.8%) and 0.3% for 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The 2020 and 2019 effective tax rates differ from the expected statutory rate of 21% based on our ability to benefit from our U.S. loss carryforwards, offset by state income taxes, non-deductible stock-based compensation expenses and foreign taxes provided on foreign subsidiary earnings. The increase in 2020 income tax provision compared to 2019 is due to additional foreign earnings.
Because of our U.S. operating loss in 2020, significant loss carryforward position, and corresponding valuation allowance in all years, other than separate filing state taxes and minimum taxes, we have not been subject to federal or state tax on our U.S. income because of the availability of loss carryforwards. If these losses and other tax attributes become fully utilized, our taxes will increase significantly to a more normalized, expected rate on U.S. earnings. The release of transfer pricing reserves in the future will have a beneficial impact to tax expense, but the timing of the impact depends on factors such as expiration of the statute of limitations or settlements with tax authorities. No significant releases are expected in the near future based on information available at this time.
In determining future taxable income, we make assumptions to forecast federal, state and international operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of any feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. The assumptions require significant judgment regarding the forecasts of future taxable income, and are consistent with our income forecasts used to manage our business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our restricted cash balance amounts are primarily pledged as collateral for certain standby letters of credit related to customer performance guarantees, value added tax licenses and property leases.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $112.3 million for 2020, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $167.4 million for 2019 and net cash used in operating activities of $99.1 million for 2018.
Net loss for 2020 was $206.7 million, which included non-cash charges of $206.2 million such as depreciation, stock-based compensation, amortization of intangibles, operating lease expense, restructuring charges and related costs, and amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, compared to a net loss of $386.6 million in 2019, which included non-cash charges of $227.5 million. Net cash used in working capital was $111.8 million in 2020. Accounts receivable decreased by $32.2 million due to cash collections. Inventory levels decreased by $71.4 million due to management efforts to reduce inventory. Prepaid and other assets increased by $36.1 million primarily due to timing of value-added tax and income tax payments and increase in customer contract assets. Accounts payable decreased by $93.4 million primarily due to more timely payments to suppliers. Accrued liabilities and other expenses decreased by $107.7 million primarily due to the payment of the fiscal 2019 corporate bonus, restructuring liabilities, tax liabilities, purchases of shares of our common stock under our 2007 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”) in 2020 and no accrual for fiscal 2020 corporate bonus. Deferred revenue increased by $21.9 million due to higher maintenance renewals during the period attributable to expanding our installed base. Maintenance contracts are typically contracted on an annual or multi-year basis.
Net loss for 2019 was $386.6 million, which included non-cash charges of $227.5 million, compared to a net loss for 2018 of $214.3 million, which included non-cash charges of $172.4 million. Net cash used in working capital was $8.3 million for 2019. Accounts receivables increased by $35.4 million attributable to higher revenue levels during 2019 and the timing of invoicing and collections. Inventory levels increased by $42.8 million to address strong customer demand for our ICE4 products, and additional inventory to support our manufacturing transition and integration efforts. Prepaid and other assets increased by $93.6 million primarily due to timing of tax payments, and increase in customer contract assets. Accounts payable increased by $83.3 million primarily to support integration initiatives and the increase in inventory. Accrued liabilities and other expenses increased by $54.7 million primarily due to increased compensation-related expenses and timing of tax payments. Deferred revenue increased by $25.7 million due to maintenance renewals on our growing installed base, which are typically contracted on an annual or multi-year basis.
Net cash used in working capital was $57.2 million for 2018. Accounts receivables increased by $21.1 million attributable to higher revenue levels during 2018 and timing of invoicing and collections. Inventory levels increased by $8.6 million to address strong customer demand for our next-generation ICE4 products, while inventory levels of our prior generation products decreased. Accounts payable decreased by $0.5 million primarily due to the timing of payments and inventory purchases. Accrued liabilities and other expenses decreased by $21.5 million primarily due to reduced levels of compensation-related accruals. Additionally, this decrease was attributable to the reduction of customer right of returns, net of an increase in customer prepayments due to our adoption of Topic 606. Deferred revenue increased by $8.0 million due to maintenance renewals on our growing installed base, which are typically contracted on an annual or multi-year basis, net of adjustments related to our adoption of Topic 606.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2020 was $39.0 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities for 2019 was $12.6 million. Investing activities during 2019 included the net escrow payment of $10.0 million in connection with the Acquisition, and net proceeds of $26.6 million associated with sales, maturities and purchases of investments during the year. In addition, we spent $30.2 million on capital expenditures and received additional proceeds on the sale of our non-marketable equity investments of $1.0 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for 2018 was $12.6 million. Investing activities during 2018 included the net payment of $102.9 million in connection with the Acquisition, and net proceeds of $152.2 million associated with sales, maturities and purchases of investments during the year. In addition, we spent $37.7 million on capital expenditures and received additional proceeds on the sale of our non-marketable equity investments of $1.1 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $334.2 million for 2020. Financing activities in 2020 included net proceeds of $92.9 million from our common stock "at-the-market" offering program (net of commissions and other charges), $194.5 million from issuance of the 2027 Notes and $55.0 million from the Credit Facility (as described below). Payments during this period included $8.0 million under the Credit Facility, $5.3 million under the financing assistance arrangement, $2.5 million in debt issuance cost, $1.6 million for
finance lease obligations and $5.7 million for term license purchase. The period also included net proceeds from the issuance of shares under our ESPP and the exercise of stock options. These proceeds were offset by the minimum tax withholdings paid on behalf of certain employees for net share settlements of restricted stock units (“RSUs”).
Net cash provided by financing activities was $71.9 million for 2019. Financing activities in 2019 included proceeds of $8.6 million from issuance of debt associated with mortgaging one of our facilities, $48.1 million from a new revolving line of credit obtained in August 2019 and subsequently amended in December 2019 (as described under “Liquidity and Capital Resources-Liquidity” below) and $24.3 million under a financing assistance arrangement with third-party contract manufacturer. Financing activities during 2019 also included $20.0 million for the repayment of the revolving line of credit. The period also included net proceeds from the issuance of shares under our ESPP and the exercise of stock options. These proceeds were offset by the minimum tax withholdings paid on behalf of certain employees for net share settlements of RSUs.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $207.9 million for 2018. Financing activities in 2018 included proceeds from the issuance of the 2024 Notes of $391.4 million, offset by the payment for capped call transactions related to the 2024 Notes of $48.9 million. Financing activities during 2018 also included $150.0 million for the repayment of the 2018 Notes, which matured on June 1, 2018. Additionally, we made principal payments on capital lease obligations of $1.2 million during the period. The period also included net proceeds from the issuance of shares under the ESPP and the exercise of stock options. These proceeds were offset by the minimum tax withholdings paid on behalf of certain employees for net share settlements of restricted stock units RSUs.
Liquidity
We believe that our current cash, along with the Credit Facility (as defined below) will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures, payments under the financing assistance arrangement with the third-party contract manufacturer, and the interest payments on the Notes and the Credit Facility for at least 12 months. While we believe we have enough cash to operate our business for the next 12 months, if the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business and financial position is more extensive than expected and the existing sources of cash are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may require additional capital from equity or debt financings to fund our operations, to respond to competitive pressures or strategic opportunities, or otherwise. In addition, we are continuously evaluating alternatives for efficiently funding our capital expenditures and ongoing operations. We may, from time to time engage in a variety of financing transactions for such purposes. We may not be able to secure timely additional financing on favorable terms, or at all. The terms of any additional financings may place limits on our financial and operating flexibility. If we raise additional funds through further issuances of equity or equity-linked securities, our existing stockholders could suffer dilution in their percentage ownership of us, and any new securities we issue could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock.
On August 12, 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement with Jefferies LLC ("Jefferies") under which the Company issued and sold through Jefferies, acting as agent and/or principal, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of $96.3 million. During the year ended December 26, 2020, we issued and sold 12,000,000 shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement, for net proceeds of approximately $93.4 million, after paying Jefferies a sales commission of approximately $2.9 million related to those shares. We intend to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including working capital and capital expenditures.
On March 9, 2020, we issued the 2027 Notes, which will mature on March 1, 2027, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, commencing on September 1, 2020. The net proceeds from the 2027 Notes issuance were approximately $194.5 million and we intend to use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including working capital to fund growth and potential strategic projects.
Upon conversion, it is our intention to pay cash equal to the lesser of the aggregate principal amount or the conversion value of the 2027 Notes. For any remaining conversion obligation, we intend to pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. As of December 26, 2020, long-term debt, net, included $131.8 million outstanding for the 2027 Notes, which represents the liability component of the $200.0 million principal balance, net of $68.2 million of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs. The debt discount and debt issuance costs are currently being amortized over the remaining term until maturity of the 2027 Notes on March 1, 2027. To the extent that the
holders of the 2027 Notes request conversion during an early conversion window, we may require funds for repayment of such 2027 Notes prior to their maturity date.
As of December 26, 2020, contractual obligations related to the 2027 Notes are payments of $5.0 million due each year from 2021 through 2026 and $202.5 million due in 2027. These amounts represent principal and interest cash payments over the term of the 2027 Notes. Any future redemption or conversion of the Notes could impact the amount or timing of our cash payments. For more information regarding the 2027 Notes, see Note 12, “Debt” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
On August 1, 2019, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with Wells Fargo Bank. The Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility of up to $100 million (the "Credit Facility"), which we may draw upon from time to time. The Credit agreement included an option to increase the total commitments under the Credit Facility by up to an additional $50 million, subject to certain conditions. The Credit Agreement provides for a $50 million letter of credit sub-facility and a $10 million swing loan sub-facility.
On December 23, 2019, we exercised our option to increase the total commitments under the Credit Facility and entered into an Increase Joinder and Amendment Number One to Credit Agreement (the “Amendment”), with BMO Harris Bank N.A. and Wells Fargo Bank, as administrative agent. The amendment increased the total commitments under the Credit Facility to $150 million.
The proceeds of the loans under the Credit Agreement, as amended by the Amendment (the “Amended Credit Agreement”) may be used to pay the fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Amended Credit Agreement and for working capital and general corporate purposes. The Credit Facility matures, and all outstanding loans become due and payable, on March 5, 2024. Availability under the Credit Facility is based upon periodic borrowing base certifications valuing certain inventory and accounts receivable, as reduced by certain reserves. The Credit Facility is secured by first-priority security interest (subject to certain exceptions) in inventory, certain related assets, specified deposit accounts, and certain other accounts in certain domestic subsidiaries.
Loans under the Amended Credit Agreement bear interest, at our option, at either a rate based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) for the applicable interest period or a base rate, in each case plus a margin. The margin ranges from 2.00% to 2.50% for LIBOR rate loans and 1.00% to 1.50% for base rate loans, depending on the utilization of the Credit Facility. The fee payable on the unused portion of the Credit Facility ranges from 0.375% to 0.625% per annum, also based on the current utilization of the Credit Facility. Letters of credit issued pursuant to the Credit Facility will accrue a fee at a per annum rate equal to the applicable LIBOR rate margin times the average amount of the letter of credit usage during the immediately preceding quarter in addition to the fronting fees, commissions and other fees. As of December 26, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings of $77 million due in March 2024 and related interest due monthly. The outstanding balance was repaid in full on January 7, 2021. For more information regarding the Credit Facility, see Note 13, “Debt” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In September 2018, we issued the 2024 Notes, which will mature on September 1, 2024, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, which commenced on March 1, 2019. The net proceeds from the 2024 Notes issuance were approximately $391.4 million, of which approximately $48.9 million was used to pay the cost of the capped call transactions. We also used a portion of the remaining net proceeds to fund the cash portion of the purchase price of the Acquisition, including fees and expenses relating thereto, and intend to use the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Upon conversion, it is our intention to pay cash equal to the lesser of the aggregate principal amount or the conversion value of the 2024 Notes. For any remaining conversion obligation, we intend to pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. As of December 26, 2020, long-term debt, net, was $306.4 million, which represents the liability component of the $402.5 million principal balance, net of $96.1 million of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs. The debt discount and debt issuance costs are currently being amortized over the remaining term until maturity of the 2024 Notes on September 1, 2024. To the extent that the holders of the 2024 Notes request conversion during an early conversion window, we may require funds for repayment of such 2024 Notes prior to their maturity date.
As of December 26, 2020, contractual obligations related to the 2024 Notes are payments of $8.6 million due each year from 2021 through 2023 and $411.1 million due in 2024. These amounts represent
principal and interest cash payments over the term of the 2024 Notes. Any future redemption or conversion of the Notes could impact the amount or timing of our cash payments. For more information regarding the 2024 Notes, see Note 13, “Debt” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 26, 2020, we had $298.0 million of cash including $87.4 million of cash held by our foreign subsidiaries. Our policy with respect to undistributed foreign subsidiaries' earnings is to consider those earnings to be indefinitely reinvested. As a result of the enactment in the United States of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “2017 Tax Act”), if and when funds are actually distributed in the form of dividends or otherwise, we expect minimal tax consequences, except for foreign withholding taxes, which would be applicable in some jurisdictions.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 26, 2020:
(1)We lease facilities under non-cancelable operating lease agreements. These leases have varying terms that range from one to 11 years, and contain leasehold improvement incentives, rent holidays and escalation clauses. In addition, some of these leases have renewal options for up to six years. We also have contractual commitments to remove leasehold improvements and return certain properties to a specified condition when the leases terminate. At the inception of a lease with such conditions, we record an asset retirement obligation liability and a corresponding capital asset in an amount equal to the estimated fair value of the obligation. Leasehold improvements are amortized using the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or estimated useful life of the asset. An assumption of lease renewal where a renewal option exists is used only when the renewal has been determined to be reasonably assured. The estimated useful life of leasehold improvements is one to 11 years. See Note 14, "Commitments and Contingencies" to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
(2)We have two finance leases for manufacturing and other equipment. The financing lease assets will continue to be amortized and payments due will be made over the lease terms, which range from 3 to 5 years. See Note 9, "Balance Sheet Details" to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
(3)We have service agreements with our major production suppliers under which we are committed to purchase certain parts.
(4)For additional information regarding our asset-based revolving credit facility and 2027 and 2024 Notes, see Note 13, “Debt” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(5)Tax liabilities of $20.6 million related to uncertain tax positions are not included in the table because we cannot reliably estimate the timing and amount of future payments, if any.
(6)In 2021, we expect to make contributions of $5.1 million to cover benefit payments to plan participants. Expected future payments to our pension and post-employment plan are excluded from the contractual obligation table because they do
not represent contractual cash outflow as they are dependent on various factors. See Note 19, "Employee Benefit and Pension Plans" to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
We had $28.9 million of standby letters of credit, bank guarantees and surety bonds outstanding as of December 26, 2020. These consisted of $19.5 million related to customer performance guarantees, $0.3 million of value-added tax and customs' licenses, $4.0 million related to property leases, $4.4 million related to Coriant pre-acquisition restructuring plans, $0.6 million related to credit cards and $0.1 million for other liabilities. Of the $19.5 million related to customer performance guarantees, approximately $2.8 million was used to secure Surety Bonds in the aggregate of $5.5 million.
Of the aforementioned standby letters of credit and bank guarantees outstanding, $11.5 million was backed by cash collateral from a third-party institution, and the Company accrues 2.25% annual fee and 0.13% annual fronting fee on the average LOC balances outstanding on the cash collateral.
We had $27.9 million of standby letters of credit and bank guarantees outstanding as of December 28, 2019. These consisted of $14.2 million related to customer performance guarantees, $5.9 million related to property leases, $6.8 million related to Coriant pre-acquisition restructuring plans, $0.4 million of value-added tax and customs' licenses, $0.5 million related to credit cards and $0.1 million for other liabilities. Of the aforementioned standby letters of credit and bank guarantees outstanding, $4.1 million was backed by cash collateral from a third-party institution, and the Company accrues 2.25% annual fee and 0.13% annual fronting fee on the average LOC balances outstanding on the cash collateral.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 26, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, assumptions and judgments that can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which is included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, which describes our significant accounting policies and methods used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Management believes that the estimates, assumptions and judgments upon which they rely are reasonable based upon information available to them at the time that these estimates and judgments are made. To the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our consolidated financial statements will be affected.
We believe our critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, employee benefit and pension plans, accounting for income taxes, inventory valuation, accrued warranty, business combination, amortization of intangible assets, and impairment of intangibles and goodwill. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition by applying the following five-step approach:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Many of our product sales are sold in combination with installation and deployment services along with initial hardware and software support. Our product sales are also sold at times with spares management, on-site hardware replacement services, network operations management, software subscription services, extended hardware warranty and training. Initial software and hardware support services are generally delivered over a one-year period in connection with the initial purchase. Software warranty provides customers with maintenance releases during the warranty support period and hardware warranty provides replacement or repair of equipment that fails to perform in line with specifications. Software subscription services include software warranty and additionally provides customers with rights to receive unspecified software product upgrades released during the support period.
Spares management and on-site hardware replacement services include the replacement of defective units at customer sites in accordance with specified service level agreements. Network operations management includes the day-to-day operation of a customer's network. These services are generally delivered on an annual basis. We evaluate each promised good and service in a contract to determine whether it represents a distinct performance obligation or should be accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
Services revenue includes software subscription services, installation and deployment services, spares management, on-site hardware replacement services, network operations management, extended hardware warranty and training. Revenue from software subscription services, spares management, on-site hardware replacement services, network operations management and extended hardware warranty contracts is deferred and is recognized ratably over the contractual support period, which is generally one year, as services are provided over the course of the entire period. Revenue related to training and installation and deployment services is recognized upon completion of the services.
Contracts and customer purchase orders are generally used to determine the existence of an arrangement. In addition, shipping documents and customer acceptances, when applicable, are used to verify delivery and transfer of title. We typically satisfy our performance obligations upon shipment or delivery of product depending on the contractual terms. Payment terms to customers generally range from net 30 to 120 days from invoice, which are considered to be standard payment terms. We assess our ability to collect from our customers based primarily on the creditworthiness and past payment history of the customer.
Customer product returns are generally approved on a case by case basis. Specific reserve provisions are made based upon a specific review of all the approved product returns where the customer has yet to return the products to generate the related sales return credit at the end of a period. Estimated sales returns are recorded as a reduction to revenue.
For sales to resellers, the same revenue recognition criteria apply. It is our practice to identify an end-user prior to shipment to a reseller. We do not offer rights of return or price protection to our resellers.
We report revenue net of any required taxes collected from customers and remitted to government authorities, with the collected taxes recorded as current liabilities until remitted to the relevant government authority.
Customer Purchase Commitments
We sell software licenses that provide customers the ability to purchase incremental bandwidth capacity on an already-deployed piece of hardware. Instant Bandwidth-enabled systems generally include a specific initial capacity and incremental capacity can be added by the purchase of Instant Bandwidth licenses. Instant Bandwidth licenses are considered distinct performance obligations because customers can provision additional transmission capacity on demand without the deployment of any incremental equipment.
Some contracts commit the customer to purchase incremental Instant Bandwidth licenses within a specified time frame from the initial shipment of the Instant Bandwidth-enabled hardware. The time frame varies by customer and generally ranges between 12 to 24 months. If the customer does not purchase the additional capacity within the time frame as stated in the contract, we have the right to deliver and invoice such Instant Bandwidth licenses to the customer. Future committed licenses are considered to be additional performance obligations when a minimum purchase obligation is present, as evidenced by enforceable rights and obligations. As such, we are required to estimate the variable consideration for future Instant Bandwidth licenses as part of determining the contract transaction price.
Contract Termination Rights
The contract term is determined on the basis of the period over which the parties to the contract have present enforceable rights and obligations. Certain customer contracts include a termination for convenience clause that allows the customer to terminate services without penalty, upon advance notification. For such contracts, the service duration is limited to the non-cancelable portion of the contract.
Variable Consideration
The consideration associated with customer contracts is generally fixed. Variable consideration includes discounts, rebates, refunds, credits, incentives, penalties, or other similar items. The amount of consideration that can vary is not a substantial portion of total consideration.
Variable consideration estimates are re-assessed at each reporting period until a final outcome is determined. The changes to the original transaction price due to a change in estimated variable consideration will be applied on a retrospective basis, with the adjustment recorded in the period in which the change occurs.
Stand-alone Selling Price
Stand-alone selling price is the price at which an entity would sell a good or service on a stand-alone (or separate) basis at contract inception. Under this model, the observable price of a good or service sold separately provides the best evidence of stand-alone selling price. However, in certain situations, stand-alone selling prices will not be readily observable and the entity must estimate the stand-alone selling price.
When allocating on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, any discount provided in the contract is generally allocated proportionately to all of the performance obligations in the contract.
The majority of products and services offered by us have readily observable selling prices. For products and services that do not, we generally estimate stand-alone selling price using the market assessment approach based on expected selling price and adjust those prices as necessary to reflect our costs and margins. As part of our stand-alone selling price policy, we review product pricing on a periodic basis to identify any significant changes and revise our expected stand-alone selling price assumptions as appropriate.
Capitalization of Costs to Obtain a Contract
We have assessed the treatment of costs to obtain or fulfill a contract with a customer. Sales commissions have historically been expensed as incurred. Under Topic 606, we capitalize sales commissions related to multi-year service contracts, which are paid for upfront and amortize the asset over the period of benefit, which is the service period. Sales commissions paid on service contract renewals, are commensurate with the sales commissions paid on the initial contracts.
Transaction Price Allocated to the Remaining Performance Obligation
Our remaining performance obligations represent the transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially satisfied, as of period end, consisting of deferred revenue and backlog. Our backlog represents purchase orders received from customers for future product shipments and services that are unsatisfied or partially satisfied as of period end. Our backlog is subject to future events that could cause the amount or timing of the related revenue to change, and, in certain cases, may be canceled without penalty. Orders in backlog may be fulfilled several quarters following receipt or may relate to multi-year support service obligations.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period) under the straight-line amortization method. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of the rights to acquire stock under the ESPP using the Black-Scholes option pricing formula. The ESPP provides for consecutive six-month offering periods and we use our own historical volatility data in the valuation of shares that are purchased under the ESPP.
We account for the fair value of RSUs using the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. For new-hire grants, RSUs typically vest ratably on an annual basis over four years. For annual refresh grants, RSUs typically vest ratably on an annual basis over two, three or four years.
We granted performance shares (“PSUs”) to our executive officers and senior management in 2017 and 2018. The PSUs granted during 2017 and 2018 to our executive officers and senior management are based on total stockholder return (“TSR”) of our common stock price relative to the TSR of the individual companies listed in the S&P North American Technology Multimedia Networking Index (SPGIIPTR) (the “S&P Networking Index”) over the span of one year, two years and three years. The number of shares to be issued upon vesting of these PSUs range from zero to two times the target number of PSUs granted depending on our performance against the individual companies listed in the SPGIIPTR. This performance metric is classified as a market condition.
PSUs granted to our executive officers and senior management during 2019 and 2020 are based on performance criteria related to a specific financial target over the span of a three-year performance period. These PSUs may become eligible for vesting to begin before the end of the three year performance period, if the applicable financial target is met. The number of shares to be issued upon vesting of these PSUs is capped at the target number of PSUs granted. We assess the achievement status of these PSUs on a quarterly basis and record the related stock-based compensation expenses based on the estimated achievement payout.
We use a Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value of PSUs with market conditions. The Monte Carlo simulation model is based on a discounted cash flow approach, with the simulation of a large number of possible stock price outcomes for our stock and the target composite index. The use of the Monte Carlo simulation model requires the input of a number of assumptions including expected volatility of our stock price, expected volatility of a target composite index, correlation between changes in our stock price and changes in the target composite index, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends as applicable. Expected volatility of our stock is based on the weighted-average historical volatility of our stock. Expected volatility of the target composite index is based on the historical and implied data. Correlation is based on the historical relationship between our stock price and the target composite index average. The risk-free interest rate is based upon the treasury zero-coupon yield appropriate for the term of the PSU as of the grant date. Our expected dividend yield is zero as we do not expect to pay dividends in the future. The expected dividend yield for the target composite index is the annual dividend yield expressed as a percentage of the composite average of the target composite index on the grant date.
In addition, we have granted other PSUs to certain employees that only vest upon the achievement of specific operational performance criteria. We assess the achievement status of these PSUs on a quarterly basis and record the related stock-based compensation expenses based on the estimated achievement payout.
Employee Benefit and Pension Plans
We operate a number of post-employment plans in Germany, as well as smaller post-employment plans in other countries, including both defined contribution and defined benefit plans. Benefit cost obligations pertaining to these plans are based on assumptions for the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, mortality rates, expected salary increases, health care cost trend rates and attrition rates. The discount rate assumption is based on current investment yields of high-quality fixed-income securities with maturities similar to the expected benefits payment period. Mortality rates help predict the expected life of plan participants. The expected increase in the compensation levels assumption reflects our actual experience and future expectations. The expected long-term return on plan assets is determined based on asset allocations, historical portfolio results, historical asset correlations and management’s expected returns for each asset class. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually including reviewing current capital market assumptions to assess the reasonableness of the expected long-term return on plan assets. We update the expected long-term return on assets when we observe a sufficient level of evidence that would suggest the long-term expected return has changed.
Accounting for Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. We estimate actual current tax expense together with assessing temporary differences resulting from different treatment of items, such as accruals and allowances not currently deductible for tax purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets. In general, deferred tax assets represent future tax benefits to be received when certain expenses previously recognized in our consolidated statements of operations become deductible expenses under applicable income tax laws or loss, or credit carryforwards are utilized. Accordingly, realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent on future taxable income within the respective jurisdictions against which these deductions, losses and credits can be utilized within the applicable future periods.
We must assess the likelihood that some portion or all of our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income within the respective jurisdictions, and to the extent we believe that recovery does not meet the “more-likely-than-not” standard, it must establish a valuation allowance. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Management judgment is required in determining its provision for income taxes, its deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. In evaluating the need for a full or partial valuation allowance, all positive and negative evidence must be considered, including our forecast of taxable income over the applicable carryforward periods, its current financial performance, its market environment, and other factors. Based on the available objective evidence, at December 26, 2020, management believes it is not more likely than not that the domestic net deferred tax assets will be realizable in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, the domestic net deferred tax assets are subject to a full valuation allowance. To the extent that we determine that deferred tax assets are realizable on a more likely than not basis, and an adjustment is needed, that adjustment will be recorded in the period that the determination is made.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories consist of raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods and are stated at standard cost adjusted to approximate the lower of actual cost or net realizable value. Costs are recognized utilizing the first-in, first-out method. Net realizable value is based upon an estimated selling price reduced by the estimated cost of disposal. The determination of market value involves numerous judgments including estimated average selling prices based upon recent sales volumes, industry trends, existing customer orders, current contract price, future demand and pricing and technological obsolescence of our products.
Inventory that is obsolete or in excess of our forecasted demand or is anticipated to be sold at a loss is written down to its estimated net realizable value based on historical usage and expected demand. In valuing our inventory costs and deferred inventory costs, we considered whether the net realizable value of inventory delivered or expected to be delivered at less than cost, primarily comprised of common equipment, had declined. We concluded that, in the instances where the net realizable value of inventory delivered or expected to be delivered was less than cost, it was appropriate to value the inventory costs and deferred inventory costs at cost or net realizable value, whichever is lower, thereby recognizing the cost of the reduction in net realizable value of inventory in the period in which the reduction occurred or can be reasonably estimated. We have, therefore, recognized inventory write-downs as necessary in each period in order to reflect inventory at the lower of actual cost or net realizable value.
We consider whether we should accrue losses on firm purchase commitments related to inventory items. Given that the net realizable value of common equipment is below contractual purchase price, we have also recorded losses on these firm purchase commitments in the period in which the commitment is made. When the inventory parts related to these firm purchase commitments are received, that inventory is recorded at the purchase price less the accrual for the loss on the purchase commitment.
Accrued Warranty
In our contracts with our customers, we warrant that our products will operate substantially in conformity with product specifications. Hardware warranties provide the purchaser with protection in the event that the product does not perform to product specifications. During the warranty period, the purchaser’s sole and exclusive remedy in the event of such defect or failure to perform is limited to the correction of the defect or failure by repair, refurbishment or replacement, at our sole option and expense. Our hardware warranty periods generally range from one to five years from date of acceptance for hardware and our software warranty is 90 days. Upon delivery of our products, we provide for the estimated cost to repair or replace products that may be returned under warranty. The hardware warranty accrual is based on actual estimated future returns and cost of repair rates and the application of those estimated rates to our in-warranty installed base. The provision for warranty claims fluctuates depending upon the installed base of products and the failure rates and costs of repair associated with these products under warranty. Furthermore, our costs of repair vary based on repair volume and our ability to repair, rather than replace, defective units, as well as our ability to utilize used units to fulfill warranty obligations. In the event that actual product failure rates and costs to repair differ from our estimates, revisions to the warranty provision are required. In addition, from time to time, specific hardware warranty accruals may be made if unforeseen technical problems arise with specific products. We regularly assess the adequacy of our recorded warranty liabilities and adjust the amounts as necessary.
Business Combination
Accounting for acquisitions requires management to estimate the fair value of the assets and liabilities assumed, which requires management to make significant estimates, judgments, and assumptions that could materially affect the timing or amounts recognized in our financial statements. These assumptions and estimates include our use of the asset and the appropriate discount rates. Our significant estimates can include, but are not limited to, the future cash flows, the appropriate weighted cost of capital, and discount rates, as well as the estimated useful life of intangible assets, deferred tax assets and liabilities, uncertain tax positions, and tax-related valuation allowance, which are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year following the acquisition date, if new information is obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these assets and liabilities, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with finite lives are carried at cost, less accumulated amortization. Amortization is computed over the estimated useful lives of the respective assets. In-process research and development represents the fair value of incomplete research and development projects that have not reached technological feasibility as of the date of acquisition. Initially, these assets are not subject to amortization. Once projects have been completed they are transferred to developed technology, which are subject to amortization, while assets related to projects that have been abandoned are impaired and expensed to research and development.
Impairment of Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We test for impairment of goodwill on an annual basis in the fourth quarter and at any other time when events occur or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. We have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we determine that as a result of the qualitative assessment that it is more likely than not (i.e., greater than 50% likelihood) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative test is required or we can directly perform the quantitative analysis. We recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized does not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We evaluate events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of purchased intangible assets may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess the recoverability of these assets by determining whether or not the carrying amount will be recovered through undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the total of the future undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying amount of an asset, we record an impairment loss for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoptions and effects on us.