Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Form 10-K. The forward-looking statements included in this discussion and elsewhere in this Form 10-K involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a leading national health care service provider, facilitating outpatient care for Durable Medical Equipment manufacturers and health care providers. We provide our products and services to hospitals, oncology practices, ambulatory surgery centers, and other alternate site health care providers. Our headquarters is in Rochester Hills, Michigan, and we operate our business from a total of five locations in the United States and Canada. We deliver local, field-based customer support as well as operate pump service and repair Centers of Excellence in Michigan, Kansas, California, Massachusetts and Ontario, Canada. ISI is accredited by the Community Health Accreditation Partner (CHAP) while First Biomedical is ISO certified.
InfuSystem competes for and retains its business primarily on the basis of its long participation and strong reputation in the Durable Medical Equipment space, its long-standing relationships with Durable Medical Equipment manufacturers and its health care provider customers, and the high levels of service it provides. Current barriers to entry for potential competitors are created by our: (i) growing number of third-party payer networks under contract, which included nearly 728 third-party payer networks for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 8% over the prior year period; (ii) economies of scale, which allow for predictable reimbursement and less costly purchase and management of the pumps, respectively; (iii) established, long-standing relationships as a provider of pumps to outpatient oncology practices in the U.S. and Canada; (iv) pump fleet of ambulatory and large volume infusion pumps for rent and for sale, which may allow us to be more responsive to the needs of physicians, outpatient oncology practices, hospitals, outpatient surgery centers, homecare practices, patient rehabilitation centers and patients than a new market entrant; (v) five geographic locations in the U.S. and Canada that allow for same day or next day delivery of pumps; and (vi) pump repair and service capabilities at all of these facilities. We do not perform any research and development on pumps, but we have made, and continue to make investments in our information technology.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company reorganized its segment reporting from one reportable segment to two reportable segments, ITS and DME Services, due to changes in our internal reporting and the information evaluated by our chief operating decision-maker.
ITS Segment
Our ITS segment’s core purpose is to seek opportunities to leverage our unique know-how in clinic-to-home health care involving Durable Medical Equipment, our logistics and billing capabilities, our growing network of third-party payers under contract, and our clinical and biomedical capabilities. This leverage may take the form of new products and/or services, strategic alliances, joint ventures and/or acquisitions. The leading service within our ITS segment is to supply electronic ambulatory infusion pumps and associated disposable supply kits to private oncology clinics, infusion clinics and hospital outpatient oncology clinics to be utilized in the treatment of a variety of cancers including colorectal cancer and other disease states (“Oncology Business”). Colorectal cancer is the third most prevalent form of cancer in the United States, according to the American Cancer Society, and the standard of care for the treatment of colorectal cancer relies upon continuous chemotherapy infusions delivered via ambulatory infusion pumps. One of the primary goals for the ITS segment is to expand into treatment of other cancers. In 2020, our Oncology Business approximated 95% of our total ITS revenues. In 2020, we generated approximately 50% of our total ITS revenues from treatments for colorectal cancer and 45% of our ITS revenues from treatments for non-colorectal disease states. There are a number of approved treatment protocols for pancreatic, head and neck, esophageal and other cancers, as well as other disease states which present opportunities for growth. There are also a number of other drugs currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”), as well as agents in the pharmaceutical development pipeline, which we believe could potentially be used with continuous infusion protocols for the treatment of diseases other than colorectal cancer. Additional drugs or protocols currently in clinical trials may also obtain regulatory approval over the next several years. If these new drugs or protocols obtain regulatory approval for use with continuous infusion protocols, we expect the pharmaceutical companies to focus their sales and marketing efforts on promoting the new drugs and protocols to physicians.
Furthermore, our Oncology Business focuses mainly on the continuous infusion of chemotherapy. Continuous infusion of chemotherapy can be described as the gradual administration of a drug via a small, lightweight, portable infusion pump over a prolonged period of time. A cancer patient can receive his or her medicine anywhere from one to 30 days per month depending on the chemotherapy regimen that is most appropriate to that individual’s health status and disease state. This may be followed by periods of rest and then repeated cycles with treatment goals of progression-free disease survival. This drug administration method has replaced intravenous push or bolus administration in specific circumstances. The advantages of slow continuous low doses of certain drugs are well documented. Clinical studies support the use of continuous infusion chemotherapy for decreased toxicity without loss of anti-tumor efficacy. The 2015 National Comprehensive Cancer Network (“NCCN”) Guidelines recommend the use of continuous infusion for treatment of numerous cancer diagnoses. We believe that the growth of continuous infusion therapy is driven by three factors: evidence of improved clinical outcomes; lower toxicity and side effects; and a favorable reimbursement environment.
The use of continuous infusion has been demonstrated to decrease or alter the toxicity of a number of cytotoxic, or cell killing agents. Higher doses of drugs can be infused over longer periods of time, leading to improved tolerance and decreased toxicity. For example, the cardiotoxicity (heart muscle damage) of the chemotherapy drug Doxorubicin is decreased by schedules of administration according to The Chemotherapy Source Book by Michael C. Perry. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and decreased white blood cell and platelet counts are all affected by duration of delivery. Continuous infusion can lead to improved tolerance and patient comfort while enhancing the patient’s ability to remain on the chemotherapy regimen. Additionally, the lower toxicity profile and resulting reduction in side effects enables patients undergoing continuous infusion therapy to continue a relatively normal lifestyle, which may include continuing to work, going shopping, and caring for family members. We believe that the partnering of physician management and patient autonomy provide for the highest quality of care with the greatest patient satisfaction.
We believe that oncology practices have a heightened sensitivity to providing quality service and whether they are reimbursed for services they provide. Simultaneously, CMS and private insurers are increasingly focused on evidence-based medicine to inform their reimbursement decisions - that is, aligning reimbursement with clinical outcomes and adherence to standards of care. Continuous infusion therapy is a main component of the standard of care for certain cancer types because clinical evidence demonstrates superior outcomes. Payers’ recognition of this benefit is reflected in their relative reimbursement policies for clinical services related to the delivery of this care.
Additional areas of focus for our ITS segment are as follows:
●
Pain Management - providing our ambulatory pumps, products, and services for pain management in the area of post-surgical continuous peripheral nerve block.
●
Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (“NPWT”) - as announced in February 2020, includes providing the Durable Medical Equipment, overseeing logistics, biomedical services, and managing third-party billing of the U.S. home health care market, which as a subset of the broader NPWT market, has an estimated addressable home health care market of $600 million per year.
●
Acquisitions - we believe there are opportunities to acquire smaller, regional health care service providers, in whole or part that perform similar services to us but do not have the national market access, network of third-party payer contracts or operating economies of scale that we currently enjoy. We may also pursue acquisition opportunities of companies that perform similar services, but offer different therapies or utilize different devices.
●
Information technology-based services - we also plan to continue to capitalize on key new information technology-based services such as EXPRESS, InfuSystem Mobile, InfuBus or InfuConnect, Pump Portal and BlockPain Dashboard®.
The payer environment within our ITS segment is in a constant state of change. We continue to extend our considerable breadth of payer networks under contract as patients move into different insurance coverages, including Medicaid and Insurance Marketplace products. In some cases, this may slightly reduce our aggregate billed revenues payment rate but result in an overall increase in collected revenues, due to a reduction in concessions. Consequently, we are increasingly focused on net revenues less concessions.
DME Services Segment
Our DME Services segment’s core service is to (i) sell or rent new and pre-owned pole-mounted and ambulatory infusion pumps and other durable medical equipment, (ii) sell treatment-related consumables; and (iii) provide biomedical recertification, maintenance and repair services for oncology practices as well as other alternate site settings including home care and home infusion providers, skilled nursing facilities, pain centers and others. We also provide these products and services to customers in the hospital market. We purchase new and pre-owned pole-mounted and ambulatory infusion pumps from a variety of sources on a non-exclusive basis. We repair, refurbish and provide biomedical certification for the devices as needed. The pumps are then available for sale, rental or to be used within our ambulatory infusion pump management service.
Key Business Metrics
Our management monitors a number of financial and non-financial measures and ratios on a regular basis in order to track the progress of our business and make adjustments as necessary. We believe that the most important of these measures and ratios include net revenues and our order-to-cash process, fleet utilization, operating margin, operating expenses, profitability, cash and cash equivalents, and debt levels including available credit and leverage ratios. These measures and ratios are compared to standards or objectives set by management, so that actions can be taken, as necessary, in order to achieve the standards and objectives.
COVID-19 Update
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which spread globally and throughout the United States. In response, we took a number of precautionary and preemptive steps to protect the safety and well-being of our employees while ensuring continuity of service to our clients, including, transitioning our employees to a remote work environment, suspending employee travel, canceling participation in industry events and in-person group meetings, promoting social distancing and enhanced cleaning and sanitization efforts across office locations, and implementing protocols to quarantine employees who may have been exposed to COVID-19, or show relevant symptoms. We also continued to undertake preparedness plans at our facilities to maintain continuity of operations, which provide for flexible work arrangements without any significant disruptions to our business or control processes. Our management team is continuing to actively monitor the situation and is in constant communication with our workforce as well as with our customers and vendors. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had any material unfavorable effect on our operations to date, the extent and nature of the impact in the future, if any, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, cannot be predicted and could have a material adverse impact on our financial position, operating results and cash flows. We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and may take further actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and partners. As the conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve, we will continue to actively manage our response in collaboration with customers, government officials and stakeholders, and assess any potential impacts to our financial position and operating results, as well as adverse developments in our business. For further information regarding the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company, please see Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Comprehensive Financial Impacts
The COVID-19 global pandemic has caused significant disruption to the United States and global economies and has severely impacted the overall healthcare industry and the related supply chain. The focus on preparing and treating large numbers of COVID-19 patients resulted in significant shifts in demand and related shortages in certain types of medical equipment, including infusion pumps, while at the same time reducing capacity for non-COVID-19 services such as elective surgeries. These impacts created a significant net favorable dynamic for InfuSystem resulting in increased net revenues and margins in certain of our service lines only partially offset by reductions in others during 2020. Some of these benefits are not expected to occur in the future, such as elevated levels of sales of new and pre-owned medical equipment, whereas some are expected to continue but partially diminish over time, including a portion of the increased volume of rental revenues. The COVID-19 pandemic has also heightened potential risks that did not impact the Company in 2020 but may impact the Company on a delayed basis such as an unfavorable impact to payer mix caused by extended periods of high unemployment rates in the United States and an increased number of uninsured patients. We continue to prepare for disruptions in the current and future periods, both positive and negative.
InfuSystem Holdings, Inc. Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
(a) Inter-segment allocations are for cleaning and repair services performed on medical equipment.
Net Revenues
Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $97.4 million, an increase of $16.3 million, or 20.1%, compared to $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to continued market penetration in Oncology and a net favorable impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic effects were favorable to the current period net revenues due to strong market demand for infusion pumps including those needed to treat COVID-19 patients which increased both medical equipment sales and medical equipment rental revenues in the DME Services segment. Increased net revenues were achieved in both the ITS and DME Services segments.
ITS
ITS net revenue of $61.1 million increased $9.5 million, or 18.5%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily attributable to growth in the Company’s customer base due to favorable changes in the competitive environment for oncology services, improved third-party payer billing throughput, growth in the pain management business, net revenues from the new NPWT therapy and other market related organic growth. The pain management business net revenue for 2020 increased despite significant country-wide, government-mandated COVID-19 pandemic-related deferrals in elective surgeries during the early months of the COVID-19 outbreak. Decreases in the number of surgeries during the 2020 second quarter were partially offset by an improved revenue volume during the 2020 third and fourth quarters as the number of surgeries recovered during those periods and by an increase in the customer base for 2020 attributable to customer penetration achieved in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020.
DME Services
DME Services net revenue of $36.3 million increased $6.7 million, or 22.8%, during 2020 as compared to the prior year. DME Services net revenue excludes inter-segment revenues for both periods. This performance was driven by strong market demand for infusion pumps needed to treat high numbers of COVID-19 patients, expansion of our market share with national home infusion service providers and the addition of new devices to our product offerings stemming from new partnerships with certain medical device manufacturers. The demand benefited both sales of new and pre-owned medical equipment, which increased by $2.6 million, and higher rental revenues, which increased by $3.7 million.
Gross Profit (inclusive of certain inter-segment allocations)
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $58.8 million increased $11.9 million, or 25.3%, from $46.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by the increase in net revenues and a higher gross margin. These improvements were attributable to increases in both operating segments. Gross margin increased to 60.3% during 2020, as compared to 57.8% during the prior year period, an increase of 2.5%.
ITS
ITS gross profit was $39.8 million, during 2020, representing an increase of $6.7 million, or 20.3%, compared to the prior year. The improvement reflected an increase in net revenues and a higher gross margin which improved to 65.1%, an increase of 1.0%, from the prior year. The higher gross margin was the result of improved leverage of fixed costs, including medical equipment depreciation, and a better payer rate mix.
DME Services
DME Services gross profit during 2020 was $19.0 million, representing an increase of $5.2 million, or 37.4%, over the prior year. This increase was due to the COVID-19 pandemic-related increase in net revenues from medical equipment sales and rental revenue and a higher gross margin. The DME gross margin was 52.3% during 2020, which was 5.6% higher than the prior year. This increase was the result of both the improved gross margin mix associated with a greater portion of the generally higher margin rental revenues and higher than average gross margin from sales of medical equipment. Medical equipment sales during 2020 had a higher weighting of pre-owned equipment sales, a typically higher margin business, as compared with sales of new equipment.
Provision for Doubtful Accounts
Provision for doubtful accounts for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.8 million, an increase of $0.8 million, compared to the prior year. The provision for doubtful accounts during the current period was mainly attributable to reserves related to our DME Services segment and included provisions recorded for slow paying customers. We did not incur any significant disruptions to payments from our customers during 2020 that can be directly associated with the COVID-19 pandemic; however, we cannot be certain that business disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic will not unfavorably impact future customer collections or our ability to recover unreserved accounts receivable balances.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.3 million representing a decrease of $0.1 million, or 2.7%, compared to 2019. The decrease is attributable to certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $9.7 million, a decrease of $0.3 million, compared to 2019. Selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of net revenues decreased to 9.9% compared to 2019, which was 12.2%. This decrease reflected COVID-19 pandemic-related lower customer travel and entertainment expenses, a shift in the proportion of net revenue favoring the DME Services segment, which has a lower commission to sales ratio than the ITS Services segment, and improved net revenue leverage of fixed selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses during these periods consisted of sales personnel salaries, commissions and associated fringe benefit and payroll-related items, marketing, overall travel and entertainment and other miscellaneous expenses.
General and Administrative (“G&A”) Expenses
G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $35.2 million, an increase of 21.4% from $29.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. G&A expenses during these periods consisted primarily of accounting, administrative, third-party payer billing and contract services, customer service, nurses on staff, new product services, service center personnel salaries, fringe benefits and other payroll-related items, professional fees, legal fees, stock-based compensation, insurance and other miscellaneous items. The increase of $6.2 million was largely due to an increase in employee compensation related expenses of $5.7 million and higher general business expenses of $0.5 million. The higher personnel expenses reflect higher staff levels supporting the increase in revenues, higher short- and long-term management incentive compensation and annual inflationary increases. The higher general business expenses include higher rent and depreciation associated with the relocation of our headquarters in 2019, higher costs for telecommunication services, higher office expenses and increased premiums associated with the Company’s general risk insurance policies. These increases were partially offset by lower outside services expenses and lower travel and entertainment expenses totaling $0.6 million. G&A expenses as a percentage of net revenues for 2020 increased to 36.1% compared to 35.7% for the prior year mainly reflecting the year-over-year increases offset partially by improved net revenue leverage over fixed costs.
Other Income and Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred interest expense of $1.3 million, a decrease of $0.6 million, or 34.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was a net result of lower weighted average interest rates on our outstanding debt in 2020 as compared to 2019, which was partially offset by interest on our increased average outstanding borrowings during 2020.
Provision for Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has generated significant pre-tax income on a three-year cumulative basis prompting management to assess available positive and negative evidence regarding the recovery of our net deferred tax assets. Due to this assessment, it was determined that it is more likely than not that the Company will recognize the benefits of its federal and state net deferred tax assets and, as a result, a previously recorded valuation allowance was released totaling $11.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a benefit for income taxes of $9.8 million, which included the valuation allowance reversal, representing a negative effective tax rate of 130% on pre-tax income of $7.5 million. Without the valuation reserve reversal, the Company would have recorded a provision for income taxes of $1.5 million which would have represented an effective tax rate of 19.4%. This adjusted effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate mainly due to permanent differences in the amounts of equity compensation expense recognized for book versus tax purposes. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a provision for income taxes of $0.2 million, representing an effective tax rate of 10.7% on pre-tax income totaling $1.5 million. This effective tax rate for 2019 differed from the U.S. statutory rate mainly due to the availability of net operating losses which almost fully offset the current tax provision in most jurisdictions in which we operate and a decrease in the valuation reserve recorded on our net deferred tax assets prior to the current year reversal. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Securities (CARES) Act was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures. The Company assessed the impact of these CARES Act provisions and the subsequently released government guidance related to the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial position and results of operations and determined their impact was not material.
Inflation
Management believes that there has been no material effect on the results of operations or financial condition as a result of inflation or changing prices of our ambulatory infusion pumps during the period from January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2020.
Subsequent Events
We have evaluated subsequent events through the date that our consolidated financial statements are issued.
On February 3, 2021, the Company acquired FilAMed, a privately held biomedical services company based in Bakersfield, California. This acquisition will supplement the Company’s existing biomedical recertification, maintenance and repair services for acute care facilities and other alternate site settings including home care and home infusion providers, skilled nursing facilities, pain centers and others.
On February 5, 2021, the Company entered into a new credit agreement (the “2021 Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent and other lenders. The 2021 Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) of $75 million, maturing on February 5, 2026. On February 5, 2021, the company made an initial borrowing of $30 million under the Revolving Facility. Proceeds from the loan, along with approximately $8.2 million in cash, were used to repay all amounts due under the Company’s existing credit facility dated March 23, 2015 (the “2015 Credit Agreement”). Further details are described under the heading “Subsequent Events” in Note 15 to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview:
We finance our operations and capital expenditures with cash generated from operations and borrowings under our existing credit agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $9.6 million and $10.8 million of availability on our revolving credit facility under the 2015 Credit Agreement compared to $2.6 million of cash and cash equivalents and $9.9 million of revolving credit availability December 31, 2019. Our liquidity and borrowing plans are established to align with our financial and strategic planning processes and ensure we have the necessary funding to meet our operating commitments, which primarily include the purchase of pumps, inventory, payroll and general expenses. We also take into consideration our overall capital allocation strategy which includes investment for future organic growth, potential acquisitions and share repurchases. We believe we have adequate sources of liquidity and funding available for at least the next year from the filing date of this report. However, any projections of future earnings and cash flows are subject to substantial uncertainty, including factors such as the successful execution of our business plan and general economic conditions, particularly in light of the rapidly changing market and economic conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic. We may need to access debt and equity markets in the future if unforeseen costs or opportunities arise, to meet working capital requirements, fund acquisitions or investments or repay indebtedness under our credit agreements. If we need to obtain new debt or equity financing in the future, the terms and availability of such financing may be impacted by economic and financial market conditions as well as our financial condition and results of operations at the time we seek additional financing. While we did not incur significant disruptions or significant direct unusual expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the COVID-19 pandemic, during the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic we used cash and drew on our revolving loan and 2019 Equipment Line (as defined below) to fund an acceleration of our capital expenditures for medical equipment and to increase our inventory levels of disposable medical supplies in conjunction with our COVID-19 pandemic preparedness activities. These amounts leveled off during the 2020 third and fourth quarters approaching normal amounts by December 31, 2020.
Long-Term Debt Activities:
On February 5, 2019, the Company and its primary lender entered into the fifth amendment (the “Fifth Amendment”) to its 2015 Credit Agreement. The Fifth Amendment amended the 2015 Credit Agreement to, among other things:
●
increase our borrowing capacity under the equipment line to $8.0 million, which allows for capital expenditure financing to the Company for the sole purpose of purchasing medical equipment (the “Equipment Line”);
●
revise the definition of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), a non-GAAP financial measure, to include additional add-back adjustments for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2019;
●
revise the definition of fixed charge coverage ratio for the year ended December 31, 2019 to include an unfinanced portion of capital expenditures of up to $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019;
●
revise the 2015 Credit Agreement’s maximum permitted indebtedness to finance the acquisition, construction or improvement of any fixed or capital assets; and
●
revise the maximum leverage ratio for each of the quarters during December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2019.
On April 15, 2019, the Company sold for $2.0 million and immediately leased back certain medical equipment in rental service to a third party specializing in such transactions. The leaseback term is 36 months. Because the arrangement contains a purchase option that the Company is reasonably certain to exercise, this transaction did not qualify for the sale-leaseback accounting under ASC 842. The medical equipment remains recorded on the accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheet and the proceeds received have been classified as an Other Financing liability, which is being paid off monthly over the term of the lease. The balance of Other Financing as of December 31, 2020 was $0.9 million.
On November 7, 2019, the Company and its primary lender entered into the sixth amendment (the “Sixth Amendment”) to its 2015 Credit Agreement. The Sixth Amendment amended the 2015 Credit Agreement to, among other things:
●
provide for a 2019 capital expenditure loan (the “2019 Equipment Line”) commitment of $10.0 million (in addition to the existing Equipment Line of $8.0 million), which may be drawn upon until the earlier of the full commitment being advanced or December 31, 2020, to be used solely to purchase eligible equipment to be used in our business and in amounts not to exceed 90.0% of the invoiced hard costs of such acquired equipment;
●
increase the commitment under the revolving facility (the “Revolver”) under the 2015 Credit Agreement to $11.8 million;
●
revise the definition of EBITDA to include the following additional or revised add-back adjustments: (i) one-time charges in an aggregate amount not to exceed $0.3 million and incurred prior to December 31, 2019 relating to our integration of business previously served by another major provider of electronic oncology pumps; (ii) one-time charges in an aggregate amount not to exceed $0.3 million and incurred prior to December 31, 2019 relating to our facility move; (iii) lease buyout expenses not to exceed: (x) $0.1 million incurred on or prior to December 31, 2018; (y) $0.2 million incurred after December 31, 2018 but on or prior to March 31, 2019; and (z) $0.2 million incurred after September 30, 2019 but on or prior to December 31, 2020; and (iv) any other non-cash charges for such period (but excluding certain non-cash charges);
●
revise the definition of Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio to mean, for any period, the ratio of (a) EBITDA minus Maintenance Capital Expenditures (defined to mean, for any period, 50.0% of depreciation expense) to (b) Fixed Charges, all calculated for the Company and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP;
●
revise the definitions of Revolving Credit Maturity Date and Term Maturity Date to mean the date five years after the Sixth Amendment Effective Date and add a definition for the 2019 Equipment Line Maturity Date to provide for the same maturity date;
●
reflect the refinancing of the Term A Loans, Term B Loans and Term C Loan as a single term loan (the “Term Loan”) on the Sixth Amendment Effective Date and, commencing on the last Business Day of December 2019, the consecutive quarterly principal installment payments changed to approximately $1.2 million; and
●
revise Section 5.01(e) of the 2015 Credit Agreement, which governs our obligation to deliver financial statements to the lender, to require us to provide the financial statements (x) as soon as possible but in any event within 30 days of the end of each fiscal quarter, or within 30 days of the end of each calendar month if any revolving loans were outstanding in month, (y) in connection with, and prior to, requesting any letter of credit and (z) at such other times as may be requested by the lender.
These debt amendments were accounted for as debt modifications. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the 2015 Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s Term Loan, Equipment Line and 2019 Equipment line under the 2015 Credit Agreement had balances of $21.9 million, $6.0 million and $10.0 million, respectively. The availability under the Revolver was subject to a borrowing base, which is calculated as the sum of the Company’s eligible accounts receivable and eligible inventory as defined by the 2015 Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the borrowing base was approximately $15.6 million, which exceeded the gross available borrowing amount of $11.8 million. The following table illustrates the net availability under the Revolver as of the applicable balance sheet date (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, interest on the credit facility is payable at our option as a (i) Eurodollar Loan, which bears interest at a per annum rate equal to the applicable 30-day London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus a margin ranging from 2.00% to 3.00% or (ii) CB Floating Rate (“CBFR”) Loan, which bears interest at a per annum rate equal to the greater of (a) the lender’s prime rate or (b) LIBOR plus 2.50%, in each case, plus a margin ranging from -1.00% to 0.25% based on our leverage ratio as defined in the 2015 Credit Agreement. The actual Eurodollar Loan rate at December 31, 2020 was 2.19% (LIBOR of 0.19% plus 2.00%). The actual CBFR Loan rate at December 31, 2020 was 2.25% (lender’s prime rate of 3.25% minus 1.00%).
As discussed above, subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company entered into the 2021 Credit Agreement, which replaced the 2015 Credit Agreement.
Share Repurchases
As described previously, on September 30, 2019, our Board of Directors approved the Share Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has not repurchased any shares under the Share Repurchase Program.
Cash Flows:
Operating Cash Flow. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20.3 million compared to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This $6.4 million, or 46.2%, increase was primarily attributable to the positive cash flow effect of increases in net income adjusted for non-cash items of $7.5 million, which was partially offset by an incremental increase in accounts receivable totaling $1.1 million.
Investing Cash Flow. Net cash used in investing activities was $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash used was primarily due to a $3.8 million decrease in cash used to purchase medical equipment, $1.8 million decrease in cash used to purchase other property and equipment and a $1.8 million increase in proceeds from the sales of medical equipment.
Financing Cash Flow. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.1 million compared to cash provided of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to cash used to repurchase common stock to satisfy statutory withholding on stock-based compensation of $1.7 million and a net increase in outstanding borrowing under the 2015 Credit Agreement and other financing totaling $0.4 million. The increase in 2015 Credit Agreement borrowings included $8.4 million in borrowings under the 2019 Equipment Line offset by amortization installments on term notes and other financing totaling $8.0 million.
Contractual Obligations
InfuSystem is a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and is not required to provide this information.
Contingent Liabilities
We are not aware of any contingent liabilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements, including the notes thereto. We consider critical accounting policies to be those that require more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, including the following: revenue recognition; leases; accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts; income taxes; and long-lived asset valuations. Management relies on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable in making its judgments and estimates. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Management believes its application of accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are periodically reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change.
Our accounting policies are more fully described under the heading “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. We believe the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments:
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018 the Company adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) and concluded that, consistent with prior reporting, the Company has two separate revenue streams: rentals and product sales. The adoption of ASC 606 requires certain customer concessions associated with rental revenues reported in accordance with ASC 605 - Revenue Recognition, previously reported in selling, general and administrative expenses as “provision for doubtful accounts” to now be recorded as a reduction of net rental revenues as they are considered price concessions of the transaction price under the new revenue guidance. ASC 606 was adopted on a modified retrospective method.
ASC 606 stipulates revenue recognition at the time and in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received for the performance obligations that have been provided. ASC 606 defines contracts as written, oral and through customary business practice. Under this definition, the Company considers contracts to be created at the time that the rental service is authorized or an order to purchase product is agreed upon regardless of whether or not there is a written contract.
The Company has two separate and distinct performance obligations offered to its customers: a rental service performance obligation or a product sale performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is defined as the unit of account for revenue recognition under ASC 606. These performance obligations are related to separate revenue streams and at no point are they combined into a single transaction. Sources of net revenues include commercial insurance payers, government insurance payers, medical facilities and patients.
The Company generates the majority of its revenue from the rental of infusion pumps to its customers and a minority of its revenue from product sales. For the rental service performance obligation, revenue is based on its standalone price, determined by using reimbursement rates established by third-party payer or other contracts. Revenue is recognized in the period in which the related performance obligation is satisfied, which is typically at the point in time that a patient concludes a treatment, or in certain arrangements, based on the number of pumps that a facility has onsite. The Company’s revenues related to product sales is recognized at the time that control of the product has been transferred to the customer; either at the time the product is shipped or the time the product has been received by the customer, depending on the delivery terms. The Company does not commit to long-term contracts to sell customers a certain minimum quantity of products.
The Company employs certain significant judgments to estimate the dollar amount of revenue, and related concessions, allocated to the rental service and sale of products. These judgments include, among others, the estimation of variable consideration. Variable consideration, specifically related to the Company’s third-party payer rental revenues, is estimated as implied price concessions resulting from differences between the rates charged for services performed and the expected reimbursements for commercial payers and other implied customer concessions. The estimates for variable consideration are based on historical collections with similar payers, aged accounts receivable by payer class and payer correspondence using the portfolio approach, which provide a reasonable basis for estimating the variable portion of a transaction. The Company doesn’t believe it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will occur in future periods because (i) there is no significant uncertainty about the amount of considerations that are expected to be collected based on collection history and (ii) the large number of sufficiently similar contracts allows the Company to adequately estimate the component of variable consideration.
Net revenues are adjusted when changes in estimates of variable consideration occur. Changes in estimates typically arise as a result of new information obtained, such as actual payment receipt or denial, or pricing adjustments by payers. Subsequent changes to estimates of transaction prices are recorded as adjustments to net revenue in the period of the change. Subsequent changes that are determined to be the result of an adverse change in the payer’s ability to pay are recorded as an allowance for doubtful accounts.
Leases
On January 1, 2019 (the “Effective Date”), the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842); ASU 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases; and ASU 2018-11, Targeted Improvements (collectively, “Topic 842”) using a modified retrospective transition approach, which requires Topic 842 to be applied to all leases existing at the date of initial application. Under Topic 842, lessees are required to recognize a lease liability and right-of-use asset (“ROU asset”) for all leases and to disclose key information about leasing arrangements. Additionally, leases are classified as either financing or operating; the classification determines the pattern of expense recognition and classification within the statement of operations. The Company elected to apply its lease accounting policy only to leases with a term greater than twelve months.
Topic 842 provides several optional practical expedients that we adopted at transition. We elected the “package of practical expedients”, which does not require us to reassess our prior conclusions regarding lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. We did not elect the practical expedient of hindsight to the evaluation of lease options (e.g. renewal).
Topic 842 also provides practical expedients for an entity’s ongoing accounting. We elected the “combining lease and non-lease components” practical expedient and also elected to apply the short-term lease recognition exemption to certain leases; therefore, we did not recognize ROU assets and lease liabilities for these leases.
In adopting Topic 842, we determined and will continue to determine whether an arrangement is a lease at inception. Our operating leases are primarily for office space, service facility centers and equipment under operating lease arrangements that expire at various dates over the next ten years. Our leases do not contain any restrictive covenants. Our office leases generally contain renewal options for periods ranging from one to five years. Because we are not reasonably certain to exercise these renewal options, the options are not considered in determining the lease term, and payments associated with the option years are excluded from lease payments. Our office leases do not contain any material residual value guarantees. Our equipment leases generally do not contain renewal options. We are not reasonably certain to exercise the renewal options for those equipment leases that do contain renewal options, thus, the options are not considered in determining the lease term and payments associated with the option years are excluded from lease payments.
For our equipment leases, we used and will use the implicit rate in the lease as the discount rate, when available. Otherwise, we use our incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate. For our office leases, the implicit rate is typically not available, so we used and will use our incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate. Our lease agreements include both lease and non-lease components. We elected the practical expedient that allows us to combine lease and non-lease components for all of our leases.
Payments due under our operating leases include fixed payments as well as variable payments. For our office leases, variable payments include amounts for the Company’s proportionate share of operating expenses, utilities, property taxes, insurance, common area maintenance and other facility-related expenses. For our equipment leases, variable payments may consist of sales taxes, property taxes and other fees.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Amounts billed that have not yet been collected that also meet the conditions for unconditional right to payment are presented as accounts receivable. Accounts receivable related to rental service and delivery of products are reported at their estimated transaction prices, inclusive of adjustments for variable consideration, based on the amounts expected to be collected from payers. The Company writes off accounts receivable once collection efforts have been exhausted and an account is deemed to be uncollectible. Subsequent to the adoption of ASC 606, an allowance for doubtful accounts is established only as a result of an adverse change in the Company’s payers’ ability to pay outstanding billings. The allowance for doubtful accounts was $1.0 million and $0.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred income tax liabilities and assets based on (i) the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities, using enacted tax rates in effect in the years the differences are expected to reverse and (ii) the tax credit carryforwards. Deferred income tax (expense) benefit results from the change in net deferred tax assets or deferred tax liabilities. A valuation allowance is recorded when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some or all of any deferred tax assets will not be realized. To make this assessment, we consider the historical and projected future taxable income or loss in each tax jurisdiction and we review our tax planning strategies. In the fourth quarter of 2020 we determined that our valuation allowance against U.S. federal and state deferred taxes is no longer required and the valuation allowance of $11.2 million that existed was released. Management has weighed all of the positive and negative evidence and determined that it was more likely than not that the Company would generate sufficient taxable income in the near future to realize all of the deferred tax assets before they expire. The Company turned profitable in 2019 and is profitable in 2020, putting the Company in a three-year cumulative income position. The Company is projecting sufficient pre-tax book income over the next several years to be able to utilize net operating loss carryforwards. Since future financial results may differ from previous estimates, periodic adjustments to our valuation allowance positions may be necessary.
Provisions for federal, state and foreign taxes are calculated based on reported pre-tax earnings based on current tax law and include the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining deferred tax assets and liabilities. Certain items of income and expense are recognized in different time periods for financial reporting than for income tax purposes; thus, such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable.
We estimate the impact of uncertain income tax positions on our income tax return. These estimates impact income taxes receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities on the balance sheet and provision for income taxes on the income statement. We follow a two-step approach for recognizing uncertain tax positions. First, management evaluates the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more-likely-than-not that the position will be sustained upon examination. Second, for positions that are determined are more-likely-than-not to be sustained, we recognize the tax benefit as the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being sustained. We establish a reserve for uncertain tax positions liability that is comprised of unrecognized tax benefits and related interest and penalties. We adjust this liability in the period in which an uncertain tax position is effectively settled, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant taxing authority to examine the tax position, or more information becomes available. For more information, refer to the “Income Taxes” discussion included in Note 8 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company adopted ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, in the fourth quarter of 2019. This guidance simplifies various aspects related to accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. The guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in any interim period for which financial statements have not yet been issued. Certain amendments may be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective or prospective basis. As permitted, the Company elected to early adopt this guidance for the year ended December 31, 2019. The adoption of this guidance did not have a significant impact on the Company’s financial statements and primarily resulted in the reclassification of an immaterial amount from non-income tax expense to income tax expense related to the accounting for franchise taxes, with no impact to the Company’s consolidated net income, equity or cash flows.
Long-lived Asset Valuation
We evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets for impairment by analyzing the operating performance and anticipated future cash flows for those assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of such assets may not be recoverable. We evaluate the need to adjust the carrying value of the underlying assets if the sum of the expected cash flows is less than the carrying value. Our projection of future cash flows, the level of actual cash flows, the methods of estimation used for determining fair values and salvage values can impact impairment. Any changes in management’s judgments could result in greater or lesser annual depreciation and amortization expense or impairment charges in the future. Depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
We performed our annual impairment analysis of all indefinite-lived intangible assets in October 2020 and determined that the fair value of all the assets was greater than the carrying value, resulting in no impairment of indefinite-lived assets.
The Company assesses impairment indicators related to its internally-developed, internal-use software, specifically looking at the effectiveness and useful lives of each project and sub-project to determine if impairment indicators are present. In December 2020 and 2019, respectively, the Company assessed the impairment indicators and found none to be present.
For more information, refer to the “Intangible Assets” discussion included in Note 6 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.