ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a major supplier of high-quality food and industrial ingredient solutions to customers around the world. We have 46 manufacturing facilities located in North America, South America, Asia-Pacific and Europe, the Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”), and we manage and operate our businesses at a regional level. We believe this approach provides us with a unique understanding of the cultures and product requirements in each of the geographic markets in which we operate, bringing added value to our customers. Our ingredients are used by customers in the food, beverage, brewing, and animal feed industries, among others.
Our strategic growth roadmap is based on five growth platforms and is designed to deliver shareholder value by accelerating customer co-creation and enabling consumer-preferred innovation. Our first platform is starch-based texturizers, the second platform is clean and simple ingredients, the third platform is plant-based proteins, the fourth platform is sugar reduction and specialty sweeteners, and finally, our fifth platform is value-added food systems.
Critical success factors in our business include managing our manufacturing costs, including costs for corn, other raw materials, and utilities. In addition, our global operations expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. We use derivative financial instruments, when appropriate, for the purpose of minimizing the risks and costs associated with fluctuations in certain raw material and energy costs, foreign exchange rates, and interest rates. The capital intensive nature of our business requires that we generate significant cash flow over time in order to selectively reinvest in our operations and grow organically, as well as to expand through strategic acquisitions and alliances. We utilize certain key financial metrics relating to return on invested capital and financial leverage to monitor our progress toward achieving our strategic business objectives (see section entitled “Key Financial Performance Metrics”).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating income, net income, and diluted earnings per common share declined from 2019 levels. The decreases were attributable primarily to reductions in volumes driven by government-mandated shutdowns associated with COVID-19, particularly in the Americas, increased restructuring and impairment charges associated with the impairments of an indefinite-lived intangible asset and an equity method investment, and the results of the acquired operations of PureCircle Limited (“PureCircle”). The declines were partially offset by the benefit from Brazilian tax matters.
COVID-19: Our operations in recent periods have been adversely affected by impacts of COVID-19. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic, and on March 13, 2020 the United States declared a national emergency with respect to COVID-19. Our global operations expose us to risks associated with public health crises, including pandemics such as COVID-19. Foreign governmental organizations and governmental organizations at the national, state and local levels in the United States have taken various actions to combat the spread of COVID-19, including imposing stay-at-home orders and closing “non-essential” businesses and their operations. As a manufacturer of food ingredients, our operations are considered “essential” under most current COVID-19 government regulations, and our facilities are operating globally. We did not experience any material supply chain interruptions during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and were able to continue to operate and ship products from our global network of manufacturing facilities without material interruptions. We experienced sales volume decline in the second and third quarters of 2020 due to COVID-19 impacts on consumer mobility and consumption. We place top priority on our employees’ health and safety and continue to follow the advice and the guidelines of public health authorities for physical distancing and to make available personal protective equipment and sanitization supplies.
The Company anticipates continued impacts from COVID-19 on net sales volume across our operating segments in the first quarter of 2021. We are monitoring COVID-19 infection rates as well as the pace and effectiveness of vaccination rollouts, as the net sales volume is generally correlated with increased consumer activity and availability of food and beverages consumed away from home.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges: In July 2018, we announced a $125 million savings target for our Cost Smart program, designed to improve profitability, further streamline our global business, and deliver increased value to stockholders. We set Cost Smart savings targets to include an anticipated $75 million in Cost of sales savings, including freight, and $50 million in anticipated SG&A savings by year-end 2021. Since the program’s inception, we have periodically updated our savings targets and we now expect to deliver $170 million in total savings by year-end 2021.
Our Cost Smart program and other initiatives resulted in restructuring charges in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a total of $48 million of pre-tax restructuring charges related to these programs, a decrease of $9 million from the restructuring charges recorded for 2019. We recorded $25 million of restructuring charges for our Cost Smart SG&A program, primarily related to professional service costs in North America during the year, and $23 million of restructuring charges for our Cost Smart Cost of sales program, primarily related to facility and product line closures during the year.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recorded $45 million of pre-tax impairment charges, including a $35 million charge related to an impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible asset associated with the TIC Gums tradename and a $10 million other-than-temporary impairment of our equity method investment in Verdient Foods Inc (“Verdient).
Storm Damage Costs: We incurred storm damage to the Cedar Rapids, Iowa manufacturing facility, which was shut down for ten days in August 2020. The storm-related damage resulted in $3 million of charges during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. We recorded the storm damage costs within Other expense (income), net on the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources: Our cash provided by operating activities increased to $829 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $680 million in the prior year primarily due to changes in working capital. Our cash used by investing activities increased to $571 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $374 million in the prior year primarily due to the acquisition of a controlling interest in PureCircle. Our cash provided by financing activities was $143 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, while our cash used for financing activities was $364 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily due to our sale of $1 billion of senior notes during the year ended December 31, 2020, offset by payments on debt maturities during the year.
We currently expect that our available cash balances, future cash flow from operations, access to debt markets, and borrowing capacity under our credit facilities will provide us with sufficient liquidity to fund our anticipated capital expenditures, dividends, and other investing and financing activities for at least the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future thereafter. Our future cash flow needs will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the timing and extent of our expansion into new markets, the timing of introductions of new products, potential acquisitions of complementary businesses and technologies, continuing market acceptance of our new products, and general economic and market conditions. We may need to raise additional capital or incur indebtedness to fund our needs for less predictable strategic initiatives, such as acquisitions.
Results of Operations
We have significant operations in four reporting segments: North America, South America, Asia-Pacific and EMEA. For most of our foreign subsidiaries, the local foreign currency is the functional currency. Accordingly, revenues and expenses denominated in the functional currencies of these subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at the applicable average exchange rates for the period. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates affect the U.S. dollar amounts of our foreign subsidiaries’ revenues and expenses.
We acquired a controlling interest in PureCircle on July 1, 2020, acquired Verdient on November 3, 2020, and Western Polymer LLC (“Western Polymer”) on March 1, 2019. The results of the acquired businesses are included in our consolidated financial results from the respective acquisition dates forward. While we identify fluctuations due to the acquisitions, our discussion below also addresses results of operations excluding the impact of the acquisitions and the results of the acquired businesses, where appropriate, to provide a more comparable and meaningful analysis.
2020 Compared to 2019 - Consolidated
Net Income attributable to Ingredion. Net income attributable to Ingredion for 2020 decreased to $348 million from $413 million in 2019. The decrease in net income was largely attributable to lower sales volumes in North America, increased restructuring and impairment charges primarily related to impairments of an indefinite-lived intangible asset and an other-than-temporary impairment of our equity method investment in Verdient, and the inclusion of the results of the acquired operations of PureCircle. These effects were partially offset by an increased benefit from the Brazilian tax matter compared to 2019.
Net sales. Net sales were down 4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in full-year net sales was driven by sales volume declines in North America and South America, related primarily to COVID-19 shutdowns in the second and third quarters.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 was down 4 percent when compared to 2019, primarily due to the reduction in net sales. Our gross profit margin was flat at 21 percent for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Operating expenses. Operating expenses increased 3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by higher corporate costs due to continued investments to drive business and digital transformations. Operating expenses, as a percentage of gross profit, were 49 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 46 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other income, net. Our change in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was as follows:
In 2019 the Company received a favorable judgment from the Federal Court of Appeals in Brazil related to certain indirect taxes collected in prior years. To account for the judgment, the Company recorded a $22 million pre-tax benefit, in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies, for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, the Company received another favorable court judgment that further clarifies the calculation of the Company's benefit, resulting in a larger indirect tax claim against the government. As a result, the Company recorded an additional $35 million in pre-tax benefits during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company expects to be entitled to credits against its Brazilian federal tax payments in 2021 and future years. The total benefit recorded represents the Company's current estimate of the credits and interest due from the favorable decisions in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies.
Additionally, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a pre-tax benefit of $1 million related to the reversal of a tax decision on a government subsidy on which the Company had previously paid taxes. The Company also recorded a $3 million tax provision benefit related to this decision.
Financing costs, net. Our financing costs, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were flat compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a reduction in interest expense, partly offset by foreign currency losses.
Provision for income taxes. Our effective income tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were 30.0 percent and 27.1 percent, respectively.
The increase in the effective income tax rate was driven by a change in the mix of earnings, including the consolidation of PureCircle, certain one-time items in the year-over-year results and, a decline in the value of the Mexican peso against the U.S. dollar. These items were partially offset by a reduction in our U.S. global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) in accordance with final regulations issued by the U.S. Treasury Department under the TCJA and utilization of previously unbenefited net operating losses compared to a valuation allowance build in the year-ago period.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests. Net income attributable to non-controlling interests for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by 45 percent compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributable to net losses associated with the acquisition of a controlling interest in PureCircle.
2020 Compared to 2019 - North America
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by a 5 percent decrease in volume, partially offset by a 1 percent improvement in price/product mix.
Operating income. Our operating income decreased $35 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by significantly lower away-from-home food and beverage consumption across the region and a government-mandated shutdown of brewery customers in Mexico in
the second quarter related to COVID-19 impacts, partially offset by lower net corn costs and favorable price mix in the fourth quarter.
2020 Compared to 2019 - South America
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by a decrease in foreign currency values against the U.S. dollar of 15 percent and a 1 percent decrease in volume, partially offset by a 12 percent increase in price/product mix.
Operating income. Our increase in operating income of $16 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was due to strong price mix, which was partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts and lower sales volumes.
2020 Compared to 2019 - Asia-Pacific
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by unfavorable volumes of 2 percent and unfavorable price/ product mix of 2 percent, partially offset by inclusion of PureCircle results.
Operating income. Our decrease in operating income of $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was driven by inclusion of PureCircle results, which reduced full-year operating income by $11 million.
2020 Compared to 2019 - EMEA
Net sales. Our net sales were essentially flat for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as favorable price/ product mix and volumes were offset by unfavorable foreign exchange impacts.
Operating income. Operating income increased by $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was largely attributable to Pakistan pricing actions, strong EMEA specialty sales, and lower operating expenses in Europe. These effects were partially offset by the impacts of stay-at-home orders on Pakistan sales volume in the first half of the year and negative Pakistan foreign currency impacts
2019 Compared to 2018 - Consolidated
Net Income attributable to Ingredion. Net income attributable to Ingredion for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased to $413 million from $443 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our results for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $32 million of one-time after-tax net costs, driven primarily by after-tax restructuring costs of $44 million. The restructuring charges consist of costs associated with our Cost Smart Cost of sales program in relation to the closure of the Lane Cove, Australia production facility, and costs related to the Cost Smart SG&A program, including professional services and employee-related severance primarily in the North America and South America segments.
Our results for 2018 included $54 million of one-time after-tax net costs, driven primarily by after-tax restructuring costs of $51 million. The restructuring charges consist of costs associated with our Cost Smart Cost of sales program in relation to the cessation of wet-milling at the Stockton, California manufacturing facility, costs related to the Cost Smart SG&A program, including employee-related severance and other costs for restructuring projects in the South America, Asia-Pacific, and North America segments, costs related to the Latin America and North America Finance Transformation initiatives, and costs related to the cessation of our leaf extraction process in Brazil. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we adjusted our provisional amounts related enactment of the TCJA and recognized an incremental $3 million of tax expense related to the TCJA.
Net sales. Net sales were slightly down for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and volume reduction due to the cessation of Stockton wet milling were partially offset by favorable price/product mix.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales for year ended December 31, 2019 was flat as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to higher net corn costs that were offset by lower volume. Our gross profit margin was 21 percent and 22 percent for the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The gross profit margin decrease primarily reflected higher costs for raw materials.
Operating expenses. Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019, were flat as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This was primarily driven by lower selling costs, offset by higher general and administrative costs. Operating expenses, as a percentage of gross profit, were 46 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 45 percent for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other income, net. Our change in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was as follows:
In January 2019, the Company’s Brazilian subsidiary received a favorable decision from the Federal Court of Appeals in Sao Paulo, Brazil, related to certain indirect taxes collected in prior years. As a result of the decision, the Company expects to be entitled to indirect tax credits against its Brazilian federal tax payments in 2020 and future years. The Company finalized its calculation of the amount of the credits and interest due from the favorable decision, concluding that the Company could be entitled to approximately $86 million of credits spanning a period from 2005 to 2018. The Department of Federal Revenue of Brazil, however, issued an Internal Ruling in which it charged that the Company is entitled to only $22 million of the calculated indirect tax credits and interest for the period from 2005 to 2014. The Brazil National Treasury has filed a motion for clarification with the Brazilian Supreme Court, asking the Court, among other things, to modify the lower court’s decision to approve the Internal Ruling, which could impact the decision in favor of the Company. Due to the uncertainty arising from the issuance of the Internal Ruling, the Company recorded $22 million of credits in 2019 in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies. The $22 million of future tax credits, which was recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement in Other income, resulted in additional deferred income taxes of $8 million. The income taxes will be paid as and when the tax credits are utilized. The Company received further clarification from the court in 2020 regarding the calculation of the Company’s benefits and recorded additional credits, as described above in the discussion of the Company’s 2020 results.
Financing costs, net. Our financing costs, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $5 million from the year ended December 31, 2018, driven by a reduction in foreign currency losses, partly offset by higher interest expense.
Provision for income taxes. Our effective income tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were 27.1 percent and 26.9 percent, respectively.
The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by a reduction in the excess tax benefit related to share-based payment awards. This was offset by the revaluation of the Mexican Peso versus the U.S. dollar which impacted the U.S. dollar denominated balances held in Mexico compared to the devaluation of the Mexican Peso versus the U.S. dollar, in the prior year. Additionally, the effective tax rate was reduced from the prior year due to relatively lower valuation allowances on Argentine net operating losses.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests. Net income attributable to non-controlling interests for the year ended December 31, 2019, was flat when compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
2019 Compared to 2018 - North America
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was driven by a 2 percent decrease in volume, partially offset by a 1 percent improvement in price/product mix.
Operating income. Our operating income decreased $23 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, due to higher net cost of corn and production costs, which were partially offset by favorable pricing.
2019 Compared to 2018 - South America
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was driven by currency devaluations of 20 percent in Argentina and Brazil versus the U.S. dollar, partly offset by a 15 percent increase in price/product mix and 2 percent increase in volume.
Operating income. Our decrease in operating income of $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was primarily driven by foreign exchange impacts and higher net corn costs, which were partially offset by favorable pricing actions.
2019 Compared to 2018 - Asia-Pacific
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was driven by unfavorable currency translation.
Operating income. Our decrease in operating income of $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was driven by higher regional input costs, increased net corn cost in Australia, and foreign exchange impacts.
2019 Compared to 2018 - EMEA
Net sales. Our decrease in net sales of 2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was driven by unfavorable foreign exchange of 11 percent, partially offset by volume growth of 2 percent and improved price/product mix of 7 percent.
Operating income. Our decrease in operating income of $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, was driven by higher raw material costs and unfavorable foreign exchange impacts, driven primarily by the Pakistan rupee, which were partially offset by improved price mix.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, our total assets were approximately $6.9 billion, as compared to approximately $6.0 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by cash on hand after the issuance of debt, as well as continued capital investment in growth platforms. Total equity increased to approximately $3.0 billion at December 31, 2020, from approximately $2.7 billion at December 31, 2019. This increase primarily reflects our current year earnings.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold two tranches of senior notes (the “Notes”), consisting of our 2.900% senior notes due 2030 in the principal amount of $600 million and our 3.900% senior notes due 2050 in the principal amount of $400 million. We recorded the aggregate discount of approximately $7 million at which the Notes were issued and capitalized debt issuance costs of approximately $9 million associated with the Notes.
We applied the net proceeds from the sale of the Notes to pay in full the outstanding balance of $394 million under our revolving credit facility described below (“Revolving Credit Facility”) and set aside funds to repay our 4.625% senior notes due November 1, 2020 (the “November 2020 Notes”). On June 8, 2020, we issued a notice for the redemption in full of all $400 million principal amount of the November 2020 Notes. The November 2020 Notes were redeemed on July 9, 2020 for a total redemption price of $409 million, including $4 million of accrued interest and a $5 million “make-whole” premium as set forth in the indenture governing the November 2020 Notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used proceeds from the Revolving Credit Facility to repay $200 million of our 5.62% senior notes due March 25, 2020.
On April 12, 2019, we amended and restated the Term Loan Credit Agreement for a $165 million senior unsecured term loan credit facility that was set to mature on April 25, 2019 (“Term Loan”) to establish a 24-month senior unsecured term loan credit facility in an amount up to $500 million that matures on April 12, 2021. We used the $500 million of borrowings under the new facility to pay down the amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility and to pay off the Term Loan balance. The balance of the amended and restated term loan credit agreement for the new facility (“Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement”) was $380 million as of December 31, 2020 and matures on April 12, 2021.
All borrowings under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement bear interest at a variable annual rate based on the specified London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) or a base rate, at our election, subject to the terms and conditions thereof, plus, in each case, an applicable margin. We are required to pay a fee on the unused availability under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement. The Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, covenants and events of default, including covenants restricting the incurrence of liens, the incurrence of indebtedness by our subsidiaries and certain fundamental changes involving the Company and our subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions in each case. We must also maintain a specified consolidated leverage ratio and consolidated interest coverage ratio. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with these financial covenants. The occurrence of an event of default under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement could result in all loans and other obligations being declared due and payable and the term loan credit facility being terminated.
On October 11, 2016, we entered into a five-year, senior, unsecured $1 billion revolving credit agreement (the “Revolving Credit Agreement”) for the Revolving Credit Facility, which replaced a $1 billion senior, unsecured revolving credit facility. All committed pro rata borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility will bear interest at a variable annual rate based on LIBOR or a base rate, at our election, subject to the terms and conditions thereof, plus, in each case, an applicable margin based on our leverage ratio (as reported in the financial statements delivered pursuant to the Revolving Credit Agreement) or our credit rating. Subject to specified conditions, we may designate one or more of our subsidiaries as additional borrowers under the Revolving Credit Agreement provided that we guarantee all borrowings and other obligations of any such subsidiaries thereunder.
The Revolving Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, covenants, events of default and other terms and conditions, including covenants restricting liens, subsidiary debt and mergers, subject to certain exceptions in each case. We must also comply with a leverage ratio covenant and an interest coverage ratio covenant. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with these financial covenants. The occurrence of an event of default under the Revolving Credit Agreement could result in all loans and other obligations under the agreement being declared due and payable and the Revolving Credit Facility being terminated.
As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement. The Revolving Credit Agreement expires on October 10, 2021. In addition to borrowing availability under its Revolving Credit
Agreement, the Company has approximately $1.2 billion of unused operating lines of credit in the various foreign countries in which it operates.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total debt outstanding of $2.2 billion. As of December 31, 2020, our total debt consisted of the following:
We, as the parent company, guarantee certain obligations of our consolidated subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, such guarantees aggregated to $58 million. We believe that such consolidated subsidiaries will meet their financial obligations as they become due.
Our principal source of our liquidity is our internally generated cash flow, which we supplement as necessary with our ability to borrow under our credit facilities and to raise funds in the capital markets.
The weighted average interest rate on our total indebtedness was approximately 3.4 percent and 4.3 percent for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net Cash Flows
A summary of operating cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 is shown below:
Cash provided by operations was $829 million in 2020 as compared with $680 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to changes in working capital versus the prior year, partly offset by lower net income. Cash provided by operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to lower net income in the year ended December 31, 2019.
To manage price risk related to corn purchases, we use derivative instruments, consisting of corn futures and options contracts, to lock in our corn costs associated with firm-priced customer sales contracts. As the market price of these commodities fluctuates, our derivative instruments change in value and we fund any unrealized losses or receive cash for any unrealized gains related to outstanding commodity futures and option contracts. We plan to continue to use
derivative instruments to hedge such price risk and, accordingly, we will be required to make cash deposits to or be entitled to receive cash from our margin accounts depending on the movement in the market price of the underlying commodities.
Listed below are our primary investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
On December 11, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.64 per share of common stock. This dividend was paid on January 28, 2021, to stockholders of record at the close of business on January 4, 2021.
We paid $340 million of capital expenditures and mechanical stores purchases to update, expand and improve our facilities in 2020. In July 2020, we acquired a controlling interest in PureCircle for $208 million, net of cash acquired of $14 million.
We have not provided foreign withholding taxes, state income taxes, and federal and state taxes on foreign currency gains/losses on accumulated undistributed earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries because these earnings are considered to be permanently reinvested. It is not practicable to determine the amount of the unrecognized deferred tax liability related to the undistributed earnings. We do not anticipate the need to repatriate funds to the U.S. to satisfy domestic liquidity needs arising in the ordinary course of business, including liquidity needs associated with our domestic debt service requirements. Approximately $427 million of our total cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $665 million at December 31, 2020, were held by our operations outside of the U.S.
Hedging and Financial Risk
Hedging: We are exposed to market risk stemming from changes in commodity prices (primarily corn and natural gas), foreign-currency exchange rates, and interest rates. In the normal course of business, we actively manage our exposure to these market risks by entering into various hedging transactions, authorized under established policies that place controls on these activities. These transactions utilize exchange-traded derivatives or over-the-counter derivatives with investment grade counterparties. Our hedging transactions may include, but are not limited to, a variety of derivative financial instruments such as commodity-related futures, options and swap contracts, forward currency-related contracts and options, interest rate swap agreements, and Treasury lock agreements (“T-Locks”). See Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Commodity Price Risk: Our principal use of derivative financial instruments is to manage commodity price risk in North America relating to anticipated purchases of corn and natural gas to be used in our manufacturing process. We periodically enter into futures, options and swap contracts for a portion of our anticipated corn and natural gas usage, generally over the following 12 to 24 months, in order to hedge price risk associated with fluctuations in market prices. Unrealized gains and losses associated with marking our commodities-based cash flow hedge derivative instruments to market are recorded as a component of other comprehensive income (“OCI”). As of December 31, 2020, our Accumulated other comprehensive loss account (“AOCI”) included $47 million of net gains (net of income tax expense of $16 million) related to these derivative instruments. It is anticipated that $44 million of net gains (net of income tax expense of $15 million) will be reclassified into earnings during the next 12 months. We expect the net gains to be offset by changes in the underlying commodities costs.
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk: Due to our global operations, including operations in many emerging markets, we are exposed to fluctuations in foreign-currency exchange rates. As a result, we have exposure to translational foreign-exchange risk when our foreign operations’ results are translated to U.S. dollars and to transactional foreign-exchange risk when transactions not denominated in the functional currency of the operating unit are revalued into U.S. dollars. We primarily use derivative financial instruments such as foreign-currency forward contracts, swaps and options to manage our foreign currency transactional exchange risk. We enter into foreign-currency derivative instruments that are designated as both cash flow hedging instruments as well as instruments not designated as hedging instruments as defined by ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. As of December 31, 2020, we had foreign currency forward sales contracts with an aggregate notional amount of $410 million and foreign currency forward purchase contracts with an aggregate notional amount of $224 million not designated as hedging instruments.
As of December 31, 2020, we had foreign-currency forward sales contracts with an aggregate notional amount of $401 million and foreign-currency forward purchase contracts with an aggregate notional amount of $542 million designated as cash flow hedging instruments. The amount included in AOCI relating to these hedges at December 31, 2020, was $1 million of net losses (net of an insignificant amount of income tax benefit). The net losses reclassified into earnings during the next 12 months are not anticipated to be significant.
We have significant operations in Argentina. In the second quarter of 2018, the Argentine peso rapidly devalued relative to the U.S. dollar, which along with increased inflation, indicated that the three-year cumulative inflation in that country exceeded 100 percent as of June 30, 2018. As a result, we elected to adopt hyperinflation accounting as of July 1, 2018 for our affiliate, Ingredion Argentina S.A. Under hyperinflation accounting, our affiliate’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar, and its income statement and balance sheet are measured in U.S. dollars using both current and historical rates of exchange. The effect of changes in exchange rates on Argentine-peso-denominated monetary assets and liabilities is reflected in earnings in financing costs.
Interest Rate Risk: We occasionally use interest rate swaps and T-Locks to hedge our exposure to interest rate changes, to reduce the volatility of our financing costs, or to achieve a desired proportion of fixed versus floating rate debt, based on current and projected market conditions. We did not have any T-Locks outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, our AOCI account included $4 million of net losses (net of $1 million tax benefit) related to settled T-Locks. These deferred losses are being amortized to financing costs over the term of the senior notes with which they are associated. The net losses reclassified into earnings during the next 12 months are not anticipated to be significant.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any outstanding interest rate swaps. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had an outstanding interest rate swap agreement that converted the interest rates on $200 million of its $400 million 4.625% senior notes due November 1, 2020, to variable rates. The Company redeemed these notes in July 2020 and settled the outstanding interest rate swap.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(a) The purchase obligations relate principally to raw material and power supply sourcing agreements, including take or pay contracts, which help to provide us with adequate power and raw material supply at certain of our facilities.
(b) The above table does not reflect unrecognized income tax benefits of $46 million, the timing of which is uncertain. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information with respect to unrecognized income tax benefits.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we were not subject to any obligations pursuant to any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity.
Key Financial Performance Metrics
We use certain key financial performance metrics to monitor our progress towards achieving our long-term strategic business objectives. These metrics relate to our ability to drive profitability, create value for stockholders, and monitor our financial leverage. We assess whether we are achieving our profitability and value creation objectives by measuring our Adjusted Return on Invested Capital (“Adjusted ROIC”). We monitor our financial leverage by regularly reviewing our ratio of net debt to adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Net Debt to Adjusted EBITDA”) and our Net Debt to Capitalization percentage to assure that we are properly financed. We believe these metrics provide valuable managerial information to help us run our business and are useful to investors.
The metrics Adjusted ROIC and Net Debt to Adjusted EBITDA include certain information (Adjusted Operating Income, net of tax and Adjusted EBITDA, respectively) that is not calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We also have presented below the most comparable metrics calculated using components determined in accordance with GAAP. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures internally for strategic decision-making, forecasting future results, and evaluating current performance. Management believes that the non-GAAP financial measures provide a more consistent comparison of our operating results and trends for the periods presented. These non-GAAP financial measures are used in addition to and in conjunction with results presented in accordance with GAAP and reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. These non-GAAP measures should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, the corresponding measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
In accordance with our long-term objectives, we set certain objectives relating to these key financial performance metrics that we strive to meet. However, no assurance can be given that we will continue to meet our financial performance metric targets. See Item 1A. Risk Factors and