Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward Looking Statements
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes to such financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and other sections in this 10-K.
Overview
Item 9 Labs produces premium cannabis and cannabis related products in a rapidly growing market. We currently offer more than 300 products that we group in the following categories: flower; concentrates; distillates and hardware. Our product offerings will continue to grow as we develop new products to meet the needs of the end users. We make our products available to consumers through licensed dispensaries in Arizona. Item 9 Labs’ products are now carried in more than 70 dispensaries throughout the state of Arizona.
We believe our past and future success is dependent upon our ongoing ability to understand the needs and desires of the consumers, and we develop and offer products that meet those needs.
Our objective is to leverage our assets (tangible and intangible) to fuel the growth of our share of the Arizona cannabis market, as well as expand the geographical reach of our products into markets outside of Arizona, with the ultimate goal of providing comfortable cannabis health solutions to a larger population in a manner that will create value for our shareholders.
We expanded our assets in November 2018 with the acquisition of the majority of the assets of AZ DP Consulting LLC. The acquisition was treated as a business combination for financial reporting purposes. The acquisition was valued at $9,270,000, with $1,500,000 in cash and $7,770,000 (3 million shares valued at $2.59/share) of the Company’s restricted common stock. As part of the acquisition, the owner of AZ DP Consulting LLC, Sara Gullickson, came aboard Item 9 Labs Corp. as CEO. We acquired numerous web domains, including dispensarypermits.com and dispensarytemplates.com, marijuana business templates, trade names and customer lists. The consulting side of the business provides dispensary application services to its clients, and through the acquisition, provides Item 9 Labs Corp. with synergistic partnerships for growth into new markets. Through nine months of operating the business, we concluded that the assets, as recorded at the acquisition date were impaired. The impairment is included in the results of operations in the year ended September 30, 2019, totaling $5,758,827. In November 2019, Ms. Gullickson resigned as CEO. As part of her resignation, she and the Company mutually agreed on an amendment to her employment agreement in which she would cancel and return 2,300,000 shares of the common stock she obtained in the acquisition in exchange for a reduction in the duration of her non-compete agreement from three years to four months.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic, and the President of the United States declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency. The services we provide are currently designated an essential critical infrastructure business under the President’s COVID-19 guidance, the continued operation of which is vital for national public health, safety and national economic security. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, its impact on our customers and vendors, and the range of governmental and community reactions to the pandemic, which are uncertain and cannot be fully predicted at this time. As of January 12, 2021, the Company has not experienced any material negative impact from the pandemic, though it is unknown what will occur going forward.
Though it was deemed necessary to record an impairment in fiscal year 2019, dispensarypermits.com is an essential tool in our future expansion. As indicated in the Company’s Form 8-K released on December 14, 2020, Item 9 Labs and OCG Inc. have reached an agreement to merge. OCG Inc. and its Unity Rd. dispensary franchise model will be a strong addition to Item 9 Labs, creating synergies throughout all verticals of the Company. The parties are awaiting completion of conditions precedent to closing, which is anticipated to occur in February 2021.
On December 13, 2020, the Company and I9 Acquisition Sub Inc. (“Merger Sub”), entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Agreement”) with OCG Inc., a Colorado corporation (“Target”), pursuant to which the Merger Sub will be merged with and into the Target in a reverse triangular merger with the Target continuing as the surviving entity as a wholly-owned direct subsidiary of the Company (“Merger”). OCG Inc. owns the award-winning dispensary franchise concept, Unity Rd. Unity Rd. will be the retail vertical of the Company, will be supplied with premium Item 9 Labs products, and gives the Company a less capital intensive method of expanding into other markets.Our Arizona cannabis operations saw significant expansion as well, both in our physical and geographic footprint. Our physical footprint expanded with the addition of a 2nd 10,000 square foot facility in the 4th quarter of fiscal year 2019, more than doubling our cultivation and processing space for Arizona. As the Company methodically expanded our operational capacity by more than 100% in fiscal year 2020, we were also able to significantly increase efficiencies within the cultivation and processing operations. The Arizona expansion will continue in fiscal year 2021, as we work towards tripling output in the first half of the year, prior to beginning construction on phase 1 of our construction plan to build additional cultivation space. Phase 1 totals over 80,000 square feet of cultivation and processing space, and the remaining five phases will add over 500,000 square feet of cultivation and processing space.
Item 9 Labs Corp. continued its expansion plans into other states during the year as well as the Company acquired (pending regulatory approval) cultivation and processing licenses in Nye County, Nevada which will be paired with our Nevada facility. In 2019, we broke ground on our 20,000 square foot cultivation and processing facility in Nevada. The facility is approximately 65% complete. With financing plans in process, we anticipate recommencing construction in the coming months as we aim to commence operations in Nevada in the fourth quarter of 2021 or first quarter of 2022.
Results of Operations
Revenues, net
Revenues, net for the year ended September 30, 2020 were $8,121,733 compared to the revenue for the year ended September 30, 2019 of $4,933,960, an increase of $3,187,773 or 65%. This increase was primarily due to an overall increase in monthly sales as production and demand for our products grew. Management anticipates revenues to continue to grow as the revenue trends are positive month over month. The demand for our products is greater than the supply we are able to produce. We increased production 100% during the year ended September 30, 2020. We have nearly doubled monthly production subsequent to year end and have plans in place to double production capacity again by April 2021 under the same operational footprint.
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues consist primarily of labor, materials, supplies and utilities. Costs of revenues as a percentage of revenues was 59% for the year ended September 30, 2020 compared to 52% for the period ended September 30, 2019. This increase was due to an increase in costs as a percentage of revenue towards the end of fiscal year 2019, due to inefficiencies encountered while commencing operations in our second building. We were able to increase operational efficiency throughout fiscal year 2020, and management believes costs of revenues will increase at a lower rate than revenues in future periods, which will lead to higher profit margins than these historical figures illustrate. Management is also focused on reducing costs. Through bulk purchasing, increasing efficiencies in production and investments in equipment, we believe that we will continue reducing the overall costs of revenues.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended September 30, 2020 was $3,295,774 compared to $2,377,771 for the year ended September 30, 2019. The increase was due to the ramp up in operations and continued improvement in the operating capacity of the Company’s cultivation and processing facilities. With the Company’s continued increase in capacity and focus on efficiencies and reducing costs, management expects gross profit to continue to grow going forward.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the year ended September 30, 2020 were $8,721,724, compared to $12,518,810 for the year ending September 30, 2019, a decrease of $3,797,086 or 30%. Operating expenses as a percentage of gross profit decreased from 526% to 265% for the years compared. Management believes this ratio will decrease going forward as the expectation is that revenues will continue to grow at a higher rate than operating expenses. $907,556 of the Company’s operating expenses for the year ended September 30, 2020 were depreciation of fixed assets and amortization of other intangible assets, and $450,018 is a provision for bad debt, which management does not believe the latter to be indicative of future results. Additionally, $1,817,910 of the Company’s operating expenses in fiscal year 2020 were paid through the issuance of shares of common stock of the Company and employee stock options. After removing impairment, the Company’s operating expenses as a percentage of sales decreased from 137% in 2019 to 106% in 2020. Payroll and employee related expenses remained consistent at approximately 50% of revenues for 2019 and 2020, though the 2020 payroll was offset in a decrease in the same ratios compared to professional fees and marketing expenses as the Company utilized more in-house resources in 2020 compared to 2019. $5,758,827 of the Company’s operating expenses for the year ended September 30, 2019 were a loss on impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets, and $376,430 is a provision for bad debt, both items that management does not believe to be indicative of future results. Additionally, $1,067,617 of the Company’s operating expenses in 2019 were paid through the issuance of shares of common stock of the Company.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other expenses consist primarily of interest expense of $6,959,705 and $342,718 for the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Nearly 70% of the interest expense in fiscal year 2020 is from the amortization of debt discounts, and beneficial conversion amounts related to recording convertible debt with warrant features based on relative fair values.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary need for liquidity is to fund working capital requirements of our business, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service, and for general corporate purposes. Our primary source of liquidity is funds generated by financing activities and from private placements. Our ability to fund our operations, to make planned capital expenditures, to make planned acquisitions, to make scheduled debt payments, and to repay or refinance indebtedness depends on our future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern. The Company has not yet established an ongoing source of revenue sufficient to cover its operating costs and has incurred net losses since its inception. These losses, with the associated substantial accumulated deficit, are a direct result of the Company’s planned ramp up period as it is pursuing market acceptance and geographic expansion. In view of these matters, realization of a major portion of the assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets is dependent upon continued operations of the Company which in turn is dependent upon the Company’s ability to meet its financing requirements, and the success of its future operations. The Company operates in a new, developing industry with a variety of competitors. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. As a result, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm included an emphasis-of-matter paragraph with respect to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, expressing uncertainty regarding the Company’s assumption that it will continue as a going concern.
In order to continue as a going concern, the Company will need to generate additional revenue and obtain additional capital to fund its operating losses and service its debt. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are described as follows:
Sales and Marketing. Historically, the Company has generated the majority of its revenues by providing its products to dispensaries throughout the state of Arizona. The Company’s revenues have increased significantly since its inception in May 2017 and continue to grow as of the date of these consolidated financial statements. Management will continue its plans to increase revenues in the Arizona market by providing top quality products. Additionally, as capital resources become available, the Company will expand into additional markets outside of Arizona, with construction of a cultivation and processing facility well underway in Nevada.
Financing. To date, the Company has financed its operations primarily with loans from shareholders, private placement financings and sales revenue. Management believes that with continued production efficiencies, production growth, and continued marketing efforts, sales revenue will grow significantly, thus enabling the Company to reverse its negative cash flow from operations and raise additional capital as needed. However, there is no assurance that the Company’s overall efforts will be successful.
If the Company is unable to generate significant sales growth in the near term and raise additional capital, there is a risk that the Company could default on additional obligations and could be required to discontinue or significantly reduce the scope of its operations if no other means of financing operations are available. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amount and classification of liabilities or any other adjustment that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
As of September 30, 2020, the Company had $84,677 of cash and negative working capital of ($7,396,258) (current assets minus current liabilities), compared with $574,943 of cash and restricted cash and ($4,174,962) of negative working capital as of September 30, 2019. The decrease of $3,221,296 in our working capital and $490,266 in cash was primarily due to investments in expanding operations totaling $961,854 for acquisitions, property and equipment, license fees and maintaining current operations. This was offset by the issuance of debt of $2,119,000. The Company is an early-stage growth company. It is generating cash from sales and is investing its capital reserves in current operations and new acquisitions that will generate additional earnings in the long term. The Company expects that its cash on hand and cash flows from operations, along with private and/or public financing, will be adequate to meet its capital requirements and operational needs for the next 12 months, although no assurance can be given that private and/or public financing can be obtained on terms acceptable to the Company, or at all.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2020, operating activities used $1,141,416 of cash and cash equivalents, primarily resulting from a net loss of $12,299,657 offset by net cash provided by operating assets and liabilities of $3,096,439. There was significant non-cash activity that contributed to the net loss totaling $8,061,802 including depreciation and amortization of $979,158, provision for bad debt of $450,018, amortization of debt discounts of $2,240,617, amortization of beneficial conversion of $2,562,099, and compensation paid in the form of stock and stock options of $1,729,910. Cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accrued interest of $1,371,606, $900,661 in accounts payable, and accrued expenses of $1,428,847, offset by a decrease in deferred costs of $210,576, and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $293,496.
During the year ended September 30, 2019, operating activities used $2,393,428 of cash and cash equivalents, primarily resulting from a net loss of $9,948,638 and net cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $260,815. Cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in deferred costs of $1,317,816 and accounts receivable of $339,644 offset by an increase in accounts payable of $351,036, accrued payroll of $40,827, and accrued interest of $663,827.
Investing Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2020, investing activities used $886,854 of cash and cash equivalents, consisting primarily of payments totaling $167,152 in purchases of property and equipment, $555,738 paid for acquisitions, and $238,964 in license fees offset by $75,000 in cash received on notes receivable.
During the year ended September 30, 2019, investing activities used $7,842,612 of cash and cash equivalents, consisting primarily of payments totaling $6,006,764 in purchases of property and equipment, $400,000 in deposits made on a land acquisition, and $1,500,000 in acquisition outlays, offset by $115,000 in cash received on notes receivable.
Financing Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2020, financing activities provided $1,538,004 of cash and cash equivalents, which includes cash proceeds from notes payable of $2,119,000, offset by debt payments of $580,996.
During the year ended September 30, 2019, financing activities provided $9,136,717 of cash and cash equivalents, which included proceeds from the sale of common stock of $5,885,003 and cash proceeds from notes payable of $3,251,714.
Anticipated Capital Requirements
We estimate that our capital requirements to implement our expansion plan over the next 18 months will be approximately $25,000,000 as described in the table below. These estimates may change significantly depending on the nature of our future business activities, expansion rollout, identification of suitable acquisition targets, and our ability to raise capital necessary to conduct the aforementioned activities. We further anticipate incurring additional costs and expenses for accounting, legal, and other miscellaneous fees relating to compliance with SEC requirements.
Given that our cash needs are strongly driven by our growth requirements, we also intend to maintain a cash reserve for other risk contingencies that may arise.
We intend to meet our cash requirements for the next 18 months through the use of the cash we have on hand and through business operations, future equity financing, debt financing or other sources, which may result in further dilution in the equity ownership of our shares. Subsequent to year end, through December 29, 2020, we have raised $5,667,350 through an $8,500,000 private placement of our common stock. We have executed a letter of intent and are currently in the diligence process for a construction loan of up to $21 million. We currently do not have any other arrangements in place to complete any private placement financings and there is no assurance that we will be successful in completing any such financings on terms that will be acceptable to us.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not currently a party to, or otherwise involved with, any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K, describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material.
Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation of warrants, intangible assets subject to amortization, goodwill, equity-based compensation and income taxes. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures.
Principles of Consolidation - The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company, its wholly owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities in which the Company is the primary beneficiary. Intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates - The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. Significant estimates of the Company include, but are not limited to, accounting for depreciation and amortization, current and deferred income taxes, deferred costs, accruals and contingencies, carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets, collectability of notes receivable, the fair value of common stock and the estimated fair value of stock options and warrants. Due to the uncertainties in the formation of accounting estimates, and the significance of these items, it is reasonably possible that these estimates could be materially changed in the near term.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments - The carrying value of the Company’s financial instruments, consisting of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued expenses approximate fair value due to their short term to maturity. The Company’s long-term receivable resulting from the sale of Airware, notes receivable and notes payable were discounted to its estimated fair value.
Revenue - The majority of the Company’s revenue is associated with a customer contract that represents an obligation to perform services that are delivered at a single point in time. Any costs incurred prior to the period in which the services are performed to completion are deferred and recognized as cost of services in the period in which the performance obligations are completed. For the year ended September 30, 2020, substantially all of the Company’s revenue was generated for performance obligations completed in the State of Arizona and in 2019, 90% of the Company’s revenues was generated for performance obligations completed in the State of Arizona.
Intangible Assets Subject to Amortization - Intangible assets include trade name, customer relationships, website, and intellectual property obtained through a business acquisition. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination are recognized at fair value using generally accepted valuation methods deemed appropriate for the type of intangible assets acquired. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful life and are reported net of accumulated amortization, separately from goodwill.
Goodwill - Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price paid for the acquisition of a business over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not subject to amortization and is tested annually for impairment, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable.
Income Taxes - The Company accounts for income taxes under FASB ASC 740, Income Taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company has federal and state net operating loss carryforwards in excess of $30,000,000, though a portion of those losses will likely be disallowed due to the merger with BSSD Group, LLC and none of the carryforwards can be utilized until the Company is profitable. Due to these facts, the Company has decided to reserve for 100% of any deferred tax asset it may be entitled to.
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and the State of Arizona. The Company is subject to U.S. federal, state, and local income tax examinations by tax authorities. All periods beginning on or after January 1, 2015 are open to examination by taxing authorities. The Company believes it has no tax positions for which the ultimate deductibility is highly uncertain.
Stock-Based Compensation - The Company follows the guidelines in FASB Codification Topic ASC 718-10 “Compensation-Stock Compensation”, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors including employee stock options and employee stock purchases related to an Employee Stock Purchase Plan based on the estimated fair values.
Warrants and Debt Discounts - The Company bifurcates the value of warrants issued with debt. This bifurcation results in the establishment of a debt discount, based on the relative fair values of the warrants and the debt, with a corresponding charge to equity unless the terms of the warrant require it to be classified as a liability. The warrants and corresponding note discounts are valued using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This model uses estimates of volatility, risk free interest rate and the expected term of the warrants, along with the current market price of the Company’s stock, to estimate the value of the outstanding warrants. The Company estimates the expected term using an average of the contractual term and vesting period of the award. The expected volatility is measured using the average historical daily changes in the market price of the Company’s common stock over the expected term of the award and the risk-free interest rate is equivalent to the implied yield on zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bonds with a remaining maturity equal to the expected term of the awards.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share - Basic earnings per share does not include dilution and is computed by dividing loss available to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per share reflects the potential dilution of securities that could share in the earnings of an entity. Dilutive securities are not included in the weighted average number of shares when inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
At September 30, 2020, there were 22,024,419 shares underlying convertible notes payable, warrants and options.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Adopted
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The update improves financial reporting about leasing transactions by requiring a lessee to record on the balance sheet the assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by lease terms of more than 12 months. We adopted ASU 2016-02 effective October 1, 2019. Results for reporting periods after October 1, 2019 are presented under Topic 842, while prior periods have not been adjusted. The Company elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance which among other things, allowed the Company to carryforward the historical lease classification and to not separate lease components from non-lease components, if any. The most significant change was related to the recognition of a right-of-use asset and lease liability on our consolidated balance sheet for our real estate operating lease. The impact on our results of operations and cash flows has not been material.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-01, Business Combination (Topic 805). The update clarifies the definition of a business to assist entities with evaluating whether transactions should be accounted for as acquisitions of assets of businesses. The Company adopted ASU 2017-01 on January 1, 2020 which impacted how the acquisition from February 2020 has been reported.
In July 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-11, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260). The update changes the classification analysis of certain equity-linked financial instruments (or embedded features) which contain down round features. The Company adopted ASU 2017-11 on January 1, 2020 which impacted how warrants relating to debt was recorded.
Pending Adoption
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), which provides guidance on measuring credit losses on financial instruments. The amended guidance replaces current incurred loss impairment methodology of recognizing credit losses when a loss is probable with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to assess credit loss estimates. ASU 2016-13 is effective for us on October 1, 2023, with early adoption permitted on October 1, 2019. We are assessing the provisions of this amended guidance; however, the adoption of the standard is not expected to have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). The amendment is meant to simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain separation models in subtopic 470-20 for convertible instruments. The amendment also changed the method used to calculate dilutes EPS for convertible instruments and for instruments that may be settled in cash. The amendment is effective for years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods for those fiscal years. We are currently evaluating the impact of adoption of this standard on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
There have been no other recent accounting pronouncements or changes in accounting pronouncements that have been issued but not yet adopted that are of significance, or potential significance, to us.
Seasonality
We do not expect our sales to be impacted by seasonal demands for our products and services. Also, due to the fact we use indoor grow space, seasonality should not have any impact on our cultivation operations.