ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
[All references in this Item 7 to numbers of shares of our common stock are on a post-split basis reflecting the 1-50 reverse split of our common stock on March 20, 2020.]
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations of the Company for the fiscal twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We caution you that any forward-looking statements included in this section are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. Factors that may affect our results include, but are not limited to, the risk factors that are included in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Company Overview
The Company is a document services and solutions software company serving both the small-to-medium business and governmental sectors. The Company’s software platform allows customers to capture, manage, store, and retrieve all documents across operations such as boxed hard-copy documents, scanned hard-copy documents, microfilm and microfiche, and all digital documents including those from Microsoft Office 365, digital images, audio, video and emails. The Company’s document services offerings provide assistance to clients with document conversion generally as well as migration to our software solutions. The Company also offers long term document storage and retrieval services. The Company’s solutions create value for customers by making it easy to connect business-critical documents to the people who need them by making them easy to find, while also being secure and compliant with the customers’ audit requirements.
Customers obtain use of the Company’s software by either purchasing it for installation onto their equipment, referred to as a “premise” model, or by accessing the platform via the Internet, referred to as a “cloud-based,” “software as a service,” or “SaaS” model. Especially in light of the increased deployment of remote workforce policies in 2020, we continue to view the provision of SaaS-based customer activation as a significant strategic part of our revenue growth opportunity. Our SaaS products are hosted with Amazon Web Services, Expedient, and Skynet Managed Technology Services, offering our customers reliable hosting services with best practices in data security. Our revenues from cloud-based delivery of our software, including hosting services, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, was $1,055,016 and $859,637, respectively. Our document conversion customers are primarily repeat customers who either regularly or periodically seek services in scanning paper to digital, microfiche to microfilm, or any combination.
We operate a predominantly U.S. business with concentrated sales to the state of Michigan for our document conversion professional services and sales that are diversified by customer for our document management software solutions and services. We hold or compete for leading positions regionally in select markets and attribute this leadership to several factors including the strength of our brand name and reputation, our comprehensive offering of innovative solutions, and the quality of our service support. Net growth in sales of software as a service during 2019 and 2020 reflects market demand for these solutions over traditional sales of on-premise software. We expect to continue to benefit from our select niche leader positions, innovative product offering, growing installed base, and the impact of our sales and marketing programs. Examples of these programs include identifying and investing in growth and market penetration opportunities, more effectively pricing our products and services, demonstrating superior value to customers, increasing our sales force effectiveness through improved guidance, and continuing to optimize our lead generation and lead nurturing processes.
How We Evaluate our Business Performance and Opportunities
The major qualitative and quantitative factors we consider in the evaluation of our operating results include the following:
● With respect to our Document Management segment, including the solutions recently acquired from CEO Image, our current strategy is to focus on cloud-based delivery of our software products. Historically, our revenues have mostly resulted from premise-based software licensing revenue and professional services revenue. Our observation of industry trends leads us to anticipate that cloud-based delivery will become our principal software business and a primary source of revenues for us, and we are seeing our customers migrate to cloud-based services. When we evaluate our results, we assess whether our cloud-based software revenues are increasing, relative to prior periods and relative to other sources of revenue.
● With respect to our Document Conversion segment, our strategy is to maintain and grow our core document conversion, storage, and retrieval business, while simultaneously leveraging our software products and services to provide more attractive total document solutions for the customers of our Document Conversion segment. Accordingly, when we evaluate our results for Document Conversion, we will assess whether our revenues increase with respect to the segment’s services, relative to prior periods, but we will also be assessing whether Document Conversion customers begin to make purchases of other products or services.
● We are focused upon sales of our document services and software solutions through resellers and directly to our customers, with a further focus on select vertical markets. We assess whether our sales resulting from relationships with resellers are increasing, relative to prior periods and relative to direct sales to customers, and whether reseller or direct efforts offer the best opportunities for growth in our targeted vertical markets.
● Our customer engagements often involve the development and licensing of customer-specific document solutions and related consulting and software maintenance services or tailoring a document conversion program to meet customer requirements. When analyzing whether to undertake a particular customer engagement, we often consider the following factors as part of our overall strategy to grow the business: (i) the profit margins the project may yield, and (ii) whether the project would help to develop new product and service features that we could integrate into our suite of products, resulting in an overall product portfolio that better aligns with the needs of our target customers.
● Our software sales cycle averages 1-2 months; however, large projects can be longer, lasting 3-6 months. When a software project begins, we generally perform pre-installation assessment, project scoping, and implementation consulting. On the other hand, our document conversion services typically contain a very short sales cycle, but we can have a backlog of work orders not yet processed. Therefore, when we plan our business and evaluate our results, we consider the revenue we expect to recognize from projects in our late-stage software pipeline and in our document conversion services backlog queue.
● We monitor our costs and capital needs to ensure efficiency as well as an adequate level of support for our business plan.
● While we are primarily focused on organic growth, we also continually monitor potential acquisitions of complementary solutions and expertise that are consistent with our core business. We look for acquisitions that can add value for our customers and are expected to be accretive to our financial performance.
Recent Developments
On January 20, 2021, we received notification that the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) has forgiven, in full, the unsecured promissory note issued to the Company under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”). The promissory note was through PNC Bank with a principal amount of $838,700, dated April 15, 2020. The PPP was established under the congressionally approved Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and is administered by the SBA. Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for, and be granted, forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP. The Company met the requirements for loan forgiveness, and the entire principal and interest of the loan granted to the Company under the PPP has been forgiven. No material early termination penalties were incurred as a result of this forgiveness.
Executive Overview of Results
Below are our key financial results for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 (consolidated unless otherwise noted) with most of the significant changes year over year resulting from our acquisition of Graphic Sciences on March 2, 2020 and CEO Image on April 21, 2020:
● Revenues were $8,253,391, representing revenue growth of 225% year over year.
● Cost of revenues was $3,262,653.
● Operating expenses (excluding cost of revenues) were $7,028,982, including $636,440 of significant transaction costs and $1,554,800 in change in fair value of earnout liabilities.
● Loss from operations was $2,038,244.
● Net loss was $2,200,201 with basic and diluted net loss per share of $0.91.
● Operating cash flow was $124,988.
● Capital expenditures were $76,854, excluding cash paid to acquire business.
● As of December 31, 2020, the number of our employees was 96, including 11 part-time.
Financial Impact of COVID-19
The spread of a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) and developments surrounding the global pandemic have had, and we expect will continue to have, a significant impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
From March 24, 2020, through June 15, 2020, our Graphic Services business operations, constituting a majority of our professional services revenues, was reduced due to the State of Michigan stay-at-home order, and we were only able to process work orders deemed “essential” by the State of Michigan. We were not able to make up our ordinary level of revenues in the remainder of 2020 to offset the period in which our operations were reduced. There has not been a meaningful cancellation of future jobs or current contracts for our Graphic Services business operations; however, certain customers continue to be slow to resume operations to pre-pandemic levels, and certain customers may never fully return. In particular, the State of Michigan, our biggest customer, has not fully resumed normal operations, resulting in a decrease in the volume of work orders for our Document Conversion segment. In addition, we are seeing inconsistent demand in certain other areas of our operations, even though those operations are still currently open for business with mostly remote staff.
We worked closely with the State of Michigan on our reopening plans for the Graphic Services business. Most of our other employees are located in the State of Ohio, which permitted general office workers to return to work on May 4, 2020. However, the majority of our Ohio employees are continuing to work remotely as a precaution. Regardless of the lifting of stay-at-home orders in Ohio and Michigan (where most of our employees are located), many of our clients operate in a variety of other states, which had differing time periods in which their operations were or are currently restricted. Even though we have been able to fully resume our operations, we expect to see continued weakened demand in light of reduced governmental and small-business spending and general economic uncertainty.
We have engaged in aggressive efforts to reduce expenses and preserve cash flow during 2020, including:
● From March 24, 2020 to June 15, 2020, we furloughed our non-essential employees in the State of Michigan who, due to the nature of their work, were not able to work remotely during the governmental shut-down in that state;
● From April 1, 2020 to June 29, 2020, we reduced our executive officer compensation by 20% and other manager compensation by 15%, and our Board of Directors waived their director compensation for the second fiscal quarter of 2020; and
● We applied for and received PPP funds, discussed below in Liquidity and Capital Resources, which we used to fund payroll and other limited permitted expenses such as rent and utilities.
Additionally, we have instituted safe distancing practices and additional cleaning procedures for all company offices, as well as established work-from-home employees wherever feasible, in order to prevent or mitigate future outbreaks and disruptions to our business.
Reportable Segments
Our reportable segments are currently organized around the following products and services that we offer as part of our core business strategy:
● Document Management; and
● Document Conversion.
Prior to the year ended December 31, 2020, our results had been reported on an aggregated basis. With the acquisition of Graphic Sciences, we determined that identification and aggregation of operating and reportable segments would be appropriate.
Document Management
The Document Management segment provides cloud-based and premise-based content services software. Its modular suite of solutions complements existing operating and accounting systems to serve a mission-critical role for organizations to make content secure, compliant, and process-ready. This segment conducts its primary operations in the United States. Markets served include highly regulated, risk and compliance-intensive markets in healthcare, K-12 education, public safety, other public sector, risk management, financial services, and others. Solutions are sold both directly to end-users and through resellers.
Document Conversion
The Document Conversion segment provides services for scanning and indexing, converting images from paper to digital, paper to microfilm, and microfiche to microfilm, as well as long-term physical document storage and retrieval. This segment conducts its primary operations in the United States. Markets served include business and state, county, and municipal governments. Solutions are sold both directly to end-users and through a reseller distributor.
Results of Operations
Revenues
We reported total revenues of $8,253,391 and $2,535,955 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $5,717,436 or 225%. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our subsidiary acquired March 2, 2020, Graphic Sciences, accounted for $5,238,654 of the total sales, or 92% of the increase. In addition, a business line that we acquired on April 21, 2020, CEO Image, accounted for $375,863 of the total sales, or 7% of the increase. The net increase in comparable total revenues year-over-year is primarily attributable to growth software as a service and software maintenance services, partially offset by sales of software and professional services, as further described below. The following table summarizes our revenues by reportable segment for the periods indicated:
Sale of Software
Revenues from the sale of software principally consist of sales of additional or upgraded software licenses and applications to existing customers and resellers. These software revenues were $194,787 and $189,165, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $5,622, or 3%. The increase year-over-year in sales was due to $13,477 from CEO Image, partially offset by a decrease due to timing of large direct sales projects. The volatility of this revenue line item is expected to continue as the frequency of on-premise software solution sales decreases over time. Revenues from the sale of software are reported as part of our Document Management segment.
Sale of Software as a Service
We provide access to our software solutions as a service, accessible through the internet. Our customers typically enter into our software as a service agreement for periods of one year or more. Under these agreements, we generally provide access to the applicable software, data storage and related customer assistance and support. Our software as a service revenues were $1,055,016 and $859,637, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $195,379 or 23%. The increase in revenue year-over-year was primarily the result of new customers choosing a cloud-based solution, plus expanded data storage, user seats, and hosting fees for existing customers, as well as $41,727 from CEO Image. Revenues from the sale of software as a service are reported as part of our Document Management segment.
Sale of Software Maintenance Services
Software maintenance services revenues consist of fees for post contract customer support services provided to license (premise-based) holders. These agreements allow our customers to receive technical support, enhancements and upgrades to new versions of our software products when and if available. A substantial portion of these revenues were generated from customers to whom we sold software in prior years who have continued to renew their maintenance agreements. The support and maintenance agreements typically have a term of 12 months. Our software maintenance support revenue was $1,257,446 and $1,011,278, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $246,168, or 24%. The increase in revenue year-over-year was the result of approximately $216,000 contribution from CEO Image, as well as new growth and normal price increases exceeding attrition of existing maintenance agreement renewals. Revenues from the sale of software maintenance services are reported as part of our Document Management segment.
Sales of Professional Services
Professional services revenues consist of revenues from document scanning and conversion services, consulting, discovery, training, and advisory services to assist customers with document management needs, as well as repair and maintenance services for customer equipment. These revenues include those arrangements where we do not sell software license as an element of the overall arrangement. Our professional services offerings, particularly with respect to scanning and document conversion, including microfilm and microfiche, were recently broadened and enhanced with our March 2, 2020 acquisition of Graphic Sciences. Professional services revenues were $5,007,617 and $475,875, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $4,531,742 or 952%. Document Conversion operations comprised $4,698,018 of the professional services revenues, while Document Management operations comprised $309,599. Our recently acquired subsidiary, Graphic Sciences, accounted for $4,500,129 of the total sales, or 99% of the increase. Professional services revenues excluding Graphic Sciences were $507,488 and $475,875, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $31,613 or 7%. The increase in revenue excluding Graphic Sciences was due to an increase in our Document Conversion services in Columbus, Ohio, due to a full year of operations. The Document Management professional services revenues include an increase of $104,481 from CEO Image, offset by a reduction in our Document Management professional services in Columbus, Ohio, due to a combination of customer-driven COVID project postponements and generally fewer custom projects in 2020.
Sale of Storage and Retrieval
Graphic Sciences provides document storage and retrieval services to customers, primarily in Michigan. Our document storage and retrieval revenues were $738,525 and $0, respectively, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amounts were lower than historical levels at Graphic Sciences for similar periods due to COVID shut-downs at customers and the Michigan stay-at-home order which reduced retrieval services from April through June, primarily. Revenues from the sale of storage and retrieval are reported as part of our Document Conversion segment.
Costs of Revenue
The cost of revenues during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $3,262,653 and $567,843, respectively, representing an increase of $2,694,810, or 475%. The Graphic Sciences acquisition accounted for $2,486,789 of the total costs of revenue, or 92% of the increase. The cost of revenues excluding Graphic Sciences during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $775,864 and $567,843, respectively, representing an increase of $208,021, or 37%. The increase in cost of revenue excluding Graphic Sciences year-over-year is primarily the result of increased sales revenue, as well as exceptional professional services margins in 2019 on two projects that were not repeated in 2020.
Cost of Software Revenues
Cost of software revenues consists primarily of third-party software licenses that are sold in connection with our core software applications and labor costs of our software engineers and implementation consultants. Cost of software revenues was $56,664 and $8,633 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of $48,031 or 556%.
Gross margin for this product category decreased to 71% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 from 95% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is driven by software solution mix: lesser margin solutions in 2020 unfavorably compared to high margin solutions sold in 2019.
Cost of Software as a Service
Cost of software as a service consists primarily of technical support personnel, hosting services, and related costs. Cost of software as a service was $273,368 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $254,999 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $18,369, or 7%. The increase in cost followed the higher revenue, at slightly improved margins due to scaling of hosting infrastructure.
Gross margins for this product category were 74% and 70% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Software Maintenance Services
Cost of software maintenance services consists primarily of technical support personnel and related costs. Cost of software maintenance services for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $159,122 compared with $87,280 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $71,842, or 82%, due to high support activity in the first quarter and one incremental FTE support personnel following the April 21, 2020 acquisition of CEO Image.
Gross margins in this product category were 87% and 91% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Professional Services
Cost of professional services consists primarily of compensation for employees performing the document conversion services, compensation of our software engineers and implementation consultants and related third-party costs. Cost of professional services was $2,553,053 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $216,931 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $2,336,122 or 1,077%. Excluding Graphic Sciences, cost of professional services was $286,710 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $216,931 for twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $69,779 or 32%. The increase year-over-year resulted from an unfavorable mix shift to lower margin solutions added by the CEO Image April 21, 2020 acquisition, one additional FTE related to the acquisition of CEO Image, and some project inefficiencies with stopping and restarting projects due to COVID-related customer unavailability.
Gross margins in this product category were 49% and 54% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Excluding Graphic Sciences, gross margins in this product category were 44% and 54% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Gross margins related to consulting services may vary widely, depending upon the nature of the consulting project and the amount of labor it takes to complete a project, and the second quarter of 2019 included higher margin projects.
Cost of Storage and Retrieval Services
Cost of storage and retrieval services consists primarily of compensation for employees performing the document storage and retrieval services, including logistics, provided by Graphic Sciences. Cost of storage and retrieval was $220,446 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $0 for twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Gross margins in this product category were 70% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Gross margins exclude the cost of facilities rental, maintenance, and related overheads.
Gross Margins
Overall gross margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 60% and 78%, respectively, representing a decrease of 18%. The decrease represents the increase of document conversion revenues from the Graphic Sciences acquisition. Excluding Graphic Sciences, overall gross margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and 2019 were 74% and 78%, respectively, representing a decrease of 4%. The decrease in gross margin year-over-year excluding Graphic Sciences is primarily a result of unusually strong professional services margins on two projects in 2019, as well as product mix in software sales in the third quarter of 2019.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $3,499,440 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $2,131,385 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $1,368,055 or 64%. The increase in operating expenses year-over-year was principally related to the addition of Graphic Sciences expenses. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the general and administrative expenses related to Document Management and Document Conversion segments were $1,808,184 and $1,990,342, and $1,691,256 and $141,043, respectively.
Change in Fair Value of Earnout Liabilities
Adjustments to fair value of earnout liabilities were $1,554,800 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, comprised of $1,423,800 for Graphic Sciences and $131,000 for CEO Image. The fair value adjustments were driven by updated assumptions to reflect the improved performance of both acquisitions against their threshold targets and a reduction of pandemic-related uncertainty.
Significant Transaction Expenses
Significant transaction expenses were $636,440 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The significant transactions expenses were comprised of investment banker and placement agent success fees, as well as legal and consulting fees.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses were $1,041,367 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $981,618 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $59,749 or 6%. The increase was a result of the addition of Graphic Sciences and CEO Image expenses, partially offset by lower stock compensation costs in 2020 due to certain option grants vesting in 2019, plus other operational savings, including marketing and web site updates in 2019 not repeated in 2020. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the sales and marketing expenses related to Document Management and Document Conversion segments were $584,470 and $916,660, and $456,897 and $64,958, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization was $296,935 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $7,701 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $289,234 or 3,756%. The increase is driven by amortization of the intangible assets acquired in March and April and the addition of Graphic Sciences and CEO Image depreciation. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the depreciation and amortization expenses related to Document Management and Document Conversion segments were $23,401 and $6,481, and $273,534 and $1,220, respectively.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on extinguishment of debt was $287,426 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The gain was driven by the extinguishment of debt in March 2020, as part of conversion of notes payable accounted for using troubled debt restructuring.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit was $188,300 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The benefit was driven by the releases of a portion of the valuation allowance in March 2020 for deferred tax liabilities of Graphic Sciences that were no longer due.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $637,683 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $980,689 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $343,006 or 35%. The decrease year-over-year resulted primarily from lower interest expense on lower net debt following the March 2020 private placement of securities and note conversion more than offsetting increased interest expense associated with accelerating the beneficial conversion option on the notes converted.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through a combination of cash on hand, cash generated from operations, borrowings from third parties and related parties, and proceeds from private sales of equity. From 2012 through March 2021 we raised a total of $18,555,903 in cash through issuance of debt and equity securities. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,907,882 in cash, and net working capital deficit of $159,254, which includes $586,579 in current PPP Note Payable principal and interest. We received notice of PPP Note Payable full forgiveness in January 2021. Without the current PPP Note Payable principal and interest, the December 31, 2020 net working capital would have been $427,325.
In 2020, we implemented plans to increase liquidity, including the acquisitions of Graphic Sciences and CEO Image. Additionally, proceeds from issuance of shares, including conversion of convertible debt, and issuance of new debt on March 2, 2020 enabled the company to restructure its balance sheet and reduce its overall debt burden by approximately $3 million.
The Company’s business plan is to increase our sales and market share by focusing on a targeted marketing approach to select vertical markets, maximizing cross selling opportunities within the newly expanded customer base of the consolidated company, enhancing our direct selling results, and continuing to develop a network of select resellers through which we expect to sell our expanded document management solutions. We expect that these initiatives will require us to continue our efforts towards direct marketing campaigns and leads management, reseller on-boarding, and to develop additional software integration and customization capabilities, all of which may require additional capital. We also plan to continually monitor opportunities to make strategic acquisitions that will strengthen or complement our product and services offerings, bring more solutions to our customers, and increase revenues and liquidity.
Our ability to meet our capital needs in the future will depend on many factors, including maintaining and enhancing our operating cash flow, successfully managing the transition of our recent acquisitions of Graphic Sciences and CEO Image, successfully retaining and growing our client base in the midst of general economic uncertainty, and managing the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. We will need to successfully manage our revenues to support potential future earnout commitments for previous transactions and current debt service commitments, and our future cash resources and capital requirements may vary materially from those now planned. Our ability to obtain additional capital or debt financing on favorable terms, if needed, would likely be adversely affected by our history of operating losses. These conditions raise substantial doubt over the Company’s ability to meet all of its obligations over the twelve months following the date of this Report. Prior to the third quarter of 2020, management has historically assessed that there was substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. However, management has evaluated these conditions and believes, based on its improved balance sheet, improved consolidated cash flow, and current plans and expectations, that it will be able to meet those obligations, although there is no assurance.
Based on our plans and assumptions as of the date of this report, we believe our capital resources, including our cash and cash equivalents, along with funds expected to be generated from our operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including for working capital, earnout liability payments for previous transactions, capital spending, and debt service commitments, for at least the next 12 months. However, any projections of future cash needs and cash flows are subject to risks and uncertainties, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and general overall economic conditions.
Equity Capital Resources
As of March 26, 2021, the Company has 2,823,072 shares of common stock issued and outstanding; and 333,232 shares reserved for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding warrants, outstanding stock options, and shares reserved for the 2015 Plan.
On March 2, 2020, we completed a private placement of securities equity and debt (which we refer to as our “2020 private placement”) for aggregate gross proceeds of $5.5 million (of which, $3.5 million resulted from the sale of our common stock). As a result of the 2020 private placement, after payment of the initial purchase price for the acquisition of Graphic Sciences and transaction fees and expenses, the Company retained approximately $530,000 for working capital and general corporate purposes.
Our shares are available for quotation on the OTCQB, and we believe this is important for raising capital to finance our growth plan. We intend to deploy any future capital we may raise to expand our sales and marketing capabilities, develop ancillary software products, enhance our internal infrastructure, support the accounting, auditing and legal costs of operating as a public company, and provide working capital.
Debt Capital Resources
On April 21, 2020, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement under which the Company agreed to pay a principal amount of $170,000 (“Seller Notes Payable”) as further discussed in Note 6. The terms of the Seller Notes Payable were approximately three and six months, with $70,000 plus accrued interest paid August 3, 2020 and $100,000 plus accrued interest paid November 1, 2020. The Seller Notes Payable bore an interest rate of 1.5% per annum. These notes were installment payments for the net assets acquired.
On April 15, 2020, the Company secured PPP funding, through PNC Bank with a principal amount of $838,700. The term of the PPP loan is two years, with an interest rate of 1.0% per annum, which shall be deferred for the first ten months after the covered period of the loan. PPP loan recipients can be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP, based on the use of loan proceeds for payroll costs and mortgage interest, rent or utility costs and the maintenance of employee and compensation levels. We received notice on January 20, 2021 that our forgiveness application was accepted by the Small Business Administration.
On March 2, 2020, we issued 12% subordinated promissory notes with a principal amount of $2 million and maturity date of February 28, 2023, as part of the 2020 private placement described above, in order to complete the acquisition of Graphic Sciences and provide additional working capital for our operations.
Simultaneously with the closing of the 2020 private placement, we converted substantially all of the outstanding principal and accrued interest payable on our then-existing convertible debt into shares of common stock at a conversion price of $4.00 per share. As a result, a total of approximately $6 million of convertible debt coming due December 31, 2020 was converted into shares of common stock.
Summary of Outstanding Indebtedness at December 31, 2020
The Company’s outstanding indebtedness at December 31, 2020 is as follows (with more details and all defined terms set forth in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements):
● The 2020 Notes issued to accredited investors on March 2, 2020, with an aggregate original principal balance of $2,000,000, a current principal balance of $2,000,000, and accrued interest of $0.
● PPP Note Payable held by PNC bank, dated April 15, 2020, with an original principal balance of $838,700, a current principal balance of $838,700, and accrued interest of $5,941.
Cash Provided and Used In Operating Activities.
From our inception, we have generated revenues from the sales, implementation, subscriptions, and maintenance of our internally generated software applications, as well as significantly increased revenues from document conversion services beginning in 2020. Our uses of cash from operating activities include compensation and related costs, hardware costs, rent for our corporate offices, hosting fees for our cloud-based software services, other general corporate expenditures, and travel costs to client sites.
Our plan is to increase our sales and market share by implementing a targeted marketing approach to select vertical markets, an expanded network of resellers through which we expect to sell our expanded software product portfolio, as well as continue to enhance our direct selling results. We expect our operations to continue to require additional capital in order to implement direct marketing campaigns and leads management, reseller training and on-boarding, and to develop additional software integration and customization capabilities. Although management believes that we may have access to additional capital resources, there are currently no commitments in place for new financing, and there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain funds on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $124,988. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the net loss adjusted for non-cash expenses of $1,390,769, a decrease in operating assets of $325,132 and a decrease in operating liabilities of $609,288. Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 was $982,169. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, the net cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to the net loss adjusted for non-cash expenses of $631,433, an increase in operating assets of $336,589 and an increase in operating liabilities of $856,268.
Cash Used in Investing Activities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 amounted to $4,095,952 and $5,489, respectively, and was primarily related to cash paid to acquire Graphic Sciences and acquire CEO Image, amounting to $3,906,253 and $130,114, respectively, in 2020. The balance of $76,854 in 2020 and the entire amount of $5,489 in 2019 was used for purchases of property and equipment.
Capital Expenditures
There were no material commitments for capital expenditures at December 31, 2020. On February 18, 2021, we committed to purchase warehouse racking in the amount of $326,864. We are evaluating equipment financing options to finance the equipment purchase.
Cash Provided and Used in Financing Activities.
Cash provided and used by financing activities primarily consist of net proceeds from issuance or repayments of debt, or new issuance of equity.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $5,474,681. The net cash provided by financing activities resulted from new borrowings of $3,008,700, partially offset by $175,924 in financing costs, and the sale of common stock resulting in $2,859,633 in net cash. Notes payable payments amounted to $170,000, which comprised of seller notes which are installment payments for net assets acquired. Notes payable payments to related parties amounted to $47,728.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $303,193. New borrowings of $350,000 were partially offset by $46,807 of notes payable repayments to related parties.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
These critical accounting policies and estimates by our management should be read in conjunction with Note 5 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. We regularly make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources.
The actual results experienced by us may differ materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations will be affected.
We consider the following accounting policies and estimates to be both those most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and those that require the most subjective judgment:
● Liquidity, Going Concern and Management’s Plans
● Revenue Recognition
● Business Acquisition, Goodwill and Intangibles, including Contingent Liability-Earnout
● Accounts Receivable, Unbilled
● Parts and Supplies Allowance
● Deferred Revenues
● Allowance for Doubt Accounts
● Accounting for Costs of Computer Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed and Accounting for Internal Use Software
● Accounting Stock-Based Compensation
Liquidity, Going Concern and Management’s Plans
We have incurred substantial recurring losses since our inception. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. Thus, the consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC 606, the Company follows a five-step model to assess each contract of a sale or service to a customer: identify the legally binding contract, identify the performance obligations, determine the transaction price, allocate the transaction price, and determine whether revenue will be recognized at a point in time or over time. Revenue is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied and the customer obtains control of promised goods and services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services. In addition, ASC 606 requires disclosures of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
Our contracts with customers often contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine the SSP based on an observable standalone selling price when it is available, as well as other factors, including, the price charged to customers, our discounting practices, and our overall pricing objectives, while maximizing observable inputs. In situations where pricing is highly variable or uncertain, we estimate the SSP using a residual approach.
Revenue from on-premises licenses is recognized upfront upon transfer of control of the software, which occurs at delivery, or when the license term commences, if later. We recognize revenue from maintenance contracts ratably over the service period. Cloud services revenue is recognized ratably over the cloud service term. Training, professional services, and storage and retrieval services are provided either on a time and material basis, in which revenues are recognized as services are delivered, or over a contractual term, in which revenues are recognized ratably. With respect to contracts that include customer acceptance provisions, we recognize revenue upon customer acceptance. Our policy is to record revenues net of any applicable sales, use or excise taxes.
Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although our terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 to 60 days. We assess whether payment terms are customary or extended in accordance with normal practice relative to the market in which the sale is occurring. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of payment, we have determined our contracts do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, not to receive financing from our customers or to provide customers with financing.
We generally do not offer rights of return or any other incentives such as concessions, product rotation, or price protection and, therefore, do not provide for or make estimates of rights of return and similar incentives.
We establish allowances for doubtful accounts when available information causes us to believe that credit loss is probable.
Business Acquisition, Goodwill and Intangibles Assets, including Contingent Liability-Earnout
We preliminarily allocate the purchase price to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on the estimated fair value of such assets and liabilities at the date of acquisition, subject to further review and analysis. We estimate a fair value of any earnout which would be owed to the seller based on the terms of the earnout and record this liability at the acquisition date. Fair value is based on future projections of metrics such as revenue or profit over the earnout period and valuation techniques that utilize expected volatility, threshold probability, and discounting of future payments. Evaluating the fair value involves a high degree of assumptions used within the valuation models, in particular, forecasts of projected revenues or margins. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the earnout liabilities.
The carrying value of goodwill is not amortized, but it tested for impairment annually as of December 31, as well as on an interim basis whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a reporting unity may not be recoverable. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the recorded fair value. All intangible assets have finite lives and are stated at cost, net of amortization. Amortization is computed over the useful life of the related assets on a straight-line method.
As of December 31, 2020, we recorded a change in fair value of earnout liabilities for both Graphic Sciences and CEO Image. The assumptions were updated to reflect the improved performance of both acquisitions against their threshold targets and a reduction of uncertainty driven by the pandemic.
Accounts Receivable, Unbilled
We recognize professional services revenue over time as the services are delivered using an input or output method (e.g., labor hours incurred as a percentage of total labor hours budgeted, images scanned, or similar milestones), as appropriate for the contract, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met. When our revenue recognition policies recognize revenue that has not yet been billed, we record those contract asset amounts in accounts receivable, unbilled.
Parts and Supplies Allowance
Parts and supplies are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Costs are determined using the first-in, first-out method. Parts and supplies are primarily used for scanning and document conversion services. We establish a provision for potentially obsolete or slow-moving parts and supplies inventory based on parts and supplies levels, future sales forecasted and our judgment of potentially obsolete parts and supplies.
Deferred Revenues
Amounts that have been invoiced are recognized in accounts receivable, deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Deferred revenue represents amounts billed for which revenue has not yet be recognized. Deferred revenues typically relate to maintenance and software-as-a-service agreements which have been paid for by customers prior to the performance of those services, and payments received for professional services and license arrangements and software-as-a-service performance obligations that have been deferred until fulfilled under our revenue recognition policy.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts which represents estimated losses resulting from the inability, failure or refusal of our clients to make required payments.
We analyze historical percentages of uncollectible accounts and changes in payment history when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. We use an internal collection effort, which may include our sales and services groups as we deem appropriate. Although we believe that our allowances are adequate, if the financial condition of our clients deteriorates, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, or if we underestimate the allowances required, additional allowances may be necessary, resulting in increased expense in the period in which such determination is made.
Accounting for Costs of Computer Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed and Accounting for Internal Use Software
We design, develop, test, market, license, and support new software products and enhancements of current products.
In accordance with ASC 985-20 “Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased or Otherwise Marketed,” we expense software development costs, including costs to develop software products or the software component of products to be sold, leased, or marketed to external users, before technological feasibility is reached. Technological feasibility is typically reached shortly before the release of such products and as a result, development costs that meet the criteria for capitalization were not material for the periods presented in this report.
In accordance with ASC 350-40, “Internal-Use Software,” the Company capitalizes purchase and implementation costs of internal use software. No such costs were capitalized during the periods presented in this report.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain one stock-based compensation plan. We account for stock-based payments to employees in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” Stock-based payments to employees include grants of stock that are recognized in the consolidated statement of operations based on their fair values at the date of grant. We account for stock-based payments to non-employees in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation,” which requires that such equity instruments are recorded at their fair value on the grant date.
The grant date fair value of stock option awards is recognized in earnings as stock-based compensation cost over the requisite service period of the award using the straight-line attribution method. We estimate the fair value of the stock option awards using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. The exercise price of options is specified in the stock option agreements. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock for the previous period equal to the expected term of the options. The expected term of options granted is based on the midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. The risk-free interest rate is based upon a U.S. Treasury instrument with a life that is similar to the expected term of the options. The expected dividend yield is based upon the yield expected on date of grant to occur over the term of the option.